

EARLY HISTORY, ROMAN & SAXON
In contrast to neighbouring Cuxton, where a most important Palaeolithic site was discovered in 1962, the prehistory of Hailing as known at present can only be shown to date from Neolithic, or New Stone Age, times.
In this connection it is perhaps significant that the boundary between the parish and Snodland was the old track or Ridgeway, now largely destroyed by chalk quarries, which, keeping to the highest and driest line over the downs is thought to have formed the main east-west route at this period, crossing the River Medway at Holborough as Mr Margery suggested.
Beside the Ridgeway and effectively parallel to it as a lower level ran the Terrace-way, here called by the later name of "Pilgrims' Way" , which passes through Upper and North Hailing to a crossing presumably in the Rochester area.
Our earliest known inhabitant, "Hailing Man" , is now securely dated by the radiocarbon method to about 2000 B.C. His skeleton came to light in August 1912 when workmen were excavating for a sewage tank behind the railway station.
The weather had been typical for August with a period of heavy rain and the men returning to work found that a land slip had occurred.
The workmen were ordered to clear the fall of earth away and it wasn't long before a human skeleton was discovered.
The engineers in charge stopped work and immediately informed Mr Cook and Dr Spencer Edwards M.B. of Hailing both founder members of the Medway Valley Scientific Society.
These two men went directly to the site to place on record the facts of the find and it is from them that we know so much of Hailing Man.
On arrival they found some of the bones still intact in the side of the hole so enabling them to place the bones in the exact Position in which they had lain.
Mr Cook writing on that day states that measuring from the top of the overlying humus to the bones the depth was 173 cm and the greatest depth 190 cm, the position of the bones in the deposit was as follows: The trunk was supine north-west by south-east, the skull rested tilted forward on the ribs to north-west.
Right femur, tibia and fibula and bones of right foot were in anatomical with regard to each other, the limb lying stretched along the right side of the trunk but with head of the femur close to the skull.
The left arm bones were under the thorax.
The other bones were more or less in a confused mass below the thorax.
The lower jaw was embedded among the ribs and the whole remains occupied a  space of 95 cm in length and about 16 cm in depth.
The remains were in a deposit forming a shelf which represents the remnant of a low terrace of the west bank of the Medway.
Also contained in the earth Surrounding the bones were flints of fine workmanship and small fragments of animal bones.
The bones of Halling Man were removed and sent to Professor Arthur Keith the foremost archaeologist of his day who later as Sir Arthur Keith, was to write a whole chapter in his book The Antiquity of Man 1915, on Halling Man.
Given the dating technique of the time Halling Man was thought to have been Aurignacian, taking him back to the closing phase of the Ice Age.
Originally the bones were kept at the Royal College of Surgeons.
In 1941 a bomb fell on the College and it was thought to be the end of Halling Man but the bones were found with the relative animal bones and sent to the British Museum (Natural History).
After the war interest was again roused over Piltdown Man who had always been a sore point with anthropologists who could never really accept him.
New dating techniques had been developed and these were used on Piltdown Man so exposing him as a fraud.
This dating technique was then applied to Halling Man with the result that the age was considerably lowered and subsequently he was assigned to well within Neolithic times.
It was just after this that I was privileged to be able to visit the British Museum and by the courtesy of Mr Rex Barker, son-in-law of the landlord of the Five Bells, Mr McCaffery, I was able to view and handle the remains of our oldest inhabitant.
Unhappily I must add that he was deposited somewhat ignominiously in a cardboard box with Piltdown Man!
Better to have lain in the marshes of Halling than to end one's time in a cardboard box in a steel locker with a fake!
During work on the building of the electricity pylons on Halling Marshes workmen digging out the footings for one of these discovered at a depth of 10 ft in the mud a dug-out canoe.
This was in a line with Halling Man on the old river bank, but sadly owing to the urgency of the work the remains were buried under the pylon.
Could this possibly have been the canoe in which our Halling Man travelled down the river?
Was he drowned in an accident and his canoe washed further down to be buried in the silting up of the marshes?
The next periods after the Neolithic were the Bronze Age and Iron Age, although nothing of these times have been discovered at Halling it is almost certain the area of the village was occupied.
During the excavations at nearby Holborough both  Bronze and Iron Age artifacts were discovered and at Luddesdown an Iron Age site was found.
It's quite probable that extensive cultivation here has erased any traces there may have been.
Roman and Saxon Times
55 B.C. as every school boy knows was the year that Caesar invaded Britain.
This first landing was more of a reconnaissance or in modem terms a commando raid in strength, this lasting for about twenty three days, landing in August and leaving mid September.
The people settled in the Medway valley almost certainly knew of the Romans before this date as a great deal of trade was carried out between Britain and the continent.
News of the Romans and the pending invasion was probably brought in by the merchants.
It was to be another twelve months before the inhabitants of the valley, including the people settled here at Halling, were to see again the Roman Armies, with the local menfolk Possibly among the British force opposing them.
Caesar's forces, after defeating a large force of British, advanced to the Medway.
It is said they were led along the secret paths by a traitor, these paths almost certainly being what we know as the Pilgrims, Way to Aylesford.
More recent theories suggest the crossing place further down river at Rochester or Chatham, but Dunkin tells us the Roman Army (the seventh and tenth legions) then turned along through what is now Snodland and Halling burning and wasting the country as they advanced through the villages.
This second invasion of Caesar lasted not much longer than the first but he advanced farther into the country, having a larger army.
A hundred years were to pass before the next Roman invasion and this time they came to stay.
In the year A.D. 43, Emperor Claudius sent an army under Aulus Plautius, who quickly subdued Kent as far as the Medway where again the British forces gathered to oppose the Romans.
This time the battle was fierce and long.
Tacitus gives us this account.
 "Advancing to the river which the barbarians thought impassable Plautius sent his Germans, who were accustomed to swimming, across, surprising the enemy, however this time the British fought bravely, the battle raging for two days." 
On the second day the Roman infantry crossed the Medway at a point between Snodland and Halling, again the villagers fleeing into the hills as the Romans passed.
After this the Romans remained in Britain for about 400 years.
Roman villas have been found in Snodland and Cuxton and it is not unlikely that one existed here at Halling as vestiges of Roman tiles are found in the village, also in the early parts of the church.
Did a villa stand where our church now stands?
In a few cases such as at Cuxton and Snodland, the positions of the churches do correspond with the remains of large Roman Villas.
Many remains of Roman burials have been discovered within the bounds of Halling.
The first recorded were discovered when the chalk pit of Formby's was being excavated, there were Roman urn burials alongside the Pilgrims' Road.
This was in the 19th century and at about the same period more graves were found in Upper Halling, on the south side of Chapel Lane.
A description in G.Paynes' Collectania Cantiana tells us that four vases of black ware, one of reddish colour, two cups of imitation Samian ware, two black paterae and the neck of a large goblet with handle were found at a depth of four feet at the feet of ten human skeletons.
The bodies lay north and south, heads to the north and all except one were buried face downwards, the skulls being in good condition but the bones decayed.
A curious find in one grave was a piece of chalk cut to design, also three large flints.
The large jar contained some bones of a bird, vertebrae of an animal, human hair and minute stems of flowers or herbs.
Some iron nails were also found.
This must have been part of a Roman cemetery as again in 1926 near this spot workmen digging on the edge of Lee's Great Quarry (Houlder Quarry), 20 yards from Clements Farm found a quantity of human bones and pottery.
These were also about four feet down, the remains were sent to Sir Arthur Keith F.R.S.
and his report dated these remains to the fourth quarter of the second century.
The pottery consisted of a small flask, a bowl and two shards.
The bones were of five individuals one a child 8–9 years old, three women and one man.
It is noticeable that all these graves are found near the Pilgrims' Way suggesting that this ancient road was being used as a highway by the Romans.
One of the most welcome sights around Hailing which we can thank the Romans for are the pheasants, it is reckoned they were first introduced by them and were quickly established here in Kent.
During the 400 years of occupation many of the Roman soldiers married British women and upon completing their service they settled to become farmers etc.
The number of graves found in Upper Halling suggests that these were of settlers.
Coins of the Roman period have been found in the woods and fields around the village.
Excavations (locally) in Snodland and nearby Holborough in 1954 show the Romans firmly established in this area.
The villa at Snodland was excavated in 1964 and covered quite a considerable area stretching for several hundred feet along the bank of the river, the site now occupied by the Lead Wool Co. and the Gas Works.
The work carried out shows the area was occupied from the 1st century to the 4th century.
At Holborough "Knob" in 1954 an excavation carried out by the Ministry of Works uncovered many Roman remains, principally a lead coffin which contained the skeleton of a young child, including interestingly a Patch of flaxen hair.
Among other relics was discovered a folding chair, this being in a badly burned condition having been placed on the funeral pyre.
Other objects found were a purse and pottery and coffin nails.
A small print in Thomas Wright's Wanderings of an Antiquary 1854 shows how the "Knob" looked before the chalk excavations.
There is also an interesting account of the excavations carried out by Wright which caused Sir Mortimer Wheeler years later to use it as an illustration of how not to carry out an archaeological dig.
I can do no better than to quote Thos.
Wright's amusing account of how news got around:
"The neighbourhood was not very populous and during the first three days our visitors were few, some children from the village below, a gypsy woman or two with dark eyes, who carried of a few halfpence, and perhaps a chance passer by.
But although we found little, report had magnified our findings in no ordinary degree and we afterwards learnt that it had gone over the country around that we had dug up a great treasure of gold.
It was not therefore surprising if, on our last day of excavation, we saw from our elevated position men on horse and foot making their way towards us from all points of the compass, and we were told after our departure the top of the hill was crowded with visitors."
An accident put a stop to further excavations.
After digging a trench about twenty feet through the mound, the side fell in and one of the labourers narrowly escaped with his life.
He found little but evidence of a funeral pyre, and his impression was that a person of importance was cremated here and his ashes carried home to Rome.
From the mid century with the withdrawal of the regular Roman forces the country was under attack from the Saxon's and Jutes, this  continuing for a period of years when a gradual occupation of Kent took place.
Settling down they formed themselves into small communities under one leader, this being  the beginning of our village system as we know it now.
Later these grew into Hundreds and Lathes, so we find Halling a Manor or Parish in the Hundred of Shame]in the Lathe of Aylesford.
In the south of England many village names are found ending with -ing, -ingham etc. this being suggested by some to be a genitive name of the early leaders, so for Halling this becomes Halls land, Heall land.
Other definitions propose that it is derived from the O.E. Heall, meaning Hall Manor or Heallgemot, the court of the Lord of the Manor, or as in Heallingas, Comrades sharing the same hall.
All these various spellings are found in relation to Halling varying from its present name to Hallingas, Haulling, Hawling and Heallingas.
One idea that has been put forward is with the spelling Haulling.
It is suggested that it was derived from the hauling of boats along the river and that it was from this place that manual hauling of boats along a tow path began, but in all fairness I think this can be discounted.
However the village received its name it is almost certain that the present name was being used by the 8th century as we find the Charter for Halling dated A.D. 765–785 when Ecgberht II of Kent granted to St. Andrews of Rochester, ten Sulings at Halling with rights.
to pasture swine in five districts.
Hasted writes: "Egberth King of Kent with consent of his nobles and princes, gave ten ploughlands in Hailing, with all appurtenances, together with fields, woods, meadows, marshes, fishings, huntings and fowlings belonging to them to Bishop Doran and the Church of Rochester with the denberies in the Weald, Bixle, Speldhurst, Meredaen, Thaerbe, Eastan, Rustewellee and Teppennyse, witnessed by King Heaberth and Archbishop Jaenbert." 
Hasted disputes the King but Jaenbert was Archbishop from 764–793 Dart in his History of Canterbury, states that he signed to a Charter of the same prince of lands at Hallynges, Jaenberthus.
Lambarde writing here at Halling in 1596 when he revised his Perambulation of Kent, states that at the time of the Charter there were in Kent more kings than one, going on to state that "by occassion of this old Charter, I am afraid from the history of Halling I find none other report in writing" .
What a pity!
He could have given us a picture of Halling in the 16th century, but we will come to that later when investigating his own life here at Halling.
The Denberies or Denes, were lands in the Weald which provided pannage for the herds of swine.
The number of these in the early Charter was ten, but the manor lost these denes  during the Danish wars.
The ten plough lands reduced to six and by the time of Domesday they had been reduced to two and a half and Pannage for hogs reduced to wood for five hogs.
By the time of the Norman invasion, the Saxon Manor had settled into a familiar form, with the Lord of the Manor, the reeve, the Hall, the lands retained in Demesne, lands let to tenants i.e. Villani, the Bordari or labourers, the Servi or slaves, in some cases Cotari, the tenants of part of the submanor, Free tenants, meadow land, mills, fisheries, woods for pannage and pasture.
Halling fell into this pattern, for after the Charter the Lord of the Manor was the Bishop of Rochester, for whom a bailiff or reeve controlled his lands.
The Villani, were tenants of land not held on demesne by the Lord of the Manor, who payed rent partly in money but mostly by service such as finding horses, oxen, ploughs and labour at specified periods, and sometimes providing for the lords table.
The Bordari, were an inferior class to the Villani, who rented cottages and worked on the other pastoral services and were bound to supply eggs, poultry etc. to the lords table.
As a class they had disappeared by the time of the Domesday survey.
The servi were the lowest in class, Somner in 1640, writing "a base tenant, men of servile condition, bondsmen or bond slaves particularly in the Bishop of Rochester's Manors of Woldham, Trottescliffe and Halling etc." 
After the defeat of the battle of Hastings the parish was given along with others to Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, half brother to William I, but at an assembly at Penenden Heath in 1076, led by Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, the Manor was returned to the Church of St. Andrew, Rochester.
The size of the manor was somewhat reduced, the bishop not receiving all that which was given in the original Charter.
The entry in the Domesday book translated reads: The same Bishop (of Rochester), holds Hallinges.
In the time of King Edward it answered for six sulings and now for two and a half, there is arable of seven teams, in demesne, there are three teams and fifteen villians with nine bordari have six teams.
A church there and two slaves and thirty acres of meadow and wood of live hogs.
In the time of King Edward and afterwards it was worth seven pounds, now sixteen.
What Richard holds in his lowry is worth seven shillings.
(A suling was a measure of land that could be ploughed by eight oxen and varies in size from manor to manor.)
At the time of Domesday the manor was not unlike a small kingdom or a dominion within which the lord was a superior over subjects of different ranks, his power though being not  absolute but according to custom and law.
His court was not only one of civil law but dealt sometimes with criminal justice.
The ideal Lord of the Manor should be, I quote "Truthful in his word, faithful in his actions, a lover of justice and of God, a hater of fraud and wrong, a man faithful and honest of much experience" .
How many lived up to this standard?
It was at this period after the Norman invasion that the Palace of Mansion house was built for the Bishop of Rochester.
But life for the population of Halling of any class was hard.
For the villager his whole life was to provide for himself and often to help supply the lords table, and as one writer puts it, doomed to agriculture, it was the only life he knew.
The Saxon peasant worked from dawn until dusk and as one went down the class ladder life was harder.
The bordari, or labourer, rented his own cottage but had to supply the lord with poultry and eggs from his own small holding in lieu of rent.
We know that this system worked here in Halling, as early entry for rent in the register of Temporalities reading thus "Rental of Hailing: De Reddita lixs de Bordland V's X.d et de lot land XIII" .
But life for the servi or slave must have been intolerable.
A Master questioning his scholars on their occupations from Analecta Anglo Saxonica: Master to Ploughman.
How do you work at your task?
Ploughman.
Oh"my Lord, I toil too much I go out at break of day, driving oxen to the field, and I yoke them to the plough, there is no winter so sharp that I dare keep at home, for fear of my Master, but having yoked my oxen and fastened my share and coulter I am bound to plough every day a full acre.
Master.
What more do ye do in a day?
Ploughman.
Certainly, I have still more to do, I must fill the oxen's cribs with hay, give them water and carry out dung.
Master.
It is great labour.
Ploughman.
Yes the labour is great because I am not free.
The same dialogue continues in similar vein for shepherd and herdsman.
The Manor of Halling was run for the Bishop by a bailiff, for we find in 1268 he was cross examined in an inquisition at the Manor of Halling.
The witness, John Hostiar, Bailiff of Halling, testified to the old established customs of Halling and the evidence of the witness is recorded as follows: "Being asked how many plough teams of land in the Manor of  Halling, he says that in the Manor of Halling with its Pertinencies, vis.
Holborough and Cookestone, there are of custom, four plough teams, but yet there are not four carucates of land.
Being asked how he knew this he says that each carucate of land by the custom of the district contains one hundred and four score acres of arable land, which quantity there is not in that Manor.
Being asked how much the foresaid are worth per annum, he says with the pasture belonging to the maintenance of the animals working in the plough teams they are worth per annum £17."
Each plough team here at Halling consisted of eight oxen to each plough.
We have evidence of this from the Customs and Services of the Manor of Halling in Kent.
 "All the tenants ought with each plough of eight animals to plough one acre of Beneherth." 
(Beneherth: A feudal service owed by a tenant to his lord using plough and cart.)
From the time of the Norman invasion until the 14th century the Manor of Halling was involved more and more with church affairs for being a manor of the Bishop we find many important matters being decided here and many documents were signed here.
Also during the first 200 years of the Norman period the outlands of the parish were settled by families with Norman names and some of these names live on with us today.
Many of the documents signed at Halling bear the signatures of these men and among these we find Phillip de Poucnessh now known as Punish Hill; Richard le Veel, Veles of Snodland; John le Lad now Lads Farm; John de Holoweye, Holoway Court Snodland; and another name that lives on to this day is Bavens Bank, which probably derives its name from Adam de Bavent.
In the 13th year of Edward I, Adam de Bavent obtained a grant for free warren for his lands in Halling.
Adam de Bavent accompanied Edward I in his campaign to Scotland and with other leading men from Kent was knighted after the battle of Caerlaverock in 1360.
His son Roger de Bavent came into his property in Kent and in the 14th year of the reign was summoned to parliament to sit as Baron.
The principal seat of Roger de Bavent was at Shipbourne, where he held the Manor as Lay Lord 1316.
The family seems to have died out about the 31st year of Edward III.
His widow Hawis releasing her right in Shipbourne to the convent and priory of Dartford m the 36th year of Edward III.
The property in Halling then came into the family of Melford, later it was sold to the family of Raynwell, who held it until the reign of Henry VII, when it passed through several hands among them, Whornes and Levesons, Barber, Golding, Wood and then to W. Baker.
THE CHURCH
The church of St. John the Baptist has stood on this site for at least I 200 years but at what date the Christian religion first came to Halling we can only guess.
It is most probably that the inhabitants had heard of this religion which had spread over Europe and had been known as early as the late Roman period in Britain.
In the year 604, Justus was ordained Bishop of Rochester, he then ordaining priests to serve his church and it is not unlikely that the priests visited the surrounding countryside.
Whether they converted many outside of the city of Rochester is not known or whether a Saxon church stood in Halling at this time.
If so it was probably destroyed in the year 676 when Aethelred laid waste Kent, destroying the churches and monasteries and slaughtering the local population.
The next hundred years saw Christianity reassert itself and by 774 the manor of Halling had been established.
We can be sure therefore that from this date a church has stood in Halling.
It was most probably of timber construction, and a building of this type continued until the Norman period.
Further evidence that a Saxon church stood in Halling is found in the records of Rochester Cathedral, in which Hailing Church is charged the full fee of 9d.
This was known as Chrism Fee, the Holy Chrism was the consecrated oil used in the rite of baptism and distributed at Easter to churches in the Bishopric of Rochester.
The fee of 9d showed that Halling possessed a church and was designated so as the fee for a chapel was 6d.
The present church is a church of many periods, the most ancient part being the chancel.
Evidence for this is seen in the use of tufa, a material of local origin.
The use of this material could very well gave us a clue to the date of the first stone church at Halling.
Tufa was dug and used in large quantities by Gundulph in his Cathedral at Rochester, and also in the building of West MaIling Abbey (1077–1108).
And we know that Gundulph built here the first buildings which became known as the Bishops' Palace, and it is most probable that when building his Manor House he rebuilt the church.
From this period until the Bishopric of Gilbert de Glanville the buildings at Hailing were neglected and we know that Glanville carried out a great deal of restoration work here.
It was he who probably built the tower and rebuilt the chancel from I 185–1214, this being within the Early English period.
It seems strange that the chancel and tower should be given an earlier date than the nave for it is presumed to have  been built during the Bishopric of Haymo, who carried out considerable building at Halling.
We know an older nave existed by the wall Paintings over the chancel arch, these paintings uncovered by Mrs Baker A.R.C.A. were dated from the 12th century.
An unknown writer observing at the restoration work of 1887 says of the nave, the walls were found to be covered with old surface paintings, and Fielding in his Memories of Malling, writes,"In Halling Church until a few years ago existed the uncouth painting over the chancel arch, variously described as the tale of the unfaithful wife and the emblematic representation of the seven deadly sins.
Halling Church remained a small building with a low spire until 1877 when the whole of the nave was rebuilt.
We have to read Sir Stephen Glynn's description of Halling Church in the year 1847 to find out how the church looked before the Victorians got at it.
He writes: "Halling, 1847 St. Johns.
The Church has a nave with aisles, a large chance]and a plain western tower surmounted by a shingled spire.
The tower is of rough workmanship of mixed flint and stone; having a door on the west side but no window; there is a large buttress on the same side, and just below the eaves of the spire are rude square openings for the belfry which are double and foliated on the west side only.
There is also a small slit on the south.
The roof on the south side tiled and slopes over the aisle.
The aisles have moulded parapets, the walls are of flint, the north porch is partly of brick and has near the door a benatura.
The chancel has a sloping tiled roof.
The windows in the aisles are of two lights, some square-headed, and seem to be third pointed.
The arcades of the nave are each of three acute arches with octagonal columns having cups and bases but not quite similar on two sides.
The tower arch is rude, upon a first pointed impost.
The west end of the south aisle is separated off, opening by a small pointed door to the west of the aisle, and contains a small single window, trefoiled, with iron bars.
It may have been a domus inclusa but is now a coal hole.
The nave contains some ancient benches with square ends having buttresses.
The chancel is first pointed, has on each side three wide splayed single lancets.
The east window is a third pointed insertion of three lights.
On the south side is a piscina with octagonal basin upon a shaft, beneath a plain pointed arch, within the sacrarium are several encaustic tiles.
In the east wall is the trace of a pointed arch.
There are portions of the original stalls remaining and some trace of the rood door.
The nave roof has plain tie beams.
At the east end of  the south aisle is a sculptured bracket by the window.
The font has a plain octagonal bowl on similar stem, close to one of the south west piers."
The church was closed for repair and restoration during the years 1887–8–9, when the old ruinous south chapel was pulled down to make room for the present commodious aisles, the reason for this being the increase in population due to industrialisation in the village.
During this restoration work some traces of earlier Norman work were found embedded in the walls of the aisles, also remains of the rood screen.
A visitor to the church in 1889 I mentioned the roof loft steps.
These could be those illustrated in the Gentleman's Magazine of 1788, with the caption "Two Altar steps in Halling Church, Kent" .
There are many pictures and engravings of the church dating from the 18th century.
Grose's Antiquities show the church with Halling House.
Samuel Ireland in 1791 gives us an aquatint showing the church in the background.
Stockdale shows two in 1810 with a view of the back of the church.
Water colours and prints in the 19th century show the church from both the South-east and North.
The church contains few memorials, the earliest being the grave of John Colard, with the inscription: "Nuper unius clericorum, regis in scaccario son per XXXVII anno, et Margerie, confortis ejusdem, Quorum animabus" .
On the same stone are these arms in brass:
1.
Two coats quarterly (1) Gyroney of ten nebulee. (2) On a Fesse between three Mullets pierced, as many cross croslets
2.
Semy of cross croslets botony fitched, three mens heads couped, banded about the temples, within a bordure impaling quarterly…and Vaire, over all a bend.
3.
Semy of cross croslets betong fitched, three mens heads couped, banded about the temples with bordure.
4.
Has been lost.
5.
On two arms erased in Saltier, an Heart valued gutte de fang.
Our most famous memorial is the Lambarde Brass which is unique and is believed to be of Flemish workmanship.
The brass (originally in the nave) was placed in its present position when the church was restored.
This was probably the saving of it as it would most likely have disappeared by now.
The inscription is: "Silvestre, the daughter of Robert Dene, Gent and of Margaret hys wife was borne 18th December 1554, Maryed to William Dalyson, Esquire, the 29th June 1573.
After that maryed to William Lambarde, Gent the 28th July 1583 and died the 1st Sept. 1587, leaving on lyve by William Dalyson, Sylvestre, a  daughter and Maximillian a son; and by William Lambarde, Multon, a son, Margaret a daughter and Gore and Fane sonnes and twins".
The brass represents a woman sitting up in bed with two females standing on each side of the bed.
Lying in a cradle close by are two babies.
There are two other tablets in memory of Mrs Peggy Towers D. 18th March 1831 and Frances Comport D. October 2nd. 1821.
The stained glass windows in the church were all placed as memorials.
The two lancet windows were erected to the memory of Rev. Jonah Nalson who was Vicar of Halling for thirty three years.
The other erected to the memory of James M. Formby in 1900.
The East window was erected to the memory of the Rev. Francis John Lambert, who died in Jan. 1892.
The Rev. Francis Lambert had only been ordained three weeks before his death, the dedication of this window taking place on Sept. 4th 1892.
The full cost of this window was £14 5s 2d which was paid for by subscription.
The window was designed by C.E. Kempe, a leading Victorian stained glass colourist and designer.
The centre light represents the Nativity of Christ, the left hand light contains figures of the shepherds, the right hand depicts the Wise Men, the small lights contain figures of Angels.
The font window was erected by a bequest in the will of the Rev. G.P. Howes who was Vicar from 1888–99.
The Vicars of Halling date back prior to 1317 when one Hugh Girton is named as Vicar, but there is one earlier named simple as Michaelis, in all probability a monk from Rochester.
We know from the Domesday Book that Hailing had two ministers.
Now in 1977 with the population around 100 times greater we cannot support one.
There is one other name who was probably a monk here at Halling.
In the Records of Rochester Cathedral there is mentioned in 1259, Brother Adam de Hallinges a Monk of the Prior of Rochester.
In the long list of vicars we find that Thomas Snydall 1515–34, renounced the authority of the Pope (Quens order depriving married clergy).
Thomas Bedlowe, Vicar in 1546 was deprived of his living and restored in 1562, he married Joan Rawlings of Rochester.
Other notable vicars of Halling became Headmasters of Kings School whilst still at Halling: Michael Chapman headmaster in 1631, Thomas Yardley 1660–3, John Edwards 1668–78, John Price 1729–39.
Another unusual feature is the oil paintings hanging in the church, a remembrance of the old Romish customs.
The old Communion plate of Halling was Elizabethan, at least the chalice made in 1569 dated by the hall mark (M), the Paten is of a later date made in 1719, but given to the church in 1732.
These still exist but are deposited in the bank.
The bells of Halling originally numbered five, possible giving the public house opposite its name.
These bells were made in 1675, the first three by John Hodson 1675, the fourth John Hodson and Christopher 1675 and the fifth John Hodson and Christopher Hodson 1675, and all bore the name of Henry Acorte, Church Warden.
In 1891 the tenor bell was recast by the bell founders Mears & Stainbank at a cost of £30, being shipped to London by barge and returned the same way.
A comment of interest, when subscriptions to pay for the bell were not forthcoming appears in the Church magazine: "This is a matter which the Non-conformist might reasonably be expected to support, a fine peal of bells is something for all inhabitants of Halling to be proud of, they are rung on many occasions, which have nothing to do with church services" .
In 1919, the bells were re-cast and re-hung in a new frame with a treble bell added, making a new peal of six bells, this was part of the memorial of 1914–18 war.
This time they were sent to Alfred Bowles of Ipswich and bear the inscription "Alfred made me and hung us all" .
During the last war these bells were silent on government orders to be used only to warn the village of a German invasion.
After the 1918 war until the last war a German field gun stood outside the lych gate, a memorial to Sgt. Harris V.C.
who won this award during the 1914 war.
It was a sore point with some villagers who never wished it there and were glad to see its removal during the 1939–45 war for scrap along with the church railings.
For my part I feel it was a great shame that this reminder to us all of a man's bravery should have disappeared.
(We now have Harris House, a fitting and lasting memorial we hope.)
The Church Registers
The first parish registers were instituted in the reign of Henry VIII.
In 1538 there was an injunction by Thomas Cromwell, Vicar-General, ordering the keeping of the parish records.
When this order first went out there was great alarm and feeling that it was to tax Christenings, Weddings and Burials.
The injunction was: Item; That you and every parson, vicar or curate within this diocese shall for every churche kepe one boke or registere, wherein ye shall write the day and yere of every wedding, christenyng and burying made within yor parish for your tyme, and so every man succeeding you lykewise.
And  shall there insert every persons name that shall be wedded christened or buryded And for the sauff (safe) kepinge the same boke the parish shale bonde to provide of these comen charges one sure coffer with twoo lockes and keys where of the one to remayne with you and the other with the said wardens, wherein the said boke shalbe laide upp Which boke ye shall every Sonday take furthe and in the presence of the said wardens or one of them write and record in the same all the weddinges, christenyngs and buryenges made the hole weke before, And that done to lay upp the boke in the said coffer as afore.
And for every tyme that the same shalbe omytted the partie that shalbe in the fault there of shall forfett to the said Churche iiis. iiiid. to be employed on the reparation of the same Churche.
Thomas Crumwell
Thomas Cromwell the chief agent for the King for dissolution of the monasteries 1535–38, made many enemies during his brief reign, especially among the clergy, His reign ended in July 1540, when he was beheaded for treason.
It was probably for this reason that the parish registers were not fully established until the reign of Elizabeth I, the fear of taxation and also that the clergy of this period had a dislike of statistics and generally met the injunction by a policy of passive resistance.
In the diocese of Rochester only 10 parishes possessed records from 1538, 11, between 1539–1557,57, between 1558–1603 and 39 from after 1603.
The Halling registers commence in 1705.
The original records were of paper unsuitable for permanent records, but in 1597 an order was given for them to be written on parchment.
The fate of the earlier Halling registers is not known but some of the early entries were copied in the 19th century by Sir Thorn as Colyer Ferguson.
Instances of how some of these registers were destroyed may give us a pointer to the fate of our own; in some cases rats and mice destroyed them, other instances of fire, damp, silver fish, some being stolen and a case where one vicar used the sheets to baste his goose.
Was this the fate of Halling Registers?
Early references give the names of Richard Longman, Robert Mitchell and John Mitchel who in 1493 gave up eleven shillings for a chalice.
In 1515, we find a cow being left to provide a light before the rood to burn from the second peal to matins, and till high mass is done and from the second peal to evensong till evensong be done for ever more.
Bequests of this nature were not uncommon for the maintenance of the light in other churches  around Kent, including gifts of land, sheep, cows, corn and wax.
These bequests were later commuted to money.
Disputes often arose between various parishes and during the reign of Henry VIII there was a dispute between Henry Johnson, Vicar of Halling 1534–45 and John Wildbore Master of Strood hospital, concerning the proportion of tithes each should receive.
This dispute became long and bitter and it was left to the Bishop, John Hisley to intercede and in consequence the Vicarage was re-endowed.
The Bishop ordained that the Vicar of Hailing should receive as his portion £5 10s yearly and that he should have the same acreage of land as the vicars of old possessed and also "all oblations what so ever within the bounds and limits of the parish, all the tithes of hay, lambs, wool, mills, calves, chicken, pigs, geese, ducks, eggs, bees' honey, wax, cheese, milk, milk-meats, flax, hemp, pears, apples, garden herbs, pigeon houses, and merchandise, fisheries, pastures, onions, garlic and saffron, also the tithes, sheaves cultivated either by plough or spade and also the tithes of wood for fuel, coppice wood, thorns, rushes, faggots and fardells, within the bounds of the Parish, all of which the vicars and his successors shall have" 
This all sounds well for the vicar but the Bishop also decreed that the vicar should be responsible for repairs to the building of the church, the vicarage and new buildings when ever need should arise, the celebration and ministration of the sacraments and sacramentals to the parishioners, the finding of bread and wine, and lights for the Church.
It is interesting that only a few years ago Mr Albert Baker of Baker Bros., Upper Halling, paid the Vicar part of the cost of wood he had cut in Halling woods.
The Vicar was reluctant to accept as he knew nothing of this, but Mr Baker insisted he should accept as was his right.
Another dispute in 1335, during the time of John Champneys, Vicar 1330–38, arose between the parishioners of Halling and the churchwarden John Heryng, this dispute again being taken before the Bishop of Rochester by the then church-warden, John le Baker.
The case went before the Bishop three times when John Heryng pleaded that he had already been accounted before auditors appointed by the Bishop and that the account was in possession of John Ie Baker, now churchwarden.
The name of Heryng is found in and around Halling; in 1346 Richard de Hales of Cobham, proved his legitimacy and that his father was married to Agnes Heryng of Halling in Halling Church more than forty years before and had lived as man and wife for more than twenty five years and that Richard  was the said child was born and recognised as son and heir.
Again in 1340, Henry Vitele, received absolution for violation of the liberty of the Church of Rochester, by distraint of the Bishop's tenants in Halling, he was to offer up one quartern of wax at the same altar.
It was decided in the spring of 1892 to repair and rebuild the tower and as the Vicar in his letter puts it "To rebuild as an ornament to the village with a good clock in it, to make the fabric itself what it should be for a wealthy parish such as ours" .
The Church clock.
In 1884, the firm of Hilton and Anderson gave the Church land for a new burial ground.
The road was owned by Mr Dalison who gave it to the parish, in 1892 and it was made up at the cost of £40 and the improvements to the cemetery cost a further £21 140.
The Vicar writing in July 1893; "It is interesting to record that there has been no funeral in Halling since March 25th, in the meantime many babies have been born, so it can be seen how it is our population keeps increasing" .
His comments were a bit premature because we find that in the next few months more than half those who died were children between the ages of 8 days and 9 years.
Of 42 deaths, 23 were under 9 years, 7 between 21 and 50 and 12 over 50.
In 1892 it was proposed to start a fund for a new organ.
In August 1893, the Vicar writes that funds for the new organ are not coming in very quickly, the funds standing at only £30 711.
The proposed new organ would cost £240 and be built by Mr F.H.
Browne an organ builder of Deal and Calais.
The Organ.
In the late 19th century a regular visitor to Halling Church was the Rev. A.J. Thorndyke, he prepared and trained Halling choir and took part in services.
In May 1893, he conducted a special service of sacred music here at Halling, assisted by his wife.
He will be remembered more for the fact that he was the father of the most famous actress Dame Sybil Thorndyke and her equally famous brother Russell Thorndyke, author of the Dr. Syn stones.
This was built at the personal expense of the Rev. G.P. Howes 1888–99.
This finished the extensions and rebuilding programme started by the Rev. F. Goldsmith, who left Halling to become Dean of Perth and later Bishop of Banbury, Western Australia, 1904.
The Rev. Goldsmith returned to England in June 1891, returning to Halling in July to hold meetings and preach at the Church before his return to Australia.
The Lychgate.
When reading through church magazines it seems it is one  long appeal for cash, even until the present with appeals for the heating, eradication of deathwatch beetle and the most recent, for tiles for the church roof.
One wonders how long the old church can survive.
Halling until the 19th century was fairly solidly conformist — it was not until the coming of the cement industry that other denominations such as Wesleyan and Baptist found their way here.
The building of the Baptist Chapel was begun in 1898, and when completed was attended by 20 adults and 200 children.
It survives and has become a religious force in the village.
The Wesleyan Chapel is now the Newtown Social Club.
Between the wars the Salvation Army started in Kent Road, but only lasted for a few years.
I'm afraid the people of Halling have not a very high reputation as church goers
It is interesting to note that 300 years ago in a census to find the number of Conformists, Catholics and Nonconformists, that Hailing was given as "no Papists, no Nonconformists but 60 Conformists" .
I suppose one cannot end without mentioning the church ghost.
This is purported to walk the grave yard at certain times of the year, but firm evidence of this I've not been able to find; you always hear that someone else has seen it but never first hand.
The final indignities suffered by our old church has been in the last few years.
Firstly to be desecrated by hooligans and then in Feb. 1976 it was broken into and brass ornaments were stolen including the crucifix and sanctus bell.
The thief was caught and given a two year prison sentence but the stolen property was not recovered.
And now finally it has to share its vicar with Cuxton.
St. Lawrence Chapel, Upper Halling
At the junction of the Pilgrims Road where one way leads to Birling and the other branches off into the woods there stands the remains of the old Free Chapel of St. Lawrence, which gives its name to the lane running by.
It is a building of great age dating back to the end of the 12th century, or the beginning of the 13th, the actual date of its building has been lost, but Fielding gives us a clue in his records by naming the first Chaplain as Michael de Painton, before 1319, and William de Kucklestane Chaplain of St. Lawrence 1319–44 and also of Dode, so it seems that Upper Hailing shared a Minister these many years ago.
The building is of rough stone and remains of some of its ancient windows are still in the south and the north walls.
Inside there is a piscina and in the bedrooms can be seen the outline of old windows that have been filled and plastered over.
What timber remains is probably of 18th century origin when the building was converted into a work-shop and dwelling house for a wheelwright.
An early print (c. 1788) shows the building with a large door in the north side, and cart wheels can be seen within.
Later the building was reconverted into two cottages as is shown on the maps of the 1850's, with stables at the western end.
A fire destroyed some parts of the western end, and then with more rebuilding it was converted into four dwellings.
Mrs Still who lived there and was born there in 1888, tells me she was the youngest of twelve.
Recently in October 1976, her sister living in America, asked for a photograph of the old building which 1 am pleased to say was dispatched and a reply received to say she now carries it everywhere showing it to everyone.
The history of the building is said to have been associated with the Pilgrims travelling the old road, possibly to Canterbury to the shrine of Thomas Becket, or to that of St. William of Rochester.
Undoubtedly a number of people travelled this way from other parts of Kent and Sussex, probably more to Rochester than Canterbury.
A great deal has been written of the Pilgrims Road and its travellers and its river crossings and I'm of the opinion that more Pilgrims to Canterbury follow this route now than followed it in Mediaeval times (howls of protest).
I am not saying the road is not ancient, it is older than the age of the Pilgrims and could even go back to Neolithic times.
I believe that the old chapel was predominately a wayside chapel serving both the few local people and travellers, also being used by sheep drovers who used the lane to drive sheep from Meopham and Luddesdown, down to the meadows beside the river.
These shepherds would stop for both rest and prayer using both the chapel and the Black Boy opposite.
The old building seems to have fallen on hard times, for on September 13th 1976 at a meeting of the owners, the A.P.C.M., and the Health Dept. it was decided that No. 3 Chapel Houses tenanted by Mr T. Hawkins, was not suitable as living accommodation and the Housing Services Committee placed a Closing Order on the premises.
Parts are still at this time being occupied but it is almost certain before long that the whole of the building will be condemned and we hope that this old building will be preserved and not allowed to fall into decay.
In 1788, John Thorpe published his Custumale Roffense.
Educated at Luddesdown before taking his degree at Oxford in 1738, he was well acquainted with this area for he writes of the  old Chapel at Upper Hailing.
Halling: "In this Parish, and distant about a mile from the Church and street which are on the western banks of the Medway is Upper Hailing, a small hamlet so denominated from its situation by the side of a narrow stony road, which runs beneath the range of hills and leads from Whornes Place, in Cuxtone, towards Paddlesworth, Birling, etc., it now consists only of two tenements one of which was a Chapel, and the other opposite is an Ale house.
None of the old historians of this County take notice of this Chantry, not even Mr Lambarde, who lived some years in the Bishops' Palace here.
 "In a list of the benefices within this diocese, from the registers of William and John Bottlesham, successive Bishops of Rochester, it is called" Libern Capella Sancto Laurentii in Hallynge".
It shared the fate with many others of its kind, and was one of the suppressed chantries in the reign of Edward VI and the lands and revenues with which it was endowed coming to the crown were, in the first year of Queen Mary, let to the family of Levesons of Whornes Place.
It appears in a survey of the manor of Polynes in the parish of Snodland, taken January 23rd 1559, in the second year of Queen Elizabeth, by order of Thomas Wotton of Bocton Malherbe Esq., Lord of the said manor, Larksdenne, a piece of land, parcel of the demeane lands of the said manor, bounded to certaine lande appertaininge to the Chapel of Hawlinge in the countie of Kent toward the north etc.
"It seems to have been an edifice of remote antiquity, and is built of rough stones, and was in my memory, in a ruinated condition without roof and timbers, but has now, for some years past been converted into a workshop and dwelling house inhabited by a wheelwright.
The Chancel part is the house which is plastered over and whitewashed, consisting of a ground room or kitchen with one or two chambers over it, near the south east buttress, a small door is broken through, for an entrance to the house.
"On the left hand side within and near the door, still remains the small niche or receptacle for the holy water.
"At the east end modern windows are made to the kitchen and chamber, over which are yet to be seen part of three antient lancet windows of the chancel, the center one somewhat higher and larger than the other two; which were before the alterations deep and narrow.
"The body of the Chapel is now the workshop; and the antient door way on the south side is enlarged by a pair of folding doors to admit waggons, carts and implements of the trade, the windows are likewise narrow.
 "This part of the building remains unplastered and the whole covered in tiles." 
Custumale Roffense 1788 John Thorpe
In 1889, a Mission Church was given and erected in Upper Halling by Lieut.
Col. W.H. Roberts J.P.
of Holborough, this was a corrugated iron building lined with timber, which stood on the opposite side of the road and lower down, where now the houses of Browndens Road, begin.
This church took the old name of St. Lawrence and served the people of Upper Halling until October 21st 1971, when it was officially closed, being finally pulled down on Friday the 10th May 1974.
Mrs Hilda Still of Upper Halling served this Church for at least 50 years, taking over from her mother as Sunday School teacher, as well as playing the organ.
Mrs Still is still an active lady at 88 and walks regularly down into the village visiting friends not nearly as old as she, a marvellous lady who will be remembered for years, when a lot of so called important folk are long forgotten.
During its early years this Church was well supported, thanks to Mrs Still, with social functions for young and old.
It also had quite a large choir for so small a Church, a photo taken in the twenties showing the choir outside the old Church with Mrs Still's husband and son.
This Church had seating for 150 people.
Mrs Bennet of Upper Halling who lived in the old Chapel Houses was also a staunch member of this little Church and assisted Mrs Still until her death.
List of Vicars and Chaplains
Charities
Halling in the past had many charities left to the poor of the village but all but one has lapsed and died, the only one  left alive is May's Great Coat Charity.
The first charity began in 1659, when Simon Smith gave by his will £5, the interest of six shillings to provide bread for the poor on Easter Day.
Another charity to provide bread for the poor was when Reginald Gregory, left 10/ in 1776, this to be charged to his estate in Halling, Snodland and Paddlesworth.
The Rev. William Dyer, Vicar of Halling 1791 — 1818, left £50 to provide flannel and clothing for deserving people.
Until a few years ago the parish had the right to nominate one person to the Aims Houses at Cobham, also known as Cobham College.
Among the rules and conditions for admission to this establishment a person had to have been resident in the parish for three years to have been receiving parish relief, and to be able to recite the Lord's prayer and Apsotles' Creed, also they shall not be an enemy of the Gospel or Established religion, nor a common swearer, adulterer, thief, picker, hedge breaker or drunkard.
It seems that these conditions were relaxed in 1894.
The dropping of these conditions may have allowed my Great-grandfather to qualify, as by all I have heard about him he had none of the virtues which were needed to gain entry.
In 1800, the parish received two bequests from John May of Snodland, the first was that ten poor children of Halling should be instructed in reading, writing and arithmetic, along with ten from Birling and twenty from Snodland.
Also in the same year he bequeathed £20 a year, the rent from the property known as Gassons in Snodland, to be used to provide great coats for the poor inhabitants of the same parishes.
In recent years this charity has been kept alive when funds allow, with the distribution of vouchers for those considered needy.
These charities were originally administered by the Church or trustees appointed by the old vestry meetings, but with the Local Government Act of 1894, they passed into the hands of the new parish councils, or such as still existed, for in 1893, we find the local vicar complaining that most of the charities were dead and buried, and that Thomas Towers promised to give twenty shillings each Christmas Day, very kind of him no doubt, but unfortunately he left no provision for anybody to give it after he was dead, so that in his case he and benefaction are both dead and buried.
He goes on to state that the great coat charity is alive and is charged to Holborough Court Estate and was paid until his death by William Lee Esq.
and has since been paid by Col. Roberts.
It seems as though some dispute as to who  controlled these charities arose, for a letter to the parish council in 1936, from the Charity Commission, states that the Mays Charity and Dyers Charity were both Parochial non-ecclesiastical Charities, within the meaning of the 1894 Act.
THE PALACE & PRISON
The Palace
A few minutes spent walking around the churchyard of the Church of St. John the Baptist, Halling, will reveal an ancient wall.
The fact that this contains three lancet windows shows that this was once a building.
This is all that remains of a noble old building once owned by the Bishops of Rochester and known locally as the Old Palace.
The side facing the river is completely overgrown and littered with rubbish, a sad sight for a place so steeped in history and it is hoped that at some future date a little dignity will return to these remains.
The village retains little of its past and it is hoped that what does remain will be preserved.
Towards the end of the 11th century Gundulph, Bishop of Rochester, looking for a site to build for himself and his successors a manor house, chose a spot close by the river at Halling.
This was to be one of the many houses used by the Bishops of Rochester and a favourite residence of some during the next three centuries.
Gundulph, it is said, had a great regard for Halling and spoke of its beauty and pleasantness.
Being consecrated Bishop in March, 1077, he was soon engaged in many building projects.
As a Monk of the Abbey of Bec in France he made a study of architecture and this was to make him one of the foremost architects of his age.
He began work on the rebuilding of the Cathedral at Rochester, and was also responsible for the building of the White Tower at the Tower of London.
Among the other buildings he is credited with is St. Leonards Tower at West MaIling.
The manor house he built here at Halling was most likely in the style of Luddesdown Court, constructed mostly of flint and stone.
This stone was probably quarried at Maidstone and conveyed by river to the site.
We know these materials were used in the construction of the Abbey at West MaIling and also the Tower of St. Leonards.
It was most probably the closeness to the river that was the deciding factor in choosing the site, for the state of the roads at that time made it easier to travel by water.
We know that at a later date there were steps down to the river as Thorpe tells us that in his time there was a handsome flight of stone stairs remaining which extended from the Palace to the low water mark.
This was for the convenience of the Bishop's barge and any other vessels to land, and where the Bishop might take  his barge at any time and in an hour reach his Cathedral.
Little is known of the Palace during the first hundred years.
Gundulph we know most certainly lived here for a while, for here he could retire with his household to live on tithes collected locally as the manor was allotted to supply his table "ad victum episcopi" as it was styled.
In the year 1184, an event took place at the Palace which at the time must have sent a ripple through the whole country for Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury, the man who had succeeded Thomas Becket, died here at Halling.
If one can imagine the scene in the village, to put it mildly it would have been hectic.
Here was possibly the second most powerful man in the land, dying, rumoured that he had been poisoned.
Richard had bitter enemies and his battles with the Archbishop of York concerning the seniority of Canterbury over York were still reverberating around the cloisters of the two cities although at the time of his death the supremacy of Canterbury had been resolved.
There are many accounts of the death of Richard, this is from Darts History of Canterbury Cathedral 1726: "The manner of his death is thus reported by Birchington and Gervaise, and confirmed by Geraldus," That being at his seat at Wrotham he had a vision of a very terrible person, who asked him, in fierce manner who he was, to whom when he, for fear made no answer, thou art he, continued he, who destroy the church, and therefore will I destroy thee from the face of the earth"at which words he vanished.
 "The Archbishop the next day travelling to Rochester, told his story to some of his familiars and had scarce concluded it when he was siezed with a sudden shivering and sickness, that he could scarce get to the village of Halling, a place of the Bishop of Rochester, where he had no sooner arrived by going to bed that night he died of a fit of collick" .
There are some who say the vision occurred at Halling and one sceptic says the wind whistling through the palace in its Ninous condition combined with his fever would account for the voices.
The news of his death would have quickly spread, and next morning it is probable that his body was conveyed by barge down river to Rochester, and then on to Canterbury.
The following year 1185, Gilbert de Glanville, became Bishop of Rochester.
This Bishop found the palace and other buildings neglected and in a ruinous condition and carried out a great deal of repair work to the palace and also added to the building (to quote), "in a most commodious manner" .
De Glanville though spending some time here at Halling, was a  much travelled man, rather I should say kept continuously on the run for these were most troubled times and towards the latter part of his life an interdict was placed on the country and it is recorded he was buried without a service.
After the death of Glanville, Benedict de Sanctum succeeded to the see of Rochester, the interdict having been removed from the Kingdom, but within a year King John was besieging Rochester Castle, the surrounding countryside was looted, and it is unlikely that Halling, having a Palace of the Bishop would have escaped.
When the siege began it is believed that Benedict was here at Halling.
Edwin Harris, who wrote many books on Rochester states this in his Second Siege of Rochester Castle.
Benedict returned to Rochester to find his Cathedral looted and being used for quartering troops.
In the meantime another Archbishop of Canterbury, Stephen Langton, who was responsible for lifting the interdict, returned to this country.
In the discussions with the monks over the qualities of Benedict as Bishop it is stated that they carefully discussed the matter with each other and also with the Archbishop at the Prior's lodgings and also at Halling.
Stephen Langton will be mostly remembered for his many trials with King John, also as one of the principals at the signing of the Magna Carta.
It may be of interest to note that 760 years after this visit there is living in Halling today a person whose grandfather, Robert Langton, a friend and biographer of Charles Dickens, claimed descent from the family of this Archbishop.
The next Bishop of Rochester to reside here at Halling was Laurence but this is not to say that the palace was vacant during these intervening years for as we have noticed earlier monks of Rochester lived here for periods with possibly a steward to maintain the household.
Bishop Laurence, who was consecrated in I 251, was another Bishop who saw his Cathedral looted and abused and his monks killed when the city was besieged by Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, in the year 1264.
In the year 1254, when Laurence was residing at Halling, we find him exchanging letters with the Archbishop of Canterbury, dated and addressed from his Palace at Halling.
The Bishop was in dispute and became involved in lengthy arguments regarding the finance of the whole see of Rochester.
Again at Easter he is arguing over his fee for attending the Archbishop at Canterbury and threatens that unless he is payed the sum of twenty shillings a day for three days he would never again obey the Archbishop's mandate.
Having resolved this dispute he became involved in long battles over his rights and tithes from the manors, for in 1256, he is complaining that his rents and profits were so small, scarcely amounting to forty marks a year, being only enough to meet half his expenses.
The previous year 1255, the property belonging to the Bishopric of Rochester, had been valued as follows: The estates at Halling with its member of Holborough and Cuxton, contained 717 acres of arable land, that not being marled was valued at fourpence an acre, also 38 acres of meadow land worth sixpence an acre, and 20 acres of pasture at eightpence an acre, the Mill at Holborough being valued at twenty shillings and the Mill at Cuxton worth thirteen and fourpence, no value is put on the vineyard at Halling but it is mentioned.
From the time of Laurence little work was carried out on the Palace and it was again allowed to fall into decay.
By the year 1316, at the death of Thomas de Woldham, the roof of the Palace had fallen in and the Manor House was in need of repair, for in his will Thomas de Woldham left all his timber at Halling to the repair of the roof of the Palace and also the repair of the hall of the Manor House.
These repairs had to wait until the time of Haymo of Hythe, or as he was to be known as Haymo of Hythe.
Haymo, although selected by the monks of Rochester as their next choice had to wait until August 1319, before he was consecrated Bishop.
It seems that the proposal that Haymo should be Bishop was opposed by the Pope and it necessitated his travelling to Avignon to be consecrated, a journey which cost him more than 1,441 florins.
This would amount to £216 3s as the value of a florin at this period was 3/, this sum with 25 marks which he paid to the Pope for his consent was about one years income of this bishopric.
After many disputes involving privileges and revenues of the See, he set about repairing the buildings in the diocese.
In this he was helped by the clergy who made voluntary contributions to the value of twelve pence in every mark, of the annual value of their benefices.
Haymo found on a tour of the diocese that the Palace at Halling with its farming implements and utensils was in a much dilapidated state and he is quoted as saying the state of the property of the diocese was so bad that in seven years the damage could not be made good.
However, at Halling he was soon engaged in repairing the Palace and started to build a new hall, this work taking one year and fifteen months and costing £120, a quite staggering sum 650 years ago.
On the completion of the work here at Halling, to celebrate the opening of his new Palace, a great party, or perhaps  the word should be banquet took place, for at the Palace on St. Andrews Day, 1324, Haymo entertained a great many guests of distinction, and high rank, from throughout the county.
Among the guests was Henry of Cobham and many dignitaries of the Church, being Abbots and Priors from all over Kent.
At the same time he rebuilt the Mill at Holborough.
The following year he continued with the building at Halling, adding to the hall a new Chapel, building on a chamber and dining room and also a high wall to enclose the court on the side towards the graveyard.
There are many incidents recorded in the registers of Haymo whilst here at Hailing, carrying out many ordinations and there are many instances recorded of monks receiving their tonsures at the Chapel at Halling.
A few extracts I believe will suffice: March 11th, 1335, he carried out an ordination, the following day, March 12th the first tonsure of seven clerks and on the 15th, another ordination.
On May 26th 1336, an ordination at Halling and on July 14th the institution of Nicholas de Hoghton to Cowden Parish oath of obedience.
At the Chapel of Halling Manor in August, the appointment of William Barbour of Trottescliffe to the sergeantry of the belfry of Rochester Cathedral.
Many such instances were carried out at the Chapel over the next few years.
On April 12th, 1335, an action of account is brought by the parishioners of Halling against John Heryng, late churchwarden, the case being adjourned to April 24th but not resummoned until June 2nd.
An incident during the life of Haymo in 1326, explains the reason for the building of the high walls around the palace: In this year Haymo was called to London for a meeting arranged by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to try and bring about the reconciliation of the King, Edward II and his Queen.
The feeling in the country was for the Queen, and Haymo the Bishop advised the Archbishop not to go into the city because of the high feeling towards the bishops and the danger to their persons.
Haymo refused to be part of the deputation and the events that followed proved how right his warning had been.
On October 18th, a large crowd of Londoners planned to  seize the Bishop of London, and to plunder others who were not favourable to the Queen.
The unfortunate Bishop of Exeter fell into the hands of the mob and was dragged to Cheapside, from St. Pauls, and there beheaded.
Haymo receiving news of this and hearing the commotion sent word to the Archbishop for further news, but found that the worthy Primate had left with his attendants and was well on the road to Kent.
Not only  had the Archbishop left in haste but he had also taken the Bishop of Rochester's horses.
Haymo realising his plight, the danger being that the mobs might cross the river at any time, decided there was only one thing to do.
and this was to flee London on foot with all possible speed.
He immediately set off and arrived that night at Lesnes Abbey in Erith, with his household, and if we are to believe that he walked the whole way, it was a goodly walk for a bishop.
Spending the night there he travelled next day to Stone, where refreshing himself he proceeded on to Halling, hoping he could find safety and refuge.
Arriving at Halling he was warned not to go on to Rochester as there was danger of his being captured on the road.
The Bishop waited until it was dark and then ferried across the river to Wouldham and made his way to Boxley Abbey for safety.
Later that week believing that he was in no danger he returned to Rochester to keep the festival of All Saints.
He also planned to entertain at the Priory his neighbours and friends, and here it was possible that he received fresh warnings of danger, as on finishing his dinner he hurriedly set off for Halling and was scarcely clear of the city when a riot broke out and the mob tried to pillage the Priory.
On his arrival he immediately set about strengthening his Manors at Halling and Trottescliffe and also erected as mentioned the high walls around the Palace.
Two other accounts of Haymo's period at Halling are worth mentioning.
As earlier stated a vineyard was always associated with the Palace, in the year 1325, Edward II who when travelling through Kent, was resting at Bokinfold, was sent a gift of wine from the Bishop's vineyard at Halling.
At this time the villagers had to work a number of days for the Bishop and among their duties, they had to send one man from each household to pick the grapes from his vines.
For this duty they received food.
The tenants of his lands both here and at Snodland also had to collect blackberries which they carried to the Palace in exchange for grain, the berries were then used in the wine, both as colouring and sweetening.
The last account of Haymo's life here at Hailing which I shall mention,(for it would take a volume to write his life), was in the years of the plague 1348–9.
During these years plague had ravaged through the whole of England, and had already wiped out whole parishes, and in particular the parish of Dode.
The Bishop who was now an ageing man resided for the most of his time at Halling, and Trottescliffe.
William Dene, a monk of Rochester, described the events:
"A plague such as never before ravaged England in this year.
The Bishop of Rochester (Haymo de Hythe), out of his small household lost four priests, five gentlemen, ten serving men, seven young clerks and six pages, so not a soul remained to serve him."
The same writer also states: "The Bishop of Rochester remained at Hailing and Trottescliffe, where he conferred orders in both places and at certain intervals," he continues, "this mortality swept away so vast a multitude of both sexes that none could be found to carry the corpses to the grave, men and women bore their own offspring to the Church and cast them into a common pit, and from these pits came such a great stench that hardly anyone dared cross the cemeteries." 
Whilst the plague lasted many chaplains and curates were not carrying out their duties and the Bishop commanded them under pain of interdict and suspension to return to their parishes.
It is more than probable that during the period of Haymo that the Church at Halling was repaired and enlarged; the chancel and tower being a century earlier however was most likely built during the time Laurence was Bishop, 1251–74.
Again we find gaps in the fortunes of the Palace as on the death of Haymo the buildings in all his manors were decaying for want of repair, and our next mention of the Palace is in 1359, when the Manor of Halling with its hamlet is mentioned as being taxed at £38 10 8d.
We find few mentions of the bishops living at Halling now, although they still continued to use Trottescliffe.
We know that the Palace was still used occasionally for in 1418, Bishop Yong was here, sitting judicially in his Chapel at Halling giving judgement and punishment to the Prior of the Convent of Rochester, in a dispute over St. Nicholas Church, Rochester.
It is not until the death of Lowe, on September 30th 1467, that we come to our next account in which a full description of the last hours of this Bishop are given.
"Bishop Lowe died at eleven o'clock on the 30th September 1467, at his Palace at Halling, in the most peaceful manner.
All night he had laboured in prayer and watching, then rising and sitting in his chair, as it were made new for the occasion, which had been placed before the chimney in his parlour, and in the midst of his chaplains, servants and officers who were praying for him, he expired as if sleeping, and without a groan yielded up his spirit most purely to his Creator."
In the year 1480, a most interesting event happened giving the villagers a subject for gossip.
On the Thursday of Whitsun  week, nine villagers from Halling and Snodland were caught and reported for playing tennis.
They were all summoned to appear before the Bishop and all were charged with playing tennis during Whitsun week, in between times of Matins and Mass.
All pleaded guilty to this crime and took oath to perform whatever penance the Bishop should impose.
They were all duly sentenced, those villagers of Snodland, were to walk bare foot after the procession on the following Sunday, each charged to carry a taper worth a halfpenny which they should offer up to the Holy Cross.
The men of Hailing, possibly some of the Bishop's own servants, were more severely punished, perhaps they were the ringleaders.
Their punishment was that they were to walk bare foot behind the procession on the following Sunday, but instead of one taper they had to carry four tapers (value 2d) and there they should offer two at the High Altar, and two at the Altar of St. John.
This is the earliest mention of tennis I have come across, and it is nice to know that even at this early age a sporting rivalry existed between the two villages.
One wonders if our worthy Bishop Russel were to see the sporting activities taking place today especially in the Holy weeks and time spent in the worship of television what punishments he would hand out.
Now we come to probably the last of the Bishops to use Halling Palace.
This is John Fisher, who is remembered for his disputes in his latter years and finally his execution in London by order of Henry VIII.
Fisher spent some time here and it is believed he entertained Erasmus, his great friend, at the Palace.
It is Erasmus who gives us an interesting picture of the ordinary people's homes, and he comments on the custom of covering the floors with rushes.
He was appalled at their habits, saying they just covered up the dirt by placing new rushes over the old, thus covering the dirt and filth which was caused by animals wandering in and out of the houses.
One wonders whether he observed this on his visits to Hailing as the houses of the villagers spread down to the river near the Palace, an ideal place for the collecting of rushes.
In the year 1531, an attempt had been made to poison Fisher whilst at his palace at Lambeth, the attempt failing owing to the bishop being unable to take food, but 19 people died and others were taken seriously ill.
His cook was charged and being found guilty was condemned to death.
The sentence was that he should be boiled in oil, the current punishment for prisoners.
This was carried out at Smithfield.
Soon after this the Bishop returned to Halling, but misfortune followed him.
The night of his arrival the Palace was broken into, and among the items  stolen was nearly the whole of his plate.
In 1533, the Bishop became involved with the Holy Maid of Kent, with her visions and threats against King Henry VIII, and also along with his friend Sir Thomas More with the Bishops' stand against the King over his divorce and subsequent marriage to Anne Boleyn, which brought him into trouble with the King.
For this Fisher's sad end came on Tower Hill on June 22nd, 1535, when the ageing Bishop was executed, a man of whom Erasmus wrote, "He was without comparison of his time, greatness of mind, learning and integrity of life" .
With the death of Fisher, ended the association of Halling with the Bishops.
The Bishops of Rochester now mostly lived at their Palace at Rochester or Lambeth, the houses at Halling and Trottescliffe being allowed to decay owing to the expense of maintaining them.
In 1551, Bishop Scory leased the Manor and its lands to Robert Deane, for 99 years when they passed at his death to his daughter Sylvestre, then ultimately to the family of Dalison, who who maintained their interest in them until the present century, or at least certain land.
To this day part of the woods above Halling is known as Dalison's, and I believe is still owned by Dalisons.
Robert Deane's daughter married William Dalison of Grays Inn, who was descended from the Dalisons of Lincolnshire and claim descent from one De Alanzon who came over with William the Conqueror.
By this William she bore two children, a boy, Maximilian, and a daughter, Sylvestre.
William died in November 1581, leaving his son Maximilian heir to his property in Halling.
In 1598, the estates reverted back to Maximilian Dalison, although it was not until 1601, that he regained his full inheritance, and it is unlikely that he spent much on the maintenance of the buildings as it appears he was always short of cash.
Maximilian was to marry twice, and by his second wife he was to have ten children.
By 1611, we find him mentioned as Sir Maximilian Dalison, Sheriff of Kent.
The Dalisons continued to live at Halling Palace until 1656, when the grandson of Sir Maximilian, also named Maximilian, married Frances Stanley of West Peckham, heir to Thomas Stanley.
On this marriage the Dalisons moved to West Peckham, although retaining all their property here at Halling.
From then on the fortunes of the Palace went into decline, these old walls which had seen so much of England's history unfold, and from within which decisions were made which played a part in this history, were now in their last chapter.
By 1719, the buildings of both the house and the hall were rapidly falling into ruin and a storm of 1720, blew parts of the hall to the ground, but a stone figure of Haymo blown from a niche over the door was undamaged, falling it is said on to some grass, this was later presented to the Bishop of Rochester.
Nearly 600 years after the first building it was to suffer a most ignoble period for the old building, within whose walls had been seen some of the highest in the land, was to become a Workhouse.
In 1749, at a Vestry meeting it was decided that the Old Palace was to be the Workhouse for the villages of Birling, Luddesdown, Snodland and Halling, at which the poor of these parishes should be sent under the charge of John Seward, a carpenter of Halling.
As a workhouse it was reckoned to have been quite a terrible place.
Conditions in workhouses throughout the country were supposed to have been bad, but here, so I have been informed they were even worse.
How long it continued as a workhouse I know not, but records were kept up till 1795.
A print by Stockdale, in the year 1810, of the rear of the Church certainly shows two figures engaged on some work, possibly carpentry.
After this period it was used as a farm, an unknown observer during the mid 19th century mentions the large ancient barn near the Church.
But its days were now numbered, as with the coming of the cement industry whatever remained was adapted or destroyed to build the factory which in its turn was to become derelict in less than 50 years.
For a few years a lean-to building stood against the remaining old wall which sheltered the homeless and I have spoken to one old inhabitant of Halling who remembers coming to the village as a young child and whose parents, being unable to afford other accommodation, sheltered there.
There is also the story that at the beginning of the century a person used this lean-to to make sulphur matches which he sold locally.
Within the last few years a small piece of wall has been restored and recapped to preserve the last few remains.
The Prison
Attached to the Palace at Hailing in medieval times was the Bishop's or Church Prison, mainly used for detaining those accused of lesser crimes such as debt and was probably no more than a cell or a building without windows but lit from a small skylight.
In some cases an underground cell was used, the only entrance being a hole into which prisoners would be lowered, to be kept until they were brought to trial or their debts were paid.
Early prisons were built in castles or large houses and the former  contained state prisoners.
These prisons were not meant as places of punishment as most offences were punishable by death.
The prison at Halling was most probably built in the time of Bishop Glanville, when this Bishop carried out extensive repairs and rebuilding in I 185.
From 1165 to 1299, considerable prison building was being carried on throughout the country with Rochester being among the earliest in I 165.
At Halling the prison was still in use in 1285, for we have a record of Leticia de Brenchelee, being held in the Bishop's prison here to await trial by a jury from the Hundred of Shamelle.
Crime has always been with us and Halling was no exception and it has been estimated that Kent's crime rate in the 13th century was higher than any other county, and a statement by Prof. James Given, of Michigan, says that the percentage of murders at 23 per 100,000 in Kent was higher than the U.S.A. average of today.
From Norman times the local keeper of the peace was termed Constable, his duties consisting of ensuring the upkeep of prisons, stocks etc., and assisting the church warden in seeing the villagers attended church regularly.
In some places in Kent he was known as a Borsholder, and was elected by the parish, in most cases reluctantly.
Evidence that there was a Borsholder here I believe can be derived from Borseholders Wood, a name that I think has been corrupted from Borsholder.
WILLIAM LAMBARDE
On the 15th May 1583, there moved to Halling its most distinguished resident, William Lambarde, who by this time was well known as the author of books on law, and of his Perambulation of Kent.
He was also reputed to be the most handsome man in the county, and had come to marry an equally beautiful and wealthy widow, Sylvestre, the daughter of Robert Dean and widow of William Dalison.
William Lambarde, born in October 1536, was the son of John Lambarde of London, a man of considerable wealth, who in 1551, became Sheriff of London.
His mother was Juliana, daughter of William Horne of London.
Nothing is known of his early life except that his mother died when he was only four.
No record exists of his education and it is assumed that he was privately tutored.
In 1554, his father and step-mother (his father having married again) both died within eight days of one another, probably of a sickness like the plague.
Two years after the death of his father he entered Lincolns Inn having studied both Latin and French.
It was during this time that he studied the Saxon language and the Anglo Saxon laws.
In June 1567, he was called to the bar and a year later he published his Archaionomia, a translation of the Anglo Saxon laws.
By this time he was well associated with Kent and on the death of his father he was left a considerable estate in Westcomb near Greenwich.
In July 1568, he was appointed to the Commission of Sewers, along with Lord Cobham, a position he was to hold for many years and which was to make him a close friend of Lord Cobham until Cobham's death.
His work on the Commission entailed the overseeing of repairs to the river banks, cleaning of rivers, streams, etc.
On the 11th September 1570, Lambarde married Jane Multon, a 16 year old, daughter of George Multon of Ightham, Justice of the Peace.
This marriage was advantageous to him in that it introduced him into the local society but it was to last only three years, for in 1573 Jane died of smallpox at the age of 20.
After the death of his wife he continued to live at Ightham and finished his work on his Perambulation, which was published in 1576.
This was to be a great success for him, being the first ever history of an English county.
In 1579, he was appointed Justice of the Peace for Kent and during this time he became associated with Sir John Leveson of Whornes Place who later became his close friend.
Even while carrying out his duties in the county he continued his work as a lawyer for in 1578, he  was admitted a bencher.
A testimony of his merit is recorded in a letter from the Society of Lincolns Inn: "William Lambarde,(a person skilful in Antiquities, publisher of Saxon laws), concerning much I find this following order, at a council here held 9th Feb. 21 Eliz.
Forasmuch as Mr. William Lambarde hath deserved universally well of his Commonwealth and country, and likewise of the fellowship and society of this house, and is likely hereafter to win greater credit to himself and the society of this house, it is therefore agreed, that he shall have room to sit amongst the Society of the Fellowship of the Bench, as other assistants do, without paying for the same: Provided always that this be no precedent to any other that shall be called to the like place hereafter, but they shall pay for the said room such sums of money as shall be assessed by the Bench."
In 1575, he built Almshouses for the poor at East Greenwich, the first of their kind founded by a Protestant at a cost of more than £2,700, and in 1581, he published another work on the Duties of Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen and other law and Lay ministers of the Peace.
It was about this time that he started to court Sylvestre, and in the year 1583 she agreed to marry him.
Although he moved to Halling in May it wasn't until October that they married.
William Lambarde loved Halling and during his time here he built up good relations.
He himself says in his 2nd Edition of the Perambulation of Kent, which he revised whilst living here, "At this place of the Bishop in Halling I am drawing on the last scene of my life, where God has given me Liberorum Ouadrigam, all the fruit that I ever had" .
During his years at the Old Palace he spent considerable sums on restoring the building.
He employed a gardener, had pipes laid to convey water to the Palace, put in chambers and hung the walls with leather gilt hangings, as well as employing a glacier, carpenter and bricklayer, and perhaps remembering his own schooling, he improved the school where his own children and the children of William Dalison were privately tutored.
Through his marriage he acquired the lease of houses and lands here and continued to invest in property.
The property here was to be held in trust for his wife and her first son, Maximilian until he was 24.
However, Lambarde's marriage to Sylvestre was not to last much longer than his first, for after bearing him four children she died two weeks after the birth of twins on the 1st September 1587, scarcely 4 years after marrying him.
In her memory he had a fine brass placed in Halling Church.
This brass is thought to have been made by a Flemish  craftsman, and depicts a woman sitting up in a four poster bed with her children around her, and twins in a cradle alongside and at the foot of the inscription Lambarde had inscribed "No lady was more full of reverence towards God than she" .
The bed on the brass probably represents that which Lambarde purchased in 1584, for the birth of his first child, a boy named Multon in honour of his previous wife's father.
Also this could be the bed mentioned in the will of Sylvestre, "to my eldest daughter Penelope, all my 82 pearls, my watch, bed and furniture at Halling" .
The lady Sylvestre, was a grand niece of John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester and two of her sons were later to be knighted, William Dalison, by her first marriage, and Multon Lambarde.
On the death of his wife Lambarde feared he might lose the right to stay at Halling and petitioned a request to Lord Burghley through his friend Lord Cobham, to ask for custody of Maximilian and a lease to the Palace, which was granted a few days later.
He wrote and thanked the Lord Treasurer for restoring his halcyon days, showing his love for Halling.
Lambarde continued living at the Palace until 1598 and during this time he maintained and kept in repair the buildings.
During his remaining years here he continued to be active as a Justice of the Peace.
These duties were many and varied, but all of which he carried out with vigour.
He attended many Royal assizes and many quarter sessions and with Sir John Leveson and Lord Cobham he attended musters, which were called to train all able bodied men, and for which he purchased his own suit of armour.
He was also involved with arranging the beacons and ordered wood and pitch to be available for the beacon watch.
In 1585, Lambarde wrote a long letter to Lord Burghley stating reasons for her Majesty to proceed with speed in the defense of the Low Countries.
In 1589 he was nominated by Lord Burghley for a position of a Judge, an office he humbly declined, giving as his reason failing eye sight which hampered his work, a condition brought on by continuous study of old documents.
It seems that he had suffered some ill health as in his letter to Lord Burghley in 1585, he complains of being weak and sick.
Lambarde, finding he needed someone to look after his children married again in 1592, this time another widow, Margaret Reader of Boughton Monchelsea.
Ten years previously he had bound her husband over to good behaviour and to appear at the next sessions.
With Sir John Leveson, he was ordered to set up provision for the poor and to enforce the order of Privy Council of 1598, and by this order they were both assessed in the Parish of Halling, Sir John for 7s 4d and Lambarde 6s and the whole total for Halling being £4 5s 8d.
This was allotted out to place in work five aged women, four young girls and one boy, who being able to work were set to spinning hemp.
Three other poor people of Halling being unable to work, were paid 4d a week relief.
It would be impossible to relate everything in which he was involved.
As well as his authorship of many books he drew up plans for the House of Correction at Maidstone, was elected to the Rochester Bridge Corporation, a deputy Alienations officer, deputy Keeper of the Rolls, President of Cobham College and, a few months before his death, Keeper of the records in the Tower of London.
On the 4th August 1601, in the Privy Chamber at Greenwich he was received by Queen Elizabeth I where he presented Her Majesty with his Pandecta of all her rolls, bundles, membranes and parcels that reposed in Her Majesty's Tower at London.
The Queen commending his work, not only for the pains therein taken, said that nothing had given her so great delectation.
Being called away to prayer she clutched the book to her bosom and having forbidden Lambarde to fall upon his knees before her, concluded, "Farewell good and honest Lambarde" .
Fifteen days later William Lambarde died.
Lambarde had left Halling in 1598 "reluctantly" , but he maintained contact with his many friends here and with Halling, "the place he loved" .
He was a pioneer in his legal and historical work and is remembered today by historians and students of legal history.
His monument erected in the Parish Church of East Grinstead was removed to Sevenoaks in 1710, when the Church roof fell in and a window to his memory was placed in the Parish Church of Sevenoaks in 1954.
In 1968, the William Lambarde (1536–1601) Memorial Fund, was set up by a bequest of the late Mrs M.E. Lambarde, to the Society of Antiquaries of London.
The income provides for a travelling scholarship in archaeology or otherwise for the promotion of antiquarian studies.
But Halling which he loved and where he spent fifteen happy years has no recognition of this great man.
Was Lambarde Shakespeare's legal adviser?
In 1938 the Folger Library in America, purchased a copy of one of Lambarde's law books, this was found to contain Shakespeare's signature, it was not until 1941 however that this was considered genuine.
Then in 1971 further evidence linking Shakespeare and  Lambarde was produced by Dr. Knight, an authority on legal and literary life in Elizabethan England, who, Supported by Ultra-violet light tests, confirmed the authenticity of the signature.
It is noteworthy that Shakespeare showed a great knowledge of law in his plays and Sonnets.
Sidney Lee in his life of Shakespeare, 1908 edition, attributes his accurate use of legal terms to observation of his father's legal battles and early association with members of the Inns of Court and there is also a suggestion that on his arrival in London he may have been employed as a clerk for a lawyer.
It is quite likely therefore that a meeting of Lambarde and Shakespeare took place at this time, although it wasn't until 1594 that Shakespeare made his mark, for it was at Christmas of that year that he was Summoned to appear at Court.
During these years Lambarde, after the death of his second wife, spent quite a lot of his time in London, and it was the fashionable thing in London for men of rank and members of Inns of Court to visit the Shakespearean theatre, while the plays were also performed in the Grays Inn Hall, before crowded audiences of Benchers, Lawyers and friends.
The same year as Lambarde was elected a Bencher of Lincolns Inn, Shakespeare visited Kent.
Sidney Lee states that when Lambarde was presented to Queen Elizabeth I she complained to him that Shakespeare's Richard II was played forty times earlier that year with seditious intent in streets and houses and she viewed it with suspicion.
This was an obvious reference to the rebellion of 1601, led by the Earl of Essex, when the play was performed in the hope that it would incite an outbreak and uprising, the play being performed on Saturday February 7th the day prior to that set for the uprising.
Later Essex was attested and executed after evidence relating to the play Richard II was used at his trial.
EARLY INHABITANTS — 13th to 16th Century
The names of many people are recorded on documents signed at Halling and these names are repeated over and over again by the historians.
But what of the ordinary villager?
We have to dig deep into records to find these and then only if they have committed a crime or some other act do they get their names recorded.
Many will never be known for many lived and died without a proper name.
But by researching we are able to uncover a few of our early inhabitants.
Some of the earliest names are on the Feet of Fines Rolls or documents relating to agreements on the rent or exchange of land.
The earliest I have found relates to Henry de Lornes, in the year 1203, when he paid 16s and a palfrey for 1½ yokes of land in Halling and Cuxton and another in 1271, when Walter, son of John de Boghurst granted land to Thomas Heryng of Halling for which he was to pay a seam of corn and do service to the chief lord.
The name Heryng is found often connected with Halling and another name we find is that of John Hostier, who in 1268, was bailiff here, for in this year he was questioned over the Bishop's land at Halling.
Two other bailiffs are named by Thotte in his Registrum Roffense, they are Petro de Widmore and Adam Lylye, who are described in Latin as Tunc Ballivio de Halling (meaning bailiff at this time), later Adam Lylye is described as Serviant de Halling.
We can get a glimpse of the life of John Hostier and Petro de Widmore, for.the Rev. Larking in his Domesday Book of Kent, records the work of the bailiff and lists his responsibilities"His Characteristics:
1.
He must rise early and the first thing have the carucae yoked, and then go round the fields, woods, meadows and pastures, to see all free from damage.
2.
After his circuit he is to inspect the custumary and precariae ploughs and in the beginning of the sowing and threshing season, the Bailiff and Praepositus and Messor, must be together with the ploughs, through the whole day work to see that the ploughings are completed and when done, to measure the work, to instruct as to comparitive work of horses and oxen in the ploughs according to the soil.
3.
Notes as to their comparitive costs, the horse being most expensive, and their respective values when too old to work.
4.
He is to superintend the falcatones, messores, cariatores, operarios, and all the labourers of the manor, to see that they do their duty to the lord, and to punish the transgressors.
5.
To take care that the demesne lands are marled, pastured, folded etc.
6.
To see that plough horses and cart horses are well treated and well fed.
7.
Not to take reliefs, fines for marriages etc. nor brew or bake in the manor, unless the lord be present.
8.
Not to be at the lord's table, but to be boarded by fixed daily wages.
9.
To superintend the threshers that they get all the grain out, stubble to be left in the ground to be ploughed, except what is wanted for thatching.
10.
April is the best month for making a fallow, and after Midsummer Day for rebinning, i.e. ploughing the fallow for seed.
11.
For sowing when the ground is settled, and not hover (loose).
12.
To take care that in ploughing, the furrows are sufficiently ample and not hurried over, when good land is to be ploughed for fallow, the ploughmen to take care that they do not dip into bad soil, and in the time of rebinning not to go too deep, but to plough lightly just to destroy the weeds, lest if wet weather ensue when they come to sow the seed will be deposited in mud instead of solid soil.
13.
To take care in sowing, that there be no large furrows, but small numerous and well united.
The mischief of a contrary course pointed out.
14.
The surplus seed to be returned into the granary.
15.
Instructions for the ploughman "deossum seminari debeat" (when land is to be laid down for grass), to treat in the furrow with his left foot.
16.
To see that the sowing is begun sufficiently early to avoid risks of early frosts.
17.
If delayed and rain come followed by frost the crop perishes.
18.
Marly lands should be sown early and the reasons for it, light and sandy need not be sown early, and the reasons, wet and marshy must be well dug and furrowed, batten and derelict lands should be sown with broom.
19.
Winter corn must not be sown in the same land which produced it, but should be brought from distant parts to ensure a better crop, but lent corn may be sown from the lord's own seed.
There is nothing discreditable in a bailiff appropriating to his lord's use his own products, e.g. to brew from his own barley, to make cloth and linen from his own wool and flax, feed his horses from his own produce.
20.
To keep his ponds, stews etc. well stocked with bream and  perch, but not pike, tench, or eels which devour the spawn.
21.
To limit the posterns of the court to a single ingress and to keep up the stock of horses, swans and bees.
22.
To keep a constant Superintendence of all the officials under him."
A name that appears in Halling for a period of around five centuries is of the family of Usher.
During the Bishopric of John of Bradfield 1278–1283, we find John Usher of the parish of Snodland being granted land in Halling and Holborough.
Later another charter granted to Robert Usher, his wife and heirs, other lands in Halling.
On the tithe map 1731, the name still appears, farming land from the marshes to Upper Halling.
The registers name various members of this family, Bartholomew 1453, Harry 1493, John senior 1542, John junior 1552, William reg Yeoman 1554, John, Holborough 1561.
Another early name that appears about the same time as Robert Usher is John Ie Baker.
The registers of Haymo de Hythe, record many items among them that of adultery which was severely dealt with and we find four couples named here in 1347.
The punishment in most cases was whipping; Albert Pirch and Joan Boxes, John Sencler and Agnes Wells, John Schepherde and Joan Bores received this sentence, while Richard Holoway, Vicar of Halling, was suspended for two years for adultery with Joan Parfrey.
A list of Hailing Parishioners in 15th and 16th centuries: Geoffrey Absolom 1453
Thomas Absolom 1453
John Andrews 1466
Stephen Andrews 1464
William Andrews 1456
John Areall 1459
William Baker 1464
Roger Baker 1487
Symond Barnes 1543
William Baron 1472
John Basse 1487 (possibly ferryman)
Cicely Blackborne 1499
John Boggas 1541 (also reg.
Luddesdown)
Alice Bray 1509
William Bray 1543
Robert Canon 1499
Walter Canon 1442
William Cheryden 1549
Agnes Cokes 1494 (husbandman)
John Colt 1458
Thomas Cooke 1488
Thomas Dank 1493
John Davy 1497
Thomasina Davy 1499
Eleanor Eastdown 1533
Richard Eastdown 1533
Joone Evysdon 1533
Emma Fowle 1493
William Fowle 1493
Thomas Gardyner 1507
Johan Gayton 1557
John Gibb 1520 (husbandman)
John Gylmin 1458
William Gylmin 1458
Robert Goudebour 1527
Ursula Kempsey 1520 
William Kell 1492 (born in Reading)
John Kent 1464
William Langcaster 1533
Agnes Mitchell 1464
John Michell 1460
Simon Mychell 1472
John Morysse 1550
Geoffrey Moteram 1501
Agnes Norman 1541
William Norman 1538
Roger Plomer 1494
Walter Pokule 1459
Thomas Quintyn 1554
Stephen Scrymby 1475
Robert Senclere 1508
William Senclere 1491
Thomas Sever 1453
Roger Siligrove 1461 (born at Halling, Rector of Stone)
John Steper 1479
Robert Steper 1499
William Steper 1457
Walter Stalworth 1544
John Swerdbreke 1513 (husbandman)
Henry Tailor 1522
John Tailor 1527
Margaret Tailor 1550
Robert Tailor 1488
William Tailor 1512
Bartholomew Usher 1453
Harry Usher 1493
John Usher 1442
William Usher 1544
Agnes Wade 1523 (yeoman)
Thomas Wade 1517
William Wadman 1515
John Waryn 1457
Thomas Watts 1560
John Whyston 1459
John Wylliam 1460
John Wright 1496
These cover a period from 1442 to 1560 and obviously do not represent the whole of the villagers at this time, but are of those whose names appear in the index of wills of the Rochester Consistory Court.
The population of Halling during this period probably did not exceed a hundred.
We are able to calculate the population for the late 17th century when a census was taken throughout Kent to enumerate the various religious bodies i.e. the number of Conformists, Catholics and Nonconformists, the return for Hailing showing 60 Conformists, no Catholics or Nonconformists, so allowing this figure was for adults only and allowing an average of 40 children for 60 adults this gives us a total of 100.
ESTATE MAP — 1634
A look at the estate map of 1634 gives a picture of the village as it was then, and it is probable that this hadn't changed much from the previous centuries.
The bulk of the houses were grouped around the Church, along what is now the High St. and extended from the Plough to Hall House (or Bourne's), then from there in a line down to the river with Halling House or the Old Palace prominent by the Church.
We can only guess as to the type of houses at this period, but if we believe the cartographer they seem to be buildings of the Hall House type.
The old Five Bells we know was of this date and is one of the buildings that can be identified.
Those extending down to the river however look to be of a rude construction.
A painting of the Palace done in 1776 shows a building which was possibly the ferryman's house and this building which is shown in both of Wheatley's paintings, is a single storey construction with a thatched roof.
We know little of the living conditions of the people of Halling at this period, but examples of other area's tell us that life for the village labouring class was hard with few comforts, houses being often nothing more than hovels with earth packed floors on which rushes would be strewn.
As in later years and even to this day the Inn was where they went to ease their hard lives and Halling was well served by this trade.
Possibly the first Inn was the Five Bells, which was probably the ale house mentioned in 1586, when William Cokar of Halling was sent to gaol for keeping an ale house and allowing gambling i.e. maintaining play at the dice of his own authority as a result of which he was bound, over to the next Sessions.
At this time the village inn had not only become the centre of social life for the lower classes but was also frequented by the local squire and lesser gentry.
A foreign traveller during the Elizabethan period wrote "The world affords not such inns as England hath, either for food and cheap entertainment or for attendance on passengers, yea even in very poor villages" .
Whether this could have been said of Halling I know not.
Another early inn was the Black Boy, for we find Thorpe in his Custumale referring to the ale house opposite the old Chapel of St. Lawrence in Upper Halling.
This was in the mid 18th century when he visited Upper Halling to view the remains of the Chapel.
William Lambarde, who was at this time a Justice of the  Peace, seems to have set about enforcing law and order.
Previous to gaoling William Cokar for allowing gambling on his premises he bound over John Vaughan a tailor of Halling to keep the peace after a dispute with a Snodland tailor, Edward Chittenden.
In March 1586, he confined to gaol Thomas Hall for stealing and bound Nicholas Nicholas, both of Halling.
Hall was probably sent to Rochester Gaol as in June we find Nicholas certified on his recognizance at Rochester Gaol to give evidence.
Jan. 1587, lie bound to good behaviour Elizabeth Watson of Halling 20 shillings and William Symons 10 shillings, also Henry Bray, Yeoman 10 shillings, all of Halling to appear at the next quarter sessions at Maidstone and in the meanwhile to be of good behaviour.
In April of the same year William Symons and John Wood of Halling were bound over 10 shillings each to keep the peace against Richard Wissenden of Gillingham and Henry and Joan Jackson both of Gillingham.
William Symons must have been a wild one for in July of the same year he and Elizabeth Cole also of Halling, were both bound over for twenty shillings to appear at the next gaol delivery.
Another of this family, Thomas Symons of Halling together with Henry Huggins of Wouldham was bound to ten shillings to keep the peace against Roper Blundell of Rochester.
Continuing with the estate map, at Halling Bottom on the corner of Vicarage Road, there stands one house, this was the house known as Forge Cottage which was demolished after the last war.
On the way to Upper Halling we find that the names have come down to us unaltered, to our right we have Yew Tree Kill, which has disappeared into the chalk quarry, also the Vicarage Close, further on and still on our right is Foxes' Hole, a name that has continued down to this day.
In Upper Halling we see how Monarch Hill has been derived, on the 1634 map and also on the 1731 tithe map it is written Mannock Hill.
At a short distance from Monarch Hill towards the hills we find Blackman's Dane, by 1731 this had been altered to Hickman's Dane, the term having the same meaning as Dene.
Forming the border between Hailing and Snodland can be clearly seen the road or lane that once formed the boundary between the two villages, all that remains of this is a small portion below Clements Farm.
This lane once known as Lord's Cross Lane, has like so much of Halling disappeared into the chalk quarries.
Following a line on which is now the Plough path, on our left is Hage Dane.
This was probably an enclosed wood for the use of the lord of the Manor for in the old English the term Hag  or Haggs denoted a fenced or enclosed wood.
Directly below this was Halling field and the Vicarage lane.
Here a building is shown which was probably the old Vicarage, later to be the first Halling school.
On or near this spot, now next to the Police House, stands Glebe House continuing the old association.
On the right of the path Halling field is continued and when we get to the Plough there is a building shown behind the inn and this is most certainly the dwelling that gave this field its old name Burnt House field.
Opposite the Plough an area is called Halling Park.
This would not have had the same meaning as it has today for the term park originally meant land enclosed to keep beasts for hunting or ornamental purposes.
This park probably belonged to the Palace or Halling House.
On the river side of the High St. there is an area with a strange name, Great Winox, and what this meant we have been unable to discover, but one theory is that this could have been the ancient vineyard.
Next to this is a portion of land known as Neroc Garne, again identification is unknown, but again a clue in the word Garne.
If this was originally "Garner" it could mean the corn store or granary.
This is possible as later maps show this as New Farm.
Behind this and approximately where the recreation ground is now, was the village Butts, where in days past the villagers practised their archery.
Kentish archers were considered among the finest in the country and it is not unlikely that archers from Halling were present with Lord Cobham during the Hundred Years War and also at Agincourt, where the archers of Kent were in the fore front and played a major part in the defeat of the French Cavalry.
Many poems have been written on the bowmen of Kent, the following being an extract from one of these.
Our Bows in France
So charged the impetuous foe at Agincourt
Till gallant "Erpingham" to spoil their sport
Cry'd as amidst his veteran bands he rose
Now for the honour of Kentish Bows.
An extract from another poem romances a day on the Butts.
Anon at the Butt
With a delicate cut
He pops them in at the white
And then to hear them — whack
And the gazers cry "Good Lack" 
Well he does it in such a knack
Then he laughs a little— and quaffs a little 
And sings a little— and shoots a little 
And fiddles a little— and foots it a little 
And sings himself home in a Crack.
With a little imagination we can see our village bowmen, after a day on the butts retiring as many later sportsmen have done to refreshment at the Five Bells to talk over their prowess with the bow.
Having digressed on our way around the village, all that is left is the marsh and the woods.
On the marsh behind the Butts and Great Winox, are the Fresh Marsh then below this out to the river The Commons and Salts, then the Hage Brook and near to Marsh Farm, Parsonage land.
Then travelling along to North Halling side of the marsh, Colts Meade and Colts Salt and Water Gate.
Opposite the present site of Rugby Cement Works are two fields called North Fielde.
In the woods is Halling Park, a large area covering 95 acres, and another of 28 acres called Pasted.
The Bishop's lands covered large areas in Snodland and Luddesdown as well as in Halling.
The names of other land owners or tenants appearing on this map of Halling are: Sir Richard Luson or Leveson, Mersham-Marsham, Lord Cobham, Thomas Usher, Dalison.
These are the main tenants, others are: Mr Clottery, John Packman, Watyer Elsie, Widow Barnarde, Robert Curtis, John Gamball, Thomas Edgar, John Freeman.
AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY
Forestry
Wood cutting has been a trade in and around Halling for centuries, in early days wood having been used for fuel.
By the 17th century the character of the woods had changed, landowners having planted out cants of chestnut and ash to supply the hop growers.
Halling at this time had considerable hop fields from the area of the Plough to North and Upper Halling, the last of these fields to survive being in Upper Halling in the early 20th century.
The planting of the woods above Halling continued into the 19th and early 20th century for woodcutters, as well as producing Bavins etc. for the lime and cement industry, planted young trees.
(Bavin, a fagot of brush-wood)
John Boys in his Agriculture of the County of Kent 1794, tells us that hop poles are the chief article which make woods valuable in this part of the country, there being not only local demand but the poles are carried as far as Maidstone and beyond, the planters preferring the poles grown on the hills to those of quicker growth.
Nothing in the woods was wasted, after the chestnut and ash poles were cut the rest was cut for bavins or winter kiln bavins, selling at six shillings per hundred, the best poles of chestnut at £15 — £20 per 1,000.
The remaining wood was cut into thatching rods, hurdle rods, wheel timbers, piles and props.
The price of labour in the hop fields in 1794 was as follows:
Labour per day…1 6
Digging per acre…15s to 18 0
Cutting per acre…5 0
Poling…10 0
Sharpening old poles…2 0
Tying…10 0
Crowning a shovelful of mould to every hole…16
Half hilling…3 0
Whole hilling, second operation…26
Summer hoeing per acre…50
Picking, by the basket, five bushels…7d to 20
Drying per week, with a quart of strong beer per day…1 1 0
Composition for tithe per acre…10s to 1 5 0 
Bagging per bag…1 0
Bagging, per pocket…9
Sharpening new poles per 100…6
Shaving new poles per 100…1 6
Drawing new poles into the ground per 100…3 0
Stripping poles of the bine per acre…2 6
Opening hills per acre…5 0
Stacking poles per acre…2 6
With the demand for hop poles declining with the use of wire and stringing in hop gardens and bavins no longer being required in industry, the continuation of this ancient craft is in the fencing industry where the chestnut woods are now used as the source of the raw material for the making of palings, fencing, posts and spiles.
This continuity is now being carried on through the firm of Baker Bros.
Upper Halling.
Agriculture
Other crops grown in the village at this time, where the land was chalky were turnips, barley, clover and wheat.
Sheep were few, cows were kept only in small herds possibly of no more than six for dairy use, mostly of mixed breeds and the horses were brought in from the Midlands.
The price of labour for agricultural workers in 1794 was:
Labourers per day…1/6 to 1 8
Thrashing wheat, barley…2/6 to 3 0
Thrashing per quarter, barley…1/6 to 1 8
Thrashing oats…1/ to 1 3
Thrashing peas…1/6 to 1 8
Hoeing peas per acre…3/ to 5 0
Hoeing beans per acre…3/ to 4 0
Spreading dung per hundred cartloads…3 4 or per acre…1 8
Making hedges and ditches per rod…3
Reaping wheat…8/to 12 0
Mowing barley and oats…2 6
Mowing sainfoin…3 0
Mowing clover…2/6 to 3 0
Mowing grass…3/ to 3 6
Waggoners per annum…£10 to 12 12 0
2nd ploughman per annum…£8 to 9 0 0
Waggoner's mate per annum…£6 to 7 0 0
2nd boy per annum…£4 to 5 0 0
Bailiff…£12 to 14 0 0 
Dairy maid…£5 to 6 0 0
Cook maid…£5 to 7 0 0
The farm implements of this period were made and repaired in the village.
In Upper Halling a wheelwright had his workshop in the old Chapel as an early print shows.
The Kentish turn-wrest plough was used throughout the county but here on the Downs it was slightly heavier.
It consisted of an oak beam ten feet long, behind this was the foot, five inches by three and a half inches and three feet long and on top of this the handles.
The foot was tenoned to the end of the beam and mortised to the chep; the chep to which the share was fixed was five feet four inches long and five inches deep; the share of hammered iron weighed thirty pounds and the upper end of the beam rested on a carriage with two three-foot wheels.
The harrow was made of ash beams four feet six inches long, each beam had an eleven inch spike driven through.
The harrow was drawn by a pair of horses.
Wheat was cut with a toothed sickle and bound by hand, barley and oats were cut with a long scythe and cradle and bound by hand.
Rakes were made from oak twelve feet long with fourteen inch iron teeth and were horse drawn.
At the beginning of the 19th century the condition of the agricultural workers was desperately poor and for the next forty years wages did not improve.
Indeed after the Napoleonic Wars the standard of life declined, low wages and poor housing leading to riots in Kent while during the winter of 1830, rick burning took place and farm machinery was destroyed.
By the new laws of 1816, a starving cottager could be transported for seven years for taking a rabbit to feed his family.
Three men who were caught poaching in Lord Darnley's woods at Ranscombe near Cuxton during the mid 19th century were tried and sentenced to transportation.
Here at Halling from 1820–30, £80 5 7 was paid out to the poor at an average of 2/ per week.
Among those receiving this were Blackman; Burgess, Manley, Butt, Lamb, Clark and Woolmer.
Woolmer, Burgess and Norris also appear in the Overseer's account for 1780.
Children were employed in field work for this was necessary to supplement the family income and Halling was no exception as the school log books show of children absenting from school in the 19th century to go pea picking and gleaning.
The few cottages that existed then may seem picturesque to us today but there were probably damp and unsanitary, with earth-packed floors.
With the lime industry increasing men were  needed to dig chalk and many farm workers left the farms and conditions improved slightly.
THE CEMENT INDUSTRY
The Romans brought the knowledge of lime production to this country and examples of the Roman's use of lime mortar are still in existance today.
With a ready supply of the raw material, chalk, at hand a thriving lime burning industry has existed in both the Thames and Medway valleys for several centuries.
This was by present day standards on a very small scale but evidence in the form of small quarry workings still exists in and around Halling.
The tithe map of 1840, indicates workings of this sort at "Turks Hall" to the west of The Street, Upper Halling.
Lime burning had expanded considerably at Halling in the second half of the eighteenth century.
In 1844 S. Lewis states that "at Halling chalk abounds and the works for burning it into lime provide the chief occupation of the inhabitants" .
The lime used in building Waterloo and New London bridges was brought from Halling.
At Whornes Place, North Halling, William and John Cutbush and Edward Jarvis, a lime merchant of Yalding, started a lime works in 1799, having bought an acre of chalk for £l, 200 from the Earl of Romney.
A second acre was acquired in 1801 and further kilns were erected.
In 1832 this thriving limeworks was leased by Thomas Boorman.
Just below Halling Church Thomas Poynder and William Medlicott had a lime kiln with another sited near the Snodland boundary, both being supplied from two pits on the hill to the west.
In 1846 these lime and Roman cement workings were purchased by William Lee, a lime burner from Burham who had already taken up residence at Holborough Court three years earlier.
In about 1854 he commenced making Portland cement as well as lime.
By 1855 the firm was known as Lee, Son & Smith.
During the 1840's Lee fought a series of legal battles against the dock dues levied by Rochester Corporation on coal and coke.
This battle which lasted for forty years ended in the passing of the Medway Conservancy Act of 1881.
Lee was also Liberal Candidate for Maidstone from 1852–1857 and from 1859 until 1870.
He was joined in business by his grandson Samuel Lee Smith who in 1881 took into partnership, William Lee Henry Roberts, a cavalry officer and friend of the Prince of Wales.
By 1900 the works covered an area of 31 acres with 500 acres of quarries and a fleet of 30 sailing barges.
In 1912 the firm amalgamated with many others to form the British Portland Cement Manufacturers Ltd. a subsidiary of the A.P.C.M. 
In the early days production was carried out entirely with bottle kilns.
These tapered towards the top to improve the draught.
At the bottom of the kiln was a grate upon which coke and dried slurry was placed in alternate layers.
The slurry was produced by mixing chalk with river mud in liquid form in a washmill, a circular tank containing revolving blades.
The materials were broken down and thoroughly mixed and were then led into a "back" where the slurry remained for several weeks while the water was gradually drained off.
The wet slurry was then dug out and taken in barrows to be spread over drying ovens.
The dried slurry and coke were loaded into the kilns from the top, a series of temporary walkways being formed for the wheelbarrows.
The kiln was then fired using bundles of faggots cut from the local woods.
These faggots were supplied under contract by local firms and were an important by-product of the woodland industries which produced chestnut fencing, posts and hoppoles.
The firing hole of the kiln was temporarily blocked with bricks and clay and the control of the burn was in the hands of the ganger.
The gang responsible for the kiln were paid upon results.
A bad burn could mean no usable clinker and hence no pay.
Once it had burned through the clinker was broken out, loaded into barrows or carts and taken to the grinding mills to be ground into a fine powder.
In the early days ordinary mill-stones were used as the clinker was soft and the cement need not be finely ground.
As production methods improved the clinker produced was harder and the cement had to be more finely ground.
This was achieved by initially breaking the clinker with stone crushers before grinding.
Eventually the modern ball mills were introduced.
In order to increase production Chamber kilns were introduced.
These were built in banks of three, each kiln being about a hundred feet long.
These chamber kilns were constructed on two levels with openings at one end.
The slurry and coke were loaded as before in layers through holes situated in the floor of the upper level.
Iron gangways across the face of the kilns enabled the loading gangs to reach this upper level.
The kilns were fired from a tunnel underneath the lower level using paraffin soaked faggots.
Between this furnace tunnel and the lower chamber was a perforated floor.
Once the firing was completed the clinker was broken out and carted away to be ground.
There were many types of chamber kiln including the Batchelor Kiln which was used locally.
This version had provision for the hot gases of combustion to be passed round and over a layer of slurry spread upon a drying floor.
The surplus heat was thus put to good use and the drying ovens were  no longer needed.
Lees later introduced Schneider Kilns.
These were of the continuous burning vertical"type which were also known as Shaft Kilns.
The raw materials were introduced through openings in the side of the form of dried brickettes which were heated in the firing zone at the base of the slowly revolving kiln.
When burned the clinker fell into a lower chamber where it was cooled by the upward stream of air entering the bottom of the kiln.
A 4′ 3″ gauge railway connected the works with the chalk quarry, crossing the A 228 road by a level crossing.
After ascending for another half a mile the line dropped steeply into the quarry.
A train of empty wagons was hauled by locomotive to the quarry entrance while a train of full wagons would be brought up from the quarry.
Each locomotive then took over the other train of wagons making a slow descent hitched to the back of the train using considerable braking power.
A flagman was stationed at the road crossing.
Seven locomotives were employed and there were two loco sheds, one by the railway bridge and one at the entrance to the quarry.
Five of these locomotives were tram engines manufactured by Aveling and Porter of Strood.
They were really traction engines with flanged wheels and buffers at each end and had the advantage that their flywheels could be used to drive machinery when they were not being used as locomotives.
The line passed under the Pilgrims Way at Upper Halling and then formed two branches.
Upper levels of the quarry were served entirely by winches and there was a drum worked incline between the two levels.
A 4′ 8½″ gauge connection was later added between the works and the main line.
One locomotive was adapted for the wider gauge and two further locomotives were later transferred, one from Hilton's works at Halling, the other from Frindsbury.
Before the coming of the railway the works relied almost entirely upon barge transport for the supply of coke and river mud and for the transport of the finished products.
Large clay holes were dug in the saltings of the Medway estuary and the clay was loaded into barges by "Muddies" .
Many barges finished their working life collecting clay.
Barges were being built at Lee's works as early as 1859 when the "Snodland" was launched.
She was the first of a succession of sturdy craft.
Barges of Lee's fleet were always well maintained and were never over-loaded.
They had black hulls with a greytransom and rails, red ochre deck and black sails.
The spreet was blue.
The name and port of  registry were applied in gold leaf.
From 1874 upon the sail was emblazoned the rampant white horse of Kent.
Later barges were built at Cowes and the fleet eventually numbered over 30.
Lees also had a steamboat built at Cowes named "Lee" .
These barges and their owner were to become well known in the sailing barge races from 1865 when "Defiance" won the Thames Spritsail race and "Blackfriars" came second in the class.
 "Superb" was also entered but was unplaced.
In 1867 Lee entered "Renown" , "Monarch" and "Blackfriars" .
 "Monarch" won the Topsail class, "Renown" won the Sprit'sail class with "Blackfriars" third.
It must have been a proud moment for William Lee, particularly as "Monarch" and "Renown" were both built at his own yard.
In 1868 Lee's "Invicta" came second in the Topsail class and "Defiance" third in the Sprit'sails, both being built at Halling.
Success followed success for the next few years but no races were held in 1888 and 1890 and the revival in 1891 was the beginning of another era with new builders entering the field although Lee's still took an interest in events for in 1900 their steamboat "Lee" dressed overall took 80 members of the firm to see the Medway Barge Race.
In 1873 a new lime works was established at Halling followed in 1878 by a cement works known as Halling Manor Lime and Cement Works which was set up as an addition to those already operated by Hilton, Anderson and Company at Upnor and Faversham.
This factory was built to the north east of the Church on a relatively confined site between the S.E. Railway and the river.
The quarries were situated just  below Upper Halling and were linked to the factory by a tramway which crossed the A 228 by level crossing just south of the Church and then passed across the S.E. Railway line by means of a bridge.
The crossing keeper's box complete with track plan still existed until the late 1940s.
The tramway was at first operated by horses which were stabled at the rear of the present Ashby's butchers shop.
The raised footpath known as the Cam carried the track to the quarry, laid to a gauge of 4′ 2½″.
Only one locomotive "Jessie" , is known to have worked on it.
A standard gauge system with a link to the S.E. Railway at Halling Station was subsequently laid and six locomotives were employed.
The factory rapidly expanded and this led to the almost total destruction of the remaining parts of the Bishop's Palace.
Even so one or two buildings already on the site including part of the Tithe barn and the Chapel were adapted and pressed into service.
In 1893 the name of the company was changed to Hilton, Anderson, Brooks & Co.
Ltd. following an amalgamation  when they became the second largest cement firm in Britain, and it was incorporated into the A.P.C.M. combine in 1900.
The firm used Hoffman Kilns, designed in Germany, which had a tunnel shaped firing chamber divided into cells which were fired in succession.
The cells were grouped around a central flue which led to considerable fuel economies but was labour intensive and relied on separate slurry drying facilities.
During the 1850's Charles Formby, son of the Vicar of Frindsbury, started a lime works at Halling.
He used a pit just to the west of the Pilgrims Road.
In about 1862 he was joined by his brother James.
The lime kilns were later mostly situated alongside the wharf but the original kilns were sited next to the quarry.
There were also two limeburners' cottages here.
The quarry and the wharf were linked by a tramway.
The company later opened another quarry down the hill to provide grey chalk which was taken in barges to their cement works at Frindsbury.
In 1894 the company erected a telephone line to connect their works at Halling and Upnor.
Canon Colson remarked in the Cuxton Parish Magazine,"The new posts and wires on the high road will remind us of the wonderful growth of knowledge and science in our age.
I am of course old enough to remember the first railway made in England, and still more easily the first telegraph wires; now we see people are not satisfied with these last, but must have telephone wires too.
These just put up are said to be in order that the managers of the cement works at Halling and Upnor may be able to speak to each other.
What would our forefathers have thought of this?".
The company went into liquidation in 1909 largely as a result of the uneconomic cost of shipping the chalk.
In 1911, a new company was registered with the title of Albert Batchelor Ltd.
Albert Batchelor constructed a small cement works on the site known as Clinkham works which continued to operate until 1931.
During this period railways of three different gauges were in use.
 "Spot" Batchelor was an  independent man.
He would often turn up at the factory in his best suit, get involved in a maintenance problem with his fitter and end up covered in grease.
He purchased two ex-German submarines after the first world war, removed the diesel engines, and used there to drive two small rotary kilns.
The output at 50,000 tons per year was low by modern standards and so was the quality of the cement but "Spot" had his own particular customers and followed an independent line, refusing to join any form of price agreement.
Batchelors had at least one barge, the "British Oak" .
In 1936, the Rugby Portland Cement Company acquired Clinkham  works and built new works alongside the old.
This was on entirely modern lines and has continued to expand right up to the present time.
The lime and cement trade made more use of barges than any other industry.
As these commodities had to be kept perfectly dry at all times the barges used were of the soundest construction and were always well maintained.
Lime was originally shipped as quick-lime and was a particularly dangerous cargo.
Cement was at first usually packed in battels or casks, this was considered to be the most effective way of keeping the cement dry.
The Halling factories each had a cooper's shop employing a considerable number of men.
The rough staves were usually imported from Scandinavia and were brought up river by barge.
The staves were subjected to heat, usually from a small fire of shavings to form them into the characteristic shape.
Early casks had butt joints but later the staves were tongued and grooved.
The staves were assembled into a preshaped base by a "hooper" and then the final stages of assembly were completed by the cooper.
Wooden hoops used on casks for the home market were usually of hazel and were produced by local firms from local timber.
Cement for export was packed in more sturdy casks, often of oak construction with iron bands and produced to a high standard.
Each cooper made up to 30 battels per day.
After the cement was loaded (up to 404 lbs per cask), the circular lid was firmly tapped into place, the destination and other details were burned upon the lid, and the hoops were tightened at the top to hold the lid in place.
A barge would carry as many as 500 casks.
Early this century jute sacks became widely used for home distribution although the export of cement still continued in battels and later in steel drums.
From about 1930 paper sacks replaced jute.
The works owned by Boorman Wilde previously referred to as Whorne's Place, partly in Halling and partly in Cuxton, was acquired by Thomas Weekes, their works manager in 1876.
He rented a further acre of land and erected five kilns, a drying floor and engine house.
Thomas was partnered by his brother William and the firm was known as T. & W. Weekes & Co.
In 1892 a Danish born cement manufacturer of West Hartlepool, Otto Trechmann acquired the company and the business then traded under the name of Trechmann, Weekes & Co.
The works was controlled by Otto's son Adolphus Octavius Trechmann, an engineer.
The firm amalgamated to form part of the British Portland Cement Manufacturers Ltd. in 1912.
For further details of the factory, quarry and railway system I would refer you to the book Cuxton, a Kentish Village.
As I have already mentioned Lee's works formed part of the B.P.C.M. in the 1912 amalgamation, and Manor cement works had become part of the A.P.C.M. Even so the Medway industry faced many difficulties.
Although they were well placed for chalk, all other commodities had to be carried by rail or barge up-river to the works.
No large sea-going vessels could navigate above Rochester Bridge and consequently most cargoes had to be double handled.
The same applied in reverse when cement was to be exported.
The factories on the east bank of the Medway were even worse off as they had no direct railway outlet and also a poor road system.
Consequently by the 1920's factories were being closed in quick succession.
Manor Works closed in about 1925, many of the staff being transferred to other A.P.C.M. factories.
Lee's carried on until 1930 or 31.
Trechmann Weekes had already closed in 1921 and Clinkham closed in 1931 but was re-opened by Rugby in 1936.
The position was eased somewhat by the construction of an entirely new works at Holborough by Major William Lee Henry Roberts in 1923.
Conditions on the factories were hard, long hours were worked and often the only form of lighting used on dark mornings or afternoons was a simple oil lamp with a guttering smokey flame.
Machinery was often unprotected and accidents were frequent.
In August 1876 a boy was kicked by a horse in the stables at Clinkham and suffered a broken collarbone.
On 30th September, Jesse Pring an engine driver employed at Lee's was operating the winding drum drawing chalk trucks up the incline when he fell into the crank pit, he received severe injuries and died within the hour.
At the inquest held at the Black Boy a verdict of accidental death was returned by the coroner and jury.
Cement was loaded into barges via chutes which had shutters at the lower end.
At Halling Manor Works, a horse weighing nearly a ton fell into one of these shutes and would have fallen 40 feet into the river had not the shutter been down.
As it was it took nearly a hundred men to pull him out.
An argument at Formby's works between a boy, John Carter, and a horse driver led to what the local paper called "A brutal attack upon the boy" .
John had been loading coals into a wagon on the instructions of another driver and then, to use his own words "I went to pick some chickens out of the breeze" and whilst doing so was attacked.
Strange circumstances and a strange phrase to use.
In June 1900, Dr. Palmer of Snodland was called to an accident at Lee's quarry but the victim died.
An inquest was  held at the Five Bells in January 1905 into an accident at Hailing Manor works when William Chalker was crushed in some machinery while working with John Burgess.
In April the horse ambulance was called to Trechmann Weekes when Bert Leigh of New Town had both legs crushed by a wagon he was pushing.
There were of course no telephones available to call a doctor and someone usually had to run or ride to call him out.
Dr Palmer had a horse and trap in the late 19th century but eventually had a chauffeur driven car.
Even so the horse ambulance was slow and men often died before they reached hospital.
In 1910 Hilton Anderson's foreman bricklayer was killed when he fell while demolishing a brick kiln.
Shortly afterwards Mrs Eliza Clark of Manor Terrace was awarded £30 and 15/ per week after her husband was killed in the works.
R.W. Davidson, a 14-year old boy employed at Lee's works had a particularly horrifying death, he was on the night shift and during a meal break was skylarking with a friend when he fell into a pile of dust which quickly enveloped and suffocated him.
At the inquest the wisdom of allowing 14-year olds to do night work was questioned.
There was however a brighter side to the cement industry.
Although conditions were hard the industry was booming in the second half of the 19th century and there were regular jobs for most people.
The presence of the factories attracted many outsiders and the population increased rapidly from 550 in 1851 to 760 in 1861, 836 in 1871, l, 306 in 1881, 2,095 in 1891 and 2,454 in 1901.
Many more houses were erected mainly by the cement firms themselves.
They were simple at first, like Poynder Terrace, but towards the end such houses as Manor Terrace were generous in accommodation and well constructed.
Some terraces such as those recently demolished at Monarch Hill were constructed of chalk blocks rendered with cement externally.
The welfare of the men was not neglected and the Institute with both indoor and outdoor sporting facilities was provided in 1885 by the cement industry.
Mr Anderson also took a great deal of interest in the local church and contributed towards many of the improvements and alterations undertaken during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Hiltons also gave the lower recreation ground to the parish in exchange for land elsewhere.
Chalk Pits
Halling has its fair share of chalk pits, from Bore's Hole to Houlder Pit on the border with Snodland, these pits splitting the village in two with two passes, one the road from Halling  Bottom to the Robin Hood and the other the footpath from the Black Boy to the Plough, Lower Halling.
Four of these pits are now disused and nature has started to heal the scars.
Many people I know deplore the digging of these cant quarries and call them ugly eyesores and the rape of the country.
With thoughts of conservation I can understand this but then one must understand the times when these were being worked and in the 19th and early 20th century this chalk gave a great many people employment and allowed families to be brought up in reasonably comfortable conditions and many of us now owe our very existance to these cement factories, our fathers and grandfathers earning their livings working on them.
One must remember that at the height of the cement boom in this valley the number of men employed ran into thousands if one considers the barge trade as well.
It only takes a little imagination to turn the Cam pit into a nature reserve and if it was possible to lay out a few paths making nature trails etc. the future of the Great Pit that Rugby Cement Works are now engaged in could in years to come make an ideal game reserve and possible "marina" with a link to the river.
During the war these derelict pits were used for various purposes; Lee's or Houlder pit became a bomb and ammunition store for the R.A.F. The top pit of Batchelors was used by the Home Guard as a rifle range, and for other weapon training.
The Cam pit also became a training area for the Army, being used for weapon training and exercise in the firing of live ammunition.
Boys will be boys and in spite of warnings at least one fatal accident occurred involving local lads, and several were injured.
Bores Hole was used as an air raid shelter, or rather the tunnel that led under the road was, and many tales could be told of nights spent under there during the air raids.
Living on chalk is a mixed blessing, on the one hand the cement industry provides work for many local people and with the mechanisation of farming methods this has meant that what was at one time an agriculture community is now largely dependant upon local industries.
The problem by and large is a problem of levels, and whilst the bottoms of the pits now support fully grown trees these are Separated from the surrounding fields and roads by massive chalk cliffs — in some places several hundred feet high!
The answer seems to be twofolk, on the one hand a more radical approach to quarrying, and on the other a more careful integration of the chalk extraction process with the topography of the landscape.
In areas like that which lies to the south of Upper Halling  it would be desirable to reshape the terrain on a much larger scale, to link the existing pit being operated by Holborough Cement Factory, with the now disused pits at Upper Halling, and to re-grade the edges to blend them with their surroundings.
This would mean dropping the roads and footpaths on to the bed of the quarries which would be covered with topsoil and be returned to agricultural use.
A whole new landscape would appear, not a totally level one I would suggest, but some hundred or so feet below the original.
The more massive older chalk faces would be covered by tipping, terracing and planting.
Another process which would be applicable to the right type of terrain is what might be called the continuous reclamation process.
This is best explained by reference to the diagram, topsoil being removed from a small area at a time and the chalk quarried down to the new level.
The topsoil is then replaced.
This method is particularly suitable for removing minor bumps in the landscape, the new level blending naturally in with the surroundings.
As the depth is obviously restricted this form of extraction would take place over a wider area than normal but in a district like this where the overburden is thin this is no real hardship.
With reinstatement forming a continuous process disturbance to agriculture would be minimal and apart from the quarry face being worked there would be little to spoil the view either.
I would strongly commend this idea to the cement industry.
It could certainly have the advantage of returning land to agricultural use without the huge delays normally associated with conventional quarrying.
In fact at present much land taken for chalk extraction is lost to agriculture permanently.
NICKNAMES
Nicknames have been used for as long as man has identified himself.
All through the ages men have had names which recognised their prowess at arms or through some physical attribute.
Larkin in his Domesday of Kent, mentions Humfridus Loripes or Humphrey the bandy leg, he states this is a decided nick-name.
No ridicule was probably intended by this designation.
Before the established use of surnames a recourse to nicknames was almost necessary and certainly of very frequent occurrence.
However nicknames today are used mostly in the place of christian names and the hey-day of this use in Halling was probably during the period of the late 19th century and the early 20th century.
The reason that these were given was most probably for quick identification, for at this time most men worked on the cement factories where father and son and uncles worked together, some with the same Christian names and a nickname was necessary for a man to know who was needed.
Whether this was done knowingly or not these nicknames saved some confusion.
In Halling there are a great number of these nicknames handed down to us and some are still used to this day.
Tile origins have been lost but certain families in the village retain these names.
Probably one of the oldest families was the Mills, and the name Monarch identifies a branch of this family.
This nickname possibly came from around 1865, when this family was associated with the barges operated by William Lee's works for a quite famous barge by the name of Monarch won many of the annual barge races and it is known that the Mills family skippered these barges.
Other families like my own (Cowers) have always been known as Cribby.
How this name originated I have no idea, but I do know that it has been around for many generations for a jingle about this name has come down from the 19th century and it went: "Old Cribb, Young Cribb and Young Cribbs Son, if it hadn't a been for Old Cribb there wouldn't have been none" .
Quite a surprise regarding this name occurred at the end of the last war.
I was visiting Cobham with a friend and after a look around we called into the Ship public house for refreshment.
The only other person in the bar was an old inhabitant of Cobham and during our conversation I mentioned that my beat-grandfather once lived in Cobham but had died many years before I was born.
The old man looked up and asked his name.
I answered "Gowers" , at which he immediately replied  "Old Cribby, the old sod" .
I have researched the nicknames of Halling and the variety of these names is amazing.
Who thought of them can only be imagined, but it is obvious that some are attributed to the physical build or character while others have probably got connections with the work they did, terms which have died with them.
Some of these names it is certain were acquired at school but most when they began work and these nicknames completely took the place of their Christian names and lasted through the rest of their lives, it being not unusual to know a person for years without ever knowing his proper name.
As I have said some names had physical attributes and these can be identified in such names as Lofty, Longsett, Fatty, Buster, Tich, Snowy, Darkie etc.
In some cases Christian names were adapted, possibly where father and son had the same Christian name, these then tending to be used in the same way as nicknames.
Examples of this are in names such as Jack becoming Jacko, Albertie for Albert.
The use of these names became accepted by the recipient for most were not used derisively but became natural names.
One or two of these names I have been able to trace such as that used in the Miller family of Upper Halling.
The nickname here is Rangi, this being given to the person for his prowess with a cricket bat and was so called after an Indian cricketer while another Upper Halling nickname was No Cut Mitchell, this being for his skill in hair cutting.
Another Mitchell got his nickname for always having his head stuck in a boys annual of the twenties — he became known as "Pill Box Annual" but this eventually was shortened to Annal Mitchell, by which he is still known.
This shows how a name can be derived from one entirely different from its original.
Even the local vicar wasn't immune, the Rev. Bartley Trimble who was vicar of Halling for many years was known as "Baggy" .
Many of these men became local characters, if only remembered for their nicknames and their prowess in drinking.
Some of these will be remembered for years to come, not only in Halling but where ever the cement barges called.
As a young man I listened to many yarns spun by such men as Billican Geary, Treacle Mills, and little Sparrow Martin, who had an insatiable appetite for apple pudding and who years ago as a young man dived off Rochester Bridge for a bet.
Billican Geary had a dry humour and would often tell his yarns.
He recalled how on one occasion when on a sea rescue in the English Channel a person obviously in fear of drowning was shouting for help.
Billican looked over the rails at him on hearing his cries  and replied quite dryly, "What the hell is he shouting about I've drunk more beer than he's swimming in" .
Another Mitchell known as "Puddin" was for many years tree planter in the village and at the later part of the 19th century planted trees around the cemetery, always maintaining he was one short, and if one takes the trouble to look there is a gap still awaiting the missing tree.
He also planted trees in the surrounding woods and countryside, so there is nothing new in tree planting schemes.
Brozie Herrington was always known for his homemade sweets, and among the older generation "Brozies Homemade" were well known.
Another character who received his name through an advert of the time was "Soapy" Watson.
I have been told that on coming to the village to work in the cement factories and receiving his first weeks wages he asked if it was all his as it was more money than he had ever had in one week.
Milky Bill, another Upper Halling man received his name for his job as milkman (sea "Cuxton, a Kentish Village" ).
Another who will be remembered by the older generation was Albert Bachelor, who employed a great many of the local men on his cement factory and was known by all as "Spot" Bachelor.
Tabs of Fuggles Fissenden was known for his strange custom of always leaving the Robin Hood public house backwards, this was because on a number of occasions having imbibed too freely, he fell forward on leaving, breaking his clay pipe, so for ever afterwards he removed himself backwards concerned not with his own safety but with that of his clay pipe.
The following list will show the diversity of the nicknames.
On collecting these names I began to wonder whether I was being taken in but so many came up on independent lists that the villagers sent in that I am sure they are authentic.
THE RIVER CROSSING
A bridge over the river at Halling has been a debating point for a great number of years and it is a wonder, considering that here has been a main crossing place for hundreds of years and possibly a few thousand, that some structure has not been built.
In the 16th century we find Lambarde, who resided near the ferry in Halling House, stating in his Perambulation of Kent, "And now, for want of a bridge at Halling, we may use the ferry and touch at Wouldham" .
So it seems our old Antiquary bemoaned the lack of a bridge.
Although much talk went on it wasn't until 1876 and then again in April 1892, that meetings were called to consider "A bridge across the Medway" .
The first meeting was held on March 2nd and it was stated that a bridge was much wanted at some point between Rochester and Aylesford.
The opinion was strongly expressed that Halling was the best point at which to build it and a committee was appointed.
The meeting was held at Halling Institute and was presided over by T.H. Baker Esq., C.C. and supported by Messrs. M.B. Parrington, T. Hollands, A.F. Bowker etc.
The committee appointed was Messrs. W. Adams, G.K. Anderson, H.W. Anderson, H. Brigden, J.W. Brown, G. Couchman, J. Edmunds, S.Lepine, T. Lingham, J. Scholey, B. Sedgwick and C.T.
Worsell, with power to add to their number and to work in conjunction with the committee already formed elsewhere.
In Dec. 1892 another meeting was called this time it was to discuss the construction of a high level bridge, and to print a pamphlet together with a lithograph plan of the proposed bridge.
There was much talk and many meetings but nothing came of this venture, then in May 1909, the question of a bridge between Halling and Wouldham was again debated.
This time members of Strood Rural Council and Rochester Council attended and the proposal was put for a high level bridge 60 ft above water level.
The Strood delegate suggested that this would put a penny on the rates, but the Rochester delegate rejected the resolution.
Halling had to wait until the 1939–45 war when a military bridge was erected and a road laid down and for a few years the people of Wouldham and Halling were able to move freely between the villages, which was a great asset to the people of Wouldham who used the bridge to get to work on this side of the river, but it was certainly the death knell of the ferry.
The bridge lasted until just after the war when it was pulled down and this again started the discussion "For the want  of a bridge here at Halling" to quote Lambarde.
In the Planning Basis for Kent, published in 1948, we read under Bridges, Halling: "From time to time there have been requests for a bridge at Halling to replace a very inadequate privately owned ferry service.
The ferry service has been discontinued since the construction of a temporary military bridge connecting Halling and Wouldham which is used in preference to the ferry to such an extent that the ferry service was discontinued by the proprietors.
The military bridge is to be removed, but there is a renewed demand for a permanent bridge at or near Halling."
And one could add, and so "ad infinitum" .
It is strange to relate that this short stretch of water should be such a barrier but the hills of Wouldham and village are as foreign to some people of Halling as any parts of the world and in fact there are some who travel all over the country and to some places abroad, but have lived all their lives in the village without ever setting foot on the further banks of the river.
There is one woman who regularly gazes across to her old home at Wouldham and if her brother is in his garden can see him plainly, but hasn't spoken to him for several years.
Halling Ferry
Mrs Mabel Rotherham (Mabel Stevens) moved to Ferry House in 1898 when she was 9 months old.
Her father had lived at the Old Parsonage at Wouldham and had 10 children.
He worked at Anderson's factory and was badly injured when a kiln in which he was working collapsed.
He and a colleague were dug out and taken to hospital in the horse, drawn ambulance.
His leg was amputated and his face and arm were badly injured.
Mr Anderson went across to his home to inform his wife and when he learned of the family circumstances he immediately paid Mrs Stevens £50.
Contrary to expectations Mr Stevens pulled through but was unable to continue with his job.
Mr Anderson therefore gave him the Hailing Ferry in perpetuity and set him up in a shed selling chandlery to the barge owners.
The Stevens boys manned the ferry until the outbreak of was although Mabel often helped out.
When her brothers joined up in 1914 she took over the running of the Ferry assisted by some local boys who enjoyed the good food that Mrs Stevens provided.
The boys were not strong enough to handle the heavy boat at flood tides so Mabel had to cope then.
She often had to get up at about 4.0 a.m. to row workmen across and the ferry remained open until 10.0 p.m.
Sometimes during the night someone from Wouldham  would run down to the opposite bank and call for the Doctor.
While Dr. Edwards was being summoned Mabel would dress, then row the doctor across and wait for his return.
One foggy night she lost her way and had to grope along the bank for some way finally realising that she had circled round and returned to the Halling side by mistake.
Helped by some workmen she tried again and this time reached the Wouldham side.
She groped her way across and landed the doctor on the mud and he slithered on hands and knees up to the bank.
While lost in the fog she heard talking and realised that a barge had dragged anchor and was coming down river with the tide.
She called out to the crew who thought that they were still securely anchored off Snodland!
One day a figure appeared on the far shore.
Her brother rowed across and to his dismay saw that the man was wearing convict's clothes.
He rowed him back however and the convict went to the door to beg for money.
Mrs Stevens eventually gave him 5/ and when he asked for clothing suggested that he look in a nearby workman's shed.
Meanwhile young George Stevens had run for the policeman and as soon as the man made off he was cornered by a party of men returning to the factory.
He ran back to the ferry house but Mrs Stevens refused to take him back across the river.
The policeman arrived and questioned the convict about the money and coat.
Mrs Stevens got the blame for producing these but she claimed that she had merely kept him talking while her son went for the police.
Mabel was in the habit of throwing missiles at the Bargees and lightermen in her earlier years and one day she had been aiming coke at a local lighterman, Ben Johnson.
He pulled his craft over to the ferry wharf and invited her to jump aboard which she did.
He asked her to go into the fo'c's'le and as soon as she was inside closed the hatch and said that she could come out when she was ready to apologise.
She sat on the small stove for some while gradually becoming more agitated.
Meanwhile Ben had gone off to move another lighter and was then intercepted by the Manager who directed him to the dock some way off.
He completely forgot about young Mabel and at the end of the day went home to bed.
It was Saturday and the works were as usual closed until Monday morning.
Mabel was by now scared stiff and frozen cold.
During the night Ben suddenly woke up and remembering her, he hurriedly dressed and ran back to the wharf and opened the hatch.
Mabel was too cold to move so he had to lift her out and carried her home to Mum.
Mrs Stevens had given her up as drowned but said little to Mr Johnson.
Mabel had learned her lesson and coke throwing  ceased.
One horrifying event she still clearly remembers occurred on Ferry Lane.
She was walking down towards the ferry with Mr Clark and found the way blocked by a stationary train of wagons.
Mr Clark started to edge between the wagons and an adjoining building and Mabel ducked under the buffers of two wagons, at that moment the train started to move forward pinning Mr Clark against the wall.
Mabel screamed at the top of her voice and the train stopped.
Poor Mr Clark was badly crushed and died shortly afterwards.
Mabel went home but her mother wouldn't believe her daughter's story.
She couldn't eat any of her meal and went off to school where she had to sit alongside Mr Clark's daughter.
She couldn't stand the strain for long, neither could she bring herself to tell her companion about her father's accident and death.
Finally she asked to speak to Mr McGay the teacher who sent her home suffering from shock.
The ferry was finally closed in 1964 after 600 years of continuous service apart from the short wartime break referred to.
SPORT
Sport had always been a part of village life and Halling has a long association with all forms of sport.
We can go back to 1480, when the men of Halling and Snodland were charged to appear before the Bishop for playing tennis in Holy Week and we know that there was anciently a butts at Halling where the men of the village practised their archery.
The hey-day of sport in our village seems to have been from the late 19th century up to the 1914 war, with a short revival between the wars but although attempts have been made at intervals the same enthusiasm doesn't seem to prevail.
Even today as I write this, a football match between the men and the women of Halling is taking place, the teams being known as the Go-Go Girls and Bionic Males.
Sport has resorted to gimmickry but I suppose some sport is better than none.
Cricket was always a favourite sport with at least three teams in Halling.
We find in 1891, a report of the first game played on the Institute ground,
"The cricket ground recently acquired by the Institute, is in fairly good order, and the first cricket match played thereon, took place on Sat.
June 13th.
The match was Halling Institute v Snodland, and was decided by the first innings Snodland scoring 77 and Halling 49, Halling were playing valiantly when stumps were drawn at 6.30."
A team existed before this as in February of the same year there was held at the Institute a cricket concert attended by a large audience.
On August 1st 1891, a cricket match between Halling Institute and Mr G.K. Anderson's eleven, was held on the Hundred of Hoo cricket ground.
Halling again lost, 140 to 87.
The Halling team was:
H. Martin bowled for 6
F. Pring bowled for 8
E. Chittenden caught 0
R. Chittenden caught 1
S. West bowled 11
G. Pring run out 7
Amos Burgess bowled 19
A. Kemsley not out 9
H. Baker run out 15
W. Leigh bowled 0
W. Day bowled 0
Byes etc. 11
Total 87
In 1892 the pavilion was erected and a report of the day  states, "The building will be match-boarded with galvanised roof 28 ft long by 13 ft containing a dressing room each end and open seating accommodation in the centre and front and will add greatly to the attractiveness of the ground" .
This pavilion was built by A. Burgess, a local man and Mr Derek Church's grandfather.
In 1891, 17 matches were played, 6 were won, 10 lost and 1 drawn, Mr Amos Burgess won the batting prize and Mr W Leigh the bowling prize, the membership was 74 with a playing staff of 54.
On May 28th 1892, a local Derby between Wm.
Lee, Son & Co and Halling Institute was arranged.
The game was won by Halling, the first innings, 49 to Lee's, 51 to Halling, second innings, Lee's 52 for 6, Halling 51 for 6.
During the period between the two wars in the twenties and thirties a quite successful team played in Halling, and I can recall as a lad spending many hours watching them.
And one man who seemed to go on for years was Cecil Dunford or "Slap" as he was known, an active man in all his pursuits in the village.
Another who will always be remembered for his all round ability was "Punch" Burgess, who it was said had a trial for the county but couldn't contain his impatience.
After the second world war, cricket tried to regain its place in village life but like many other traditions it seems to have died.
Upper Halling has its own team and in its early days this team played in the field opposite the Robin Hood, and I have been told of near carnivals on Sunday afternoons.
Whilst cricket was played onlookers would sit along the bank at Petts Field with picnic baskets and with gramophones playing.
This team now has its own ground near the Black Boy.
Football has been the other major sport and has always produced good teams, and Halling must have been among the first to play under floodlights.
A report of the day states, "December the 20th 1892 a novel football match was played between Halling and Snodland, the match was played during the evening under artificial lights, the lights were three Wells lights lent by Mr H. Anderson, more than 300 people assembled to watch the match" .
Each generation has argued as to the merits of its team.
In the twenties Halling football team was the pride of the village and when one of its players, "Nobby" Clark died suddenly after a game, the whole village mourned.
Many villagers attended his funeral, with his team mates in football gear as pall bearers.
During the thirties two teams vied for support, Lees, Holborough had a very successful team, playing on the Halling Institute ground.
And a team run from the "Bolshie" or New  Town Social Club, played by Stake Lane.
Since the second war various teams have played in the village and in the fifties Halling Institute ran a team which won league honours, but the most popular team was Halling Minors, who played from the recreation ground at Lower Halling.
Before the 1914 war, field sports were a popular feature and cycle racing had quite a large following though these were mostly open races and drew competitors from around Kent.
A report of the Halling Sports Meeting September 1909 states,"The day was a great success although it was wet with a fine drizzle.
A large crowd assembled to see competitors from all parts of Kent take part, among the events included were track races for local athletes and open events for all comers.
The Halling Institute race was won by A. Ashby with F. Stokes 2nd and Ford 3rd.
The most popular events were the cycle races which were raced over a mile, 2 miles and 3 miles including handicaps and novice events and finishing with a 3 mile handicap race open to all comers".
The Grand Finale event was a horse race which was an open event known as the Halling Derby and won by Pretty Polly, a horse from Gillingham.
I suppose when sport is discussed horse racing has always been a part of village life, a pastime which most of the working men have indulged in.
Bets would be made out on odd scraps of paper with all the formula of doubles, ups and downs, trebles, box ups, each way bets, in fact any means of winning a few shillings and saving their stake money that could be found.
These bets would be handed over to a runner and signed with each man's racing nom de plume, be it his nickname or any other name he considered lucky.
Walking through the village on any racing day one would hear conversation like, "What do you know today Fred" and the reply would bring forth such words of wisdom as "Watch Richards in the 2.30" , or "Back top weight" for these men had a language of their own and in the evening, meeting over a pint the locals would discuss the downfall of the favourite or starting prices and often the first greeting one would get on opening the door of the bar was "How did you get on today" Tich "" , and often the reply was "First and second, Fred" .
A visitor to the village just after the war once remarked to me that he was amazed at the interest and knowledge of the local men on the subject of horse racing, as we had no race course.
The opening of betting shops and legal off course betting, knocked out the fun and interest.
On big race days I would say 98 per cent of the village bet on their favourite.
For housewives 6d each way was a popular bet on the Derby and Grand National.
A gamble or a bet or wager was a way of life to the men of the village, and often a wager would be made at work or whilst drinking in the local.
These wagers would be a talking point for days and in some cases bets on individuals would be made.
Many years ago one such wager was made in the "Homeward Bound" , when a group of men were drinking together, the wager was made by one that nine in the bar could carry a 56 lb weight on his head for a measured mile and back.
The challenge was taken up by Harry Baker, who being provided with a weight placed it in a backet and walked from Halling Institute to Snodland Institute, so winning the bet, but he had more difficulty collecting his winnings.
Fox hunting is a sport that is never seen in the village today, although the fox abounds in the surrounding woods and the disused pits.
The method today is with beaters and guns, but in the 18th and 19th centuries the sound of horn and hounds was often heard about the village.
The decline of hunting was brought about by the digging of the chalk quarries as there was always the danger of hounds being led over the edge.
I have been informed that this once happened, with the death of a number of hounds.
A hunting song of the 18th century titled "The Lulling-stone Hunt" tells of the hunt chasing a fox through Halling and in the ninth verse we read;
"Dashed down to the Friars, where Romney'skind Lord
Live's the friend of mankind, and is by thousand adored
He again took the Medway, but faultered in pace
While the old bridge at Aylesford befriended the chase
At Halling, sly Reynard had near met his doom
Where Lambard, the learned, had chosen his Tomb
"
In the 19th century the hunt is mentioned in Upper Halling and there is also a reference to the West Kent Hunt going over Holly Hill via Birling.
Before the last war the Royal Engineer Drag Hounds could be seen following the scent along the Pilgrims Road, but this is a sight no longer with us.
LOCAL SERVICES
Fire Brigade
At the Lady Day Vestry Meeting of March 1892, it was proposed to establish a Volunteer Fire Brigade.
A committee was formed consisting of Messrs H. W. Anderson, A.F. Bowker, E.G. Brown, G. Couchman, A.H.
Hambrook, S. Lepine, T. Lingham and E.S.
Weekes, this was to "look into and make inquiries to see what can be done, and report on some future occasion" .
It wasn't until September 1905, that the Fire Brigade was formed, this consisted of five members with a Captain and a Lieutenant.
Some sort of fire prevention had been in existence, for a number of hydrants were placed around the village and earlier in the same year extra hydrants were provided and the fire appliance committee was formed.
This Fire Brigade was to continue as a Local Volunteer Force until the 1939–45 war when it became part of the National Fire Service.
Under the Captaincy of Fred Beadle the brigade took part in many competitions winning many trophies, individual as well as for team events.
In the event of a fire, a maroon would be set off and their turn out was of such a high standard that they arrived at fires out of the district before the local brigades in whose area the fire was.
During these years the fire engine and appliances were kept in the recreation ground behind the present Fire Station, and training was carried out on Wednesday evenings on this ground.
I can remember as a lad watching these men with a hand cart and hoses going through their training sessions.
Besides their attendances at fires and competitions the Halling Brigade gave many exhibitions of their fire fighting skills, and were always prominent in local functions.
All this training was to hold them in good stead for the war to come, when the older members were to form the backbone of a very efficient Fire Brigade.
By this time a new headquarter had been built in Vicarage Road, with a new engine and modern appliances, and set into the forecourt was proudly displayed in large letters "HALLING" , but with the outbreak of war this was blocked in with cement for security reasons, and as one walks across in front of the station today the same cement is still visible.
In between these duties they still managed to have a lighter side, arranging dances at the Institute which became popular throughout the war, and their concert party entertained many during those dark days.
At this time women were employed in duties in the fire station on a full time rota.
A few names of those who have served Halling faithfully during the history of the brigade:
Captain Walter Smith (probably the first) 1908 Captain Fred Beadle Captain Harry Wooden Leading Fireman Harry Hearn Members: H. Martin, J. Chittenden, S. Mitchell, Frank Mitchell, Trevor Mitchell, one time mascot and later active member, the Heighes brothers, F. Coomber, Reg.
Gore, Jennings, and E. Mitchell.
There are many others who, though not mentioned, have served equally well.
Among the women were: Bib Brooks, Pam Walters, Hazel Knott and D. Haynes.
Home Guard
In May 1940 with the threat of invasion a call went out for volunteers for a new force to be known as the Local Defence Volunteers or for short L.D.V. This was later to be called the Home Guard and "Dad's Army" .
Within a few days a unit was formed in Halling under the command of Captain Wanstall.
The majority of these early volunteers were ex-service men, some with experience of World War I and within a few weeks many of us teenagers barely sixteen jointed the unit.
The Home Guard became a joke for some and a remark once passed in my company was "What use do you think you would be against trained troops?" .
This fortunately the village was never to know, but later on in the war I found how much trouble units of this kind could cause.
However in all fairness to the Halling unit a number of those older men who fought in the first war wore medals for gallantry, and were to show us youngsters that they had lost none of their skills with a rifle.
The training we were to receive was later to help us teenagers when most of us enlisted into the services.
In the beginning an arm-band was all we had to identify us with an assortment of weapons, not enough ammunition, and not really knowing what our role was.
But with these we guarded the water works, patrolled the hills and woods, and maintained a guard duty at Rugby Works, where our first H.Q. was situated, working our normal jobs by day and on duty by night.
Later as weapons and uniforms became available and with the help of the older men, the unit began to take shape.
Some were sent on courses of instruction.
And there were drill parades and training sessions, the surrounding hills and woods being used to carry our field and night exercises.
Training times were Tuesday and Thursday evenings, when  lectures and weapon training was carried out, and sometimes night schemes, but Sunday was the main day and often this would be used to acquaint us with our weapons.
For many this was our first experience with firing live ammunition and also anti-tank weapons, and for this the disused pit of Rugby's was used, and when some proficiency was obtained we were allowed to use the ranges at Milton near Gravesend.
The Headquarter was originally at Rugby Cement Works where disused offices were placed at our disposal, but later as the unit increased this was moved to the Church rooms, and the unit was commanded by Captain Sammy Wenham.
Like all good Home Guarders a great deal of effort was made to arrive at the Five Bells, our unofficial H.Q. which was then being run by Mrs Friar, her husband Bill being away on service with the Navy, and a common joke of the day was "If the Jerries landed the Five Bells would be defended to the last half pint" .
Like the fire brigade there were lighter moments and dances were organised with great success and local support, at the Institute.
In the early fifties after the war the Home Guard was reformed for a few years and some of us, having been demobbed from the forces rejoined, but somehow the spirit of the "Dads' Army" had gone and one felt the enthusiasm was not there.
This time the H.Q. was in the old offices of Hiltons, in Ferry Road, and again true to tradition the Five Bells became the unofficial H.Q.
Mid Kent Water Co.
Halling
This company formed in 1889 began boring for water in 1890 when the first buildings were erected, and by 1892 most of the village had been connected to its mains.
This was to ease the burden of the local inhabitants who before this had to rely on getting their water supply from wells, pumps and catchment tanks.
Like any new improvements this had its opponents, claims being made that this work would drain the surrounding wells, so that those not connected would get no water.
This argument was to be proved wrong as on the bore hole being drilled to a depth of 376 ft 11in, the surrounding wells were flooded, water also running away flooding the pit.
This water, tubed off, yielded a supply of 38,000 gallons per hour.
In 1898 a second well was bored to a depth of 398 ft supplying a further 24,000 gallons per hour, and by 1907 these two wells operated by two steam driven pumps were supplying 250 million gallons yearly, and in July of that year a record was reached of 1 1/2 million gallons in one day.
The water from this works was of a high standard and with the small works at  Charing this company was supplying water to an area covering 296 square miles, which included 85 parishes.
Mr Relf, present Superintendent, informed me that these works were the first of the Mid Kent Co. and this was "where it all began" .
In 1912, the water works was considerably extended, and three more wells were bored, operated by gas engines, the gas being made on the premises.
These consumed large amounts of coal and anthracite which was delivered by barge to Halling, then conveyed by horse and cart to the works.
The men working on this pumping station would often work 114 hours in a week, for a wage of 3 3/4d per hour, maintaining a regular output of 7 1/2 to 9 million gallons per week.
Electricity has taken over from steam and gas, and the present output fluctuates between 3 and 5 million gallons per week.
Until the 1930's, apart from the water being screened nothing was added to it, but with an outbreak of typhoid in Croydon, chlorine was added.
Before the mains water supply was connected diseases such as typhoid and diphtheria were a regular hazard.
Often local wells would become polluted from sewage tanks, leading to outbreaks, and sometimes as happened in Upper Halling, homes were evacuated and wells sealed off.
Many of these wells still exist around the village, and with old houses being demolished and the areas being cleared, ancient wells are being discovered.
One such well found when workmen were levelling the ground in Upper Halling was estimated to have been 200 ft deep, and bricked as far down as one could see.
The well was obviously ancient, the bricks of a type used in the 17th — 18th century, and standing looking into this well was quite a frightening experience.
How water was raised from the well can only be speculated but close to this spot stood an old Elizabethan house, which was demolished to make way for the flats.
In 1906 there was an interesting account of the survival of an old method of raising water.
Near Snodland was an Elizabethan house with an old cage wheel, formerly used for drawing water from a well some one hundred and twenty feet deep.
This wheel was worked by a man getting inside and walking forward rapidly.
The wheel was thirteen feet in diameter and two feet wide.
Sometimes a donkey would be used for the same purpose.
Could this have been the method used in Upper Halling?
We tend to take our water for granted, a turn of the tap and we have all we need, but we should consider more this most important mineral, without which we could not exist, the dry summer of 1976 proving how much we owe to water companies and the men who operate them.
VILLAGE LIFE BEFORE THE MOTOR CAR
Talk of a bypass through Hailing because of the volume of traffic recalls memories of when I was a boy in the late 20's and early 30's.
We had no fear of crossing the roads and at times these were our playgrounds, playing cricket in Kent Road with an upturned box as wicket, a long stop watching for the 'bus leaving Halling Bottom.
A warning would be given, up stumps and all would wait for it to pass then on with the game.
The only other regular vehicles to come by would be cement lorries, large yellow giants driven by steam which, as darkness fell, you could see coming with the fire boxes aglow.
Most of the village traffic during these days was horse drawn.
Our bread was.delivered by Gammons of Snodland, with the old horse knowing every stopping place.
Coal was brought to the door by horse and cart from Hayman's Yard in Essex Road, and later by Bert Cook who continued to use his horse long after others had changed.
During the last war Bert was asked if lie had received his "Calling up papers" , his reply was "They will have to take the old horse as well" .
Milk was a local produce from Fauchon's, Marsh Farm, this would be delivered around Lower Halling by hand-cart loaded with a churn and buckets and dispensed from the buckets with a half pint measure into jugs placed on windowsills, and covered with beaded doilies to keep out flies and dust.
This cart was pushed around by Nora Fauchon, well remembered by many.
Upper and North Halling were served by her sister Ella who drove a horse drawn milk float, not unlike a chariot of old.
Another favourite with the children was the Hokey Pokey man with his painted ice-cream cart decorated with a fringed canopy with highly polished barley twist supports, and selling half-penny cornets.
Later to take his place came a converted motor cycle, and Walls "Stop me and buy one" .
These were tricycles with a large box on the front and one of these vendors was Mr Maddocks of Upper Halling.
Ice cream was also made locally and the lads would congregate in Roots shop and drink a "Penny Monster" with ice cream served by old Mrs Roots.
Upper Halling had its own ice cream made at the Black Boy by Jesse Crowhurst and Ernie Pankhurst, this would be made at weekends then loaded on to a hand card and pushed either up to Red Kill or to Birling Bank, where they would sell approx. 5–6 gallons on a Sunday.
To help pull this cart at times they would enlist the help of a mule owned by old Dick Gooding at Holly Kill.
Ernie, who was employed by him, would go up on a Sun  day to feed his stock and unbeknown to Dick Gooding would bring the old mule back with him, hitch him to the hand cart and pull it over to Birling Bank, this went on for some time and poor old Dick knew nothing of these goings on.
A picture of Jesse with his cart taken in 1932 outside the Black Boy shows him complete with white coat and advertising "Try our Home Made Ices" .
Going to school was an adventure; no 'buses for us, there would be bird nesting in spring, and during the appropriate sea-son hoops would ring along the roads to school, to be hung on our pegs on the cloak-room ready for the race home.
There would be times for our tops, and games of tip-cat, and with our packs of cigarette cards, games of Long Skate, and other variations of these to be played during break.
Other days there would be the chase after a passing farm cart to grab its tail board, feet swung underneath on to the axle and a free ride to school.
This was in the mid-thirties when Miss Gladys Batchelor niece of "Spot" Batchelor, owner of the cement works, would visit her uncle and land her light aircraft in the village, on one occasion she landed in an autogyro, the early equivalent of a helicopter.
Some of the early big events of the year for us were the various treats run by the Working Men's Clubs, and if your father happened to belong to both clubs you were lucky.
During the summer the "Bolshie outing" as it was known, practically emptied the village.
On a set Sunday a convoy of coaches, usually Pilchers of Chatham, would arrive, stretching from Halling Bottom back nearly to Stake Lane.
Getting these filled was like a military operation, the grown-ups with large baskets of food, children clutching buckets and spades, bottles of lemonade and a few pence pocket money to buy ice cream and other seaside delights.
Soon all were aboard and waving to those unfortunate enough to stay behind, and we would be off to Dymchurch or some other exotic foreign place.
The trip down would start off quietly for a while, everyone busily engaged in talking with friends, but soon the holiday spirit would prevail and after the first stop, singing would start, and then arriving at our destination, coaches to be unloaded, mountains of food carted on to the sands, and the task of enjoying oneself began.
No Eastern bazaar could have held more wonders for us kids as those highly coloured stalls with their buckets, spades and "Kiss me Quick" hats and all that goes with a seaside bazaar.
At about six in the evening the trip home would begin, after some hectic moments of rounding up the strays.
For many this was the highlight of the day, once all had settled the singing would begin  and this time all with full voice, songs like "One man went to mow" , "Ten green bottles" and "I'm happy when I'm hiking" would be taken up and echoed along the route, and arriving back in Halling we would be encouraged into one mighty effort to let all at home know that we were back, safe if somewhat tired, overfed and happy.
Golden days.
During these years before the war, each summer, the village would be invaded by Londoners, who had come for a holiday in the country.
These children would be billeted out among local families, and for some it was the only holiday they ever had.
Transport
Until public transport became an every day means of travel getting from one village to another was quite a problem.
It was either by horse and trap or walking.
Walking was the rule and not the exception, for the villagers of Hailing walked into Strood carrying their shopping baskets and walked home with rests in between.
The coming of the railway through to Maidstone didn't help as at first there was no station at Halling.
Either way it meant a walk to Snodland or Cuxton to catch a train so walking that extra was no trouble.
It wasn't until 1890 that Halling had its own station and on the morning of its opening the School Master John Scholey was there to buy the first ticket.
But this didn't excite too much attention as by this time Halling folk were used to walking, and only used the railway over longer distances.
This produced a people for whom walking was no hardship and this continued to be so until the war of 1939.
I can remember as a boy walking to Rochester via the ferry and Wouldham on many occasions but this was only a stroll compared with some of the older inhabitants efforts.
Not only walking to do the shopping but walking to work when men would have to get up at 4.0 a.m. with, in some cases, an hour's walk to get to work.
Mrs Pearce of Upper Haillng walked regularly to Cobham to work on the fields and Mrs Rogers of Upper Halling, mother of Jack and Rodney the local game keepers, would walk from her home to Cobham, there catch a bus to Gravesend, do all her shopping then bus back to Cobham and walk through the woods home with her baskets.
This she continued to do into the thirties.
Mrs Bennett (formerly Miss Green) told me of her Uncle Alf Monk who as a young apprentice working in London, would, on finishing work on Friday, walk home from London to his home in Essex Road.
This would be in about the 1880's.
Later he travelled by train when  the station was opened and money would allow.
Another feat of walking was undertaken by Harry Baker, who having a brother in Hastings would, at the turn of the century, visit his brother walking there and back over a weekend.
He would set off on Saturday evening arriving early next morning.
His saying was"If I can work for 1 Yard an hour I can walk for 1 1/2d an hour.
Others more recently walked from Hailing to Brands Hatch to watch the racing, and many would walk out to Harvel or Luddesdown for the evening's drink.
LOCAL FARMS
Langridge
All the old historians when mentioning Hailing tell us of the old Manor of Langridge or Bavents, each one describes the antiquity of the Manor from Adam de Bavent to the various owners of their period until we reach William Baker.
They also tell us of a field with the manor house in a ruinous condition.
None of these tell us exactly where this house stood but go to great pains to state that a field of this name is still extant.
I don't believe any of these actually knew and readily copied from the previous histories.
This is not criticism as it is necessary when writing local history to use previous writers.
I have studied various maps of the county and a number of documents without being able to pin-point the location of this manor, but will try to place it by the clues I have been able to deduce.
For a start I think we can discount Bavin's Bank despite the similarity with the Bavents and the fact that until the early part of this century the foundations of an old building were visible, the reason being that among the Whornes title deeds, Bavins and its adjacent lands are mentioned separately with Langridge.
Now to place this manor and house, first I believe the only place this could have been is Upper Haillng, and the house is now what is known as Court Farm, the present residence of Mr Peter Lingham.
The tithe maps of Halling show all the property belonging to the Bishop of Rochester, but also that of owners bordering on these lands, so if we go back to the 1633 estate map we find that lands above the Pilgrims Road and in the area around Court Farm are owned by Luson or Leveson and the 1731 map shows Marsham and R. Wood as present owners.
In tracing the antiquity of Langridge we find that this manor has come down to Robin Wood via Henry Golding, Barber, Leveson, Whornes, Watson, Melford and Roger Bavent who held it with John de Langereche and finally back to Adam de Bavent during the reign of Edward I. Robin Wood died 14th July 1738 and is buried in Hailing Church.
Through a second marriage it passed to William Baker who on the death of his son in 1775 is registered as of this parish i.e. Upper Hailing.
In tracing the descent of this manor I found a small handwritten note in Edward Hasted's own copy of the 1664 edition of Philipot's Villare Cantianum.
He has written in reference to a  property in Hoo, "This is owned by Mr Henry Golding of Upper Halling who we find is of Langridge Manor" .
This shows the line of descent down to three previous owners of Upper Halling.
Now to the house itself, one of the early observers gives us a clue when mentioning the house he writes of the fine Elizabethan chimneys still standing, these I believe are those which collapsed in 1973 after having previously been lowered owing to their dangerous condition, on the collapse of these some fine timber framing was discovered in the older parts of the house showing considerable blackening, and Mrs Lingham informed me that vestiges of a gallery were discovered, and it was suggested that this part of the building may have been of the hall type.
The present building has had much rebuilding including restoration work in 1973.
Early photos show the round type of oast in front of the building, these dating from around 1839.
At this period it was known as Upper Hailing Place and was the residence of the Rev. James Formby.
In 1840 we find in the title deeds when William Holding took over the tenancy of the farm that an oast was on the deeds; after this date, between 1838–47, the name was changed to Court Farm.
Unless further evidence comes to light I believe that Court Farm is the old manor house of Langridge.
Local Farms
Hailing in the past has had many farms, and of these Court Farm is the last major farm, and Mr Peter Lingham now farms the greater part of the agricultural land in Halling as well as some in Cuxton and across the parish boundary into Snodland.
Mr Lingham's grandfather came to Hailing from Luddesdowne as tenant to Court Farm in the 1860's, it seems at first it was run jointly with a Mr Davis, but in October 1895 the farming stock of Court Farm was auctioned off, the property of Messrs Lingham & Davis.
The sale was conducted by Messrs Cobb, many items being bought in by Mr T. Lingham including sheep, cattle, horses etc. as well as hop growing implements The growing of hops continued into the present century in Upper Hailing, and a photograph album loaned to me by Mr P. Lingham shows some fine photos taken in the hop fields of Upper Hailing as well as the farm, these date from the late 19th and early 20th century.
Mr T. Lingham became an active member of the village community serving on the parish or vestry councils, a family tradition which has continued through his son (the late Ivor Lingham) to the present Mr Peter Lingham.
Farms that have ceased to exist in the last few years have  been Osentons (or Clinkham Farm), Whitings, Clements and Flint House.
Earlier farms, including some we know by name only, King's Farm, Hailing Farm, New Farm and Manor Farm.
The Marsh Farm is still maintained, and Mr Chapman farms here.
Which is the oldest of these is a debatable point, obviously Court Farm must be reckoned if my theory is correct.
Clements Farm is of great antiquity, the building itself probably dates back to the 15th century, and happily has been boarded up to prevent more deterioration.
Whiting's or Whitting's as it is sometimes spelt has a name that seems to have come down through generations, and one authority tempts to suggest that it may be of Saxon period.
J.K. Wallenberg in Kentish Place Names 1931 states: "There is Whittings Farm in Hailing (no early forms found).
On supposition that this name is not a modern one, it seems tempting to connect it with Charter form, i.e. Huioeinhamsted, to read Huietinhamsted, from, Hwitinghamsted, Old English — Hwita, person + ing + hamsted."
Marsh Farm was built in the late 19th century by James Formby, the Formby family were well known in Halling during the whole of the 19th century through their connection with the cement industry and were also active members like the Linghams in village life.
After the death of James Formby the farm was run by Jack Edmunds also Marsh Warden, then later by F. Church.
In 1915 the farm was taken over by Fauchons who ran it as a dairy farm.
This family has an interesting history.
Their origins stem from France where old Mr Fauchon years ago told me his forebears were Huguenots, who fled their country from a small place bearing the family name of Fauchonville.
Arriving in this country they established themselves as farmers and in the early 19th century they farmed at Allington Castle and then travelled through various parts of England as farmers until arriving back in Kent.
This family has left its mark in Kent, from having a villa in France of that name.
At Bearsted they have left Fauchon's Lane and a house recently sold is known as Fauchon Cottage.
Over the border into Snodland, but associated with Upper Halling is Lads Farm, approximately a quarter of a mile from the Black Boy, on the corner of the road that leads to Holborough.
There are now two houses and what survives of Lads Farm.
To the rear of these houses are remains of an old barn, rapidly falling into decay, all that exists from the original farm.
The name of Lads has survived down through the years from the 15th century.
It is probably that the Lads originated from France, arriving as settlers after the Norman invasion.
The family of Lad spread itself all over Kent, leaving Snodland  during the 16th century.
We find them mentioned first during the reign of Edward I, in the 14th century when they were assessed to pay 20/ for the knighting of the Black Prince.
The Black Boy though now a public house was at one time also a farm for when Robert Hearnden ran the public house in 1840 he also farmed a considerable amount of land, where the large pit is now situated and down into the village.
The title deeds of 1840 show that with the Black Boy there was land known as "The Commons, Stackfield, Haggles, Brickmans field, Crouch Corner and Meadows" .
Hearndon was also tenant of land from Thos.
Poynder.
There is an interesting story in Fielding's Memories of Hailing of a farmer and Ms dog, first published in 1842, it concerns a certain Mr Henry Hawkes, farmer of Halling:
"Mr Henry Hawkes, a farmer residing at Hailing, in Kent, was late one evening at Maidstone market.
On returning at night, with his dog, who was usually at his heels, he again stopped at Aylesford, and as is too frequently the case upon such occasions, he drank immoderately, and left the place in a state of intoxication.
Having passed the village of Newheed (Hythe) in safety, he took his way over Snodland Brook — in the best season of the year a very dangerous road for a drunken man.
The whole face of the country was covered with deep snow, and the frost intense.
He had, however, proceeded in safety till he came to the Willow Walk, within half a mile of the church, when by a sudden stagger he quitted the path, and passed over a ditch on his right hand.
Not apprehensive he was going astray, the took towards the river; but having a high bank to mount, and being nearly exhausted with wandering and the effect of the liquor, he was most fortunately prevented from rising the mound, or he certainly must have precipitated himself (as it was near high water) into the Medway.
At this moment, completely overcome, he fell among the snow in one of the coldest nights ever known, turning upon his back.
He was soon overpowered with either sleep or cold, when his faithful defendant, who had closely attended to every step, scratched away the snow so as to throw up a sort of protecting wall around his helpless master; then mounting upon the exposed body, rolled himself round and lay upon his master's bosom, for which his shaggy coat proved a most seasonable covering and eventual protection during the dreadful severity of the night, the snow falling all the time.
The following morning a person who was out with his gun, in expectation of falling in with some sort of wild fowl, perceiving an appearance rather uncommon, ventured to approach the spot; upon his coming up  the dog got off the body, and after repeatedly shaking himself to get disentangled from the accumulated snow, encouraged the sportsman (a Mr. Finch), by actions of the most significant nature, to come near the side of his master.
Upon wiping away the icy incrustation from the face, the countenance was immediately recollected; but, the frame appearing lifeless, assistance was procured to convey it to the first house upon the skirts of the village, when, a pulsation being observed, every possible means was instantly adopted to promote his recovery.
In the course of a short time the farmer was sufficiently restored to relate his own story, as already recited, and in gratitude for his miraculous escape ordered a silver collar to be made for his friendly protector, as a perpetual remembrance of the transaction.
A gentleman of the faculty in the neighbourhood, hearing of the circumstance, and finding it so well authenticated, immediately made him an offer of ten guineas for the dog, which the grateful farmer refused, exultingly adding that so long as he had a bone in his meat, or a crust to his bread, he would divide it with the faithful friend who had preserved his life: arid this he did in a perfect conviction that the warmth of the dog, in covering the most vital part, had continued the circulation arid prevented a total stagnation of the blood by the frigidity of the elements."
A PATCHWORK
From late Victorian times the village was a fairly self-contained community, and a glance through the trade directories from this period until the 1930's shows considerable local trade.
Two carriers operated from Essex Road, these ran a daily service to the Medway towns, taking goods for sale from the village, and returning with merchandise both private and trade, including potions for the village herbalist.
The first of these was run by Henry Mills from a yard midway along Essex Road, the other was run from Stake Lane end of Essex Road by E. Parris, who purchased the business from Ongleys.
Later to be run on the death of his father by Ted Parris, who still lives in the same road, taking over at the age of 15 until called into the services during the first war.
This business passed into the hands of Mr Spires the butcher, then after the war to Jim Beaney, who maintained this service into the 1950's, combining it with his coach business.
Many of the older folk will remember Bobby Whale, who ran a fried fish shop from his house in Kent Road, and old Mrs Poysden whose toffee apples were the best I've ever tasted.
The D.I.Y.
shop in Essex Road, known as Jireh House was originally built as a hotel or station lodging house, the proprietors hoping to collect trade on the opening of the station.
The blacksmith's forge at Hailing Bottom was in use until just before the 1914 war, the blacksmith was then Eblin Brown who emigrated to Canada.
The village has always been well served with public houses, clubs and the old Walnut Tree off license.
Considerable amounts of beer were consumed on the factories in these pre 1914 days, and boys were employed as beer runners operating from their chosen pubs.
These would be open from six in the morning.
Jack Gooding, landlord of the Rose & Crown, had a hand cart built to carry a barrel and bottles, and this he would push down on to the factories each day.
A story was told to me by one of these old beer runners.
When collecting the weekly account he told one of the cement gang his share was 6/ for beer.
He payed without a murmur, but on being asked for 4d for his share of tea, exploded saying "Who in ****** hell has been drinking tea" .
For many years the Robin Hood in Upper Halling was always known as "The Shant" .
This goes back to the days when there were hop gardens at the rear of the pub, and picking was done by gipsy families (shant being an old gipsy word, meaning to drink).