

In those days units, or mobile rummage crews, setting up schemes between us as a result of local smuggling information.
Today we tend to work more with our Investigation teams who have much wider sources of information up to international level.
Vincent's sister ship Valiant was identical in most respects, manned in the same way, but she operated from Southampton to cover the Solent and adjacent waters.
Occasionally Valiant would patrol down to the West Country and less frequently round into the Bristol Channel and other parts of the West Coast.
The HDML's had nice lines and for this reason many of them were converted into yachts, some of them are still around to this day.
They were seventy two feet long, built of carvel construction in wood and were powered with Gardner engines, which are still acknowledged as being one of the best and most reliable of diesels.
I remember they had a one cylinder Lister diesel generator which had to be started by hand, and it was very difficult to get a good swing at the handle.
More than one of our officers sprained his wrist on that job.
Compared to our modern cutters the HDML's were very elementary in the machinery department.
That was just as well as our engineers were not professionals by any means, although they always coped very well and our engines gave very little trouble.
Similarly on deck and on the navigational side we had all that was necessary but everything was very basic down to the manual anchor winch.
We even had a coal burning stove on board and very cosy it was on the cold evenings.
The depth sounder and Decca Navigator in the wheelhouse were innovations and although Radar was out of the question at that time we  managed very well with the Decca Navigator, often running up the Thames in quite dense fog buoy hopping through Sea Reach.
Returning to my first meeting with Vincent, Arthur Cheyney naturally became my hero, especially when he took me on a trip from Ipswich to Parkeston Quay, which completely sold me on the job and made me resolve to move heaven and earth to get on a cutter crew as soon as possible.
This was not so easy at that time as the crewing arrangements were very much of a closed shop.
The small nucleus of ex-service officers naturally guarded their job closely.
They were eminently suited to the work and knew their ship and its equipment well enough to keep things going which also suited the administration at Headquarters.
So there was no reason for crew reliefs except in emergencies, especially as the working season was only for the summer months.
Yes, they were quite an elite band of brothers, but it was possible to break into the circle, and eventually by a stroke of luck and a bit of help from one of Vincent's crew who took pity on me, I managed to get a short spell of leave relief on HMRC Vincent.
The crew member who befriended me was an exRN Officer Phil Andrews, MBE, one of nature's gentlemen.
Subsequently we became lifelong friends, sailed many miles together and shared many adventures.
I have Phil to thank for my first break on the Cutters.
Vic Roberts, ex RN Officer and rugby cap, was in command of the Vincent.
He used to disappear periodically and come back covered in glory and bruises, often taking us ashore to celebrate England's victory on  the field.
We spent most of the time on the Thames and Medway keeping observations on shipping.
Finns and Poles were the flavour of the month as I recall — they still are for that matter.
I seemed to spend much of my time assisting the chef and painting but this did nothing to damp my enthusiasm.
One of the great characters of the cutter fleet at that time was Leo Brock, ex P & 0 purser and when he was chef he demanded an assistant — and got one.
Even a salad meal was a work of art for Leo, but he really did produce some marvellous meals from that old galley stove.
We have always eaten well on the cutters, good meals on time are important for morale at sea, and those early days seemed to establish a tradition that was never lost.
Looking back to this era there is no doubt that our small fleet was pitifully Inadequate to control the long stretches of coastline but we did our best within the limits imposed by man power and patrol time.
I cannot remember any big captures being made by the HDML's, but we had our moments with regular routine seizures from yachts and merchant ships.
The deterrent effect of our presence and continuous patrols in the busier yachting areas could not be discounted.
Now and then we were sent out of our normal patrol area on special operations.
During one of my later crewing spells Vincent was anchored off Burnham on Crouch when we received orders to proceed to Poole as soon as possible.
This was quite a long passage for us, but we were lucky with the weather and made it in one leg.
There we were briefed by local staff who wanted us to keep a seaward eye on the local Colliers from Rotterdam following an outbreak of watch smuggling in Poole.
Our plan of campaign was to anchor in Studland at the approaches of Poole harbour and keep observation on shipping bound for Poole to see if any goods were being off-loaded by small boats such as yachts or fishing vessels.
Although in retrospect it might seem a vain hope to disguise ourselves as a motor yacht, we were not well known in the area and there were, after all, quite a few converted HDML's about in those days, so we removed a few obvious identification marks from the ship including our uniforms, flew the red ensign and settled down to wait.
The only hard part about this operation was the regular watchkeeping split between our six-man crew throughout twenty four hours, but the time passed pleasantly enough at first.
Shipping came and went, nothing happened and we seemed to become a permanent part of the seascape.
After several days of this we were rather bored with the whole thing until one afternoon a yacht came in under sail and anchored near us.
Shortly after anchoring the crew came on deck to hang out bedding and clothing to dry, so they had obviously had a wet passage.
We knew the weather conditions were calm enough inshore but fresher on the other side of the Channel so the indications were that she had probably crossed from France overnight.
To relieve the monotony I called my watchmate Peter and we decided to take a closer look at the yacht.
Alter notifying our Commander, we chugged over in our motor boat to find she was crewed by a schoolmaster and several of his senior boys.
The schoolmaster skipper told us they had in fact come from France and had experienced bad weather during the night crossing.
He was somewhat taken aback when we  identified ourselves as Customs, muttering something about clearing customs at Poole Quay later.
When we indicated that we would like to clear him on the spot he was very reluctant to let us on board saying that the boat was "in a hell of a mess" !
Perversely, in the way of Customs Officers, we insisted but gave him ten minutes to clear up, then climbed on board to see to the necessary documentation.
The formalities were completed sitting on a makeshift seat of boxes surrounded by a rather bedraggled crowd of schoolboys.
Formalities over, our routine search of the yacht revealed that, amongst other educational subjects the boys had been given a practical lesson in how to avoid paying the duty on a considerable quantity of wines and spirits.
Our makeshift seat had consisted of cases of wine while bottles of brandy were distributed liberally amongst the boys' bedding, none of which had been declared to us, of course.
This incident was notable only because it was my first seizure made on board a cutter.
It was not exactly what we were after but that is the way things often happen in our job.
The closest analogy I can think of is that it is very much like fishing, you never know what you are going to catch, you have to pull in the small ones when you are hoping for the big one, but occasionally a big one comes along when you least expect it.
We never did crack the watch smuggling racket.
This was also the first of many operations at Poole in which I was involved on the cutters.
It was always a popular venue for smuggling, and our cutters made some excellent seizures in this area from all types of vessels.
Socially too, Poole was always popular with the  cutter crews with its handy berthing facilities close to the town.
Needless to say, the pubs were quite handy too!
Although we had excellent training schemes for our general customs work at this period cutter crews did not receive any specialised instruction for crewing duties.
Any new hands were expected to learn the ropes from the old hands and with the small number of personnel involved together with the expertise of the ex-service officers the system worked quite satisfactorily.
I suppose our earliest training course was held in the early 1950's.
Several selected junior officers were sent to Southampton as an experiment to take part in exercises with Vigilant, Vincent and Valiant in the Solent.
I was one of the selected few who were billetted ashore and joined the various boats every day.
The training was not very comprehensive and was really only intended as an introduction to the cutters, but we all enjoyed ourselves as I recall, although a few of us with previous experience considered ourselves as veterans.
My tours of duty on Vincent were very infrequent following this brief training course, and the long periods ashore trudging round the docks on routine customs work seemed very dull in comparison with life afloat.
There was something about cutter work — glamour, adventure, battling the elements, or just plain escapism — call it what you will, but once you had experienced it you had great difficulty in settling down to the more prosaic existence ashore.
That's how it was with me and I know it was true for many others.
By the middle 1950's most of my generation were settling down to carving out their careers and bringing up families after the unsettling effects of the war years  during which they had experienced all they wanted of adventure and excitement.
I tried to do the same, and in between sailing my own boat and the occasional cutter duty managed to concentrate enough on my proper job to pass a promotion examination in 1956.
Much to my disgust I then found myself as far from the sea as I could get — Heathrow Airport, which was just in its infancy but beginning to grow rapidly with the postwar boom in air travel.
London Airport was not the most popular station for customs officers at that time, especially with the older officers who were still steeped in the traditional work at seaports.
Consequently, and inevitably, all junior officers were drafted there to do their stint in the overcrowded, overheated and noisy halls of the new airport which seemed to expand and change in a bewildering chaos of new cement and plaster board overnight.
Resented by the air crews as well as the travelling public, it was not a good atmosphere in which to work, and I very soon decided it was not for me.
Maybe I was less fortunate than my colleagues in my experience of Heathrow, but even my landlady in Twickenham was a most severe character, as mean as mustard with food and I seemed to live in the expensive Airport restaurant even when I was off duty.
I had not moved my family from Felixstowe and used to commute home on my old battered motor cycle as often as possible which relieved the monotony of existence.
Seeking escape routes I found the only other Customs Waterguard Station, seemingly more unpopular than Heathrow, available at that time was Stornoway in the Outer Hebrides and when I rang HQ one day to see if it was still open.
I was assured by a friendly female voice  that I would have no competition for the job.
 "Right, I'll take it," I said without hesitation.
 "You'll have the application form in a few days as soon as I can get it processed." 
The lads in the office were outwardly horrified at my drastic action and the usual jokes about sheep and welly boots began to circulate, but I detected a tinge of envy creeping in at times.
It was a big step to take, but there was no way I could contemplate settling down to bring up my family in London, and I knew my wife felt the same way as she loved the sea and country.
Anyway, with the enthusiasm of youth I had no doubt that we should be able to cope with life in remote parts for a few years.
At least we would be out of the rat race until I had worked up some seniority in my job.
I could then apply for a position in the South with more certainty of success, with perhaps a choice of ports.
HEBRIDEAN INTERLUDE
Living In Lewis
Little did I know that my brief interlude in the north would stretch to eight years, bring me many more undreamed of adventures at sea in fantastic scenery and make me many very good lifelong friends in the islands of the West.
For that reason I have related some of the more interesting highlights of my life in the Western Isles in the following chapters which can be regarded as an intermission to my Cutter Service.
The Mallaig train pulled away from the Clyde valley, leaving the haze-softened lights of Dumbarton paling in a cold February dawn.
I sat in the restaurant car waiting for breakfast and peered eagerly through steamy windows at an obscure grey landscape, unwilling to miss any part of the new ground that I was covering.
I had left my East Anglian home early the previous day with very mixed feelings.
When I had first heard of my appointment to Stornoway I had been elated at the prospect of leaving a somewhat dull routine existence down south.
The doubts came later.
Behind me was the security of familiar routine; ahead, uncertainty.
I breakfasted as the train skirted Gareloch and Loch Long, dimly remembered from war-time service.
The  sun rose to give sparkle to a beautiful frosty morning as we puffed steadily into the country and soon we were rolling past the delightful wooded hills and lochs of the West Highlands.
The train journey passed quickly with its culminating glory at the coast near Morar; dazzling white sands, sunlit jade seas shadowed with rock, and a horizon broken by misty blue islands.
This was my first tantalising glimpse of the Hebrides.
First impressions are inclined to stick so I am glad that my introduction to the Highlands and Islands was on such a day.
From Mallaig I continued my journey by sea and the rest of that day passed like a dream.
It was dark by the time the Loch Seaforth berthed at Stornoway and I had only a brief glimpse of the rugged Lewis coastline.
Cold and tired, I was met by a colleague who showed me to my hotel where, later, I slept long and sound.
I settled quickly to my new job, liking the Lewis folk and the easy tempo of island life.
I think I was a little disappointed by the countryside in the north of Lewis when I first encountered its bleak wilderness of peat bog, but after a while I was to know and love the open moors.
More attractive were the hillier southern regions of Lewis and Harris where I spent most of my spare time rambling and climbing.
By virtue of an association with the Stornoway Sea Cadets I was able to extend my exploration by sea, and spent many happy days on the more remote sea lochs and outlying islands as far apart as Barra Head and North Rona.
On the domestic front I was less fortunate and had no great success with house hunting.
My job entailed being on call for shipping in the harbour and for this reason I  was loath to live outside Stornoway.
However, by August, when it was obvious that there was no family accommodation to be found in town, I was forced to take on a croft cottage about seven miles to the north of Stornoway on the Eye Peninsula, known locally as the Point district.
In October, I fetched my wife, Chris, and our two children, Alan and Christine, aged eight and six years.
Summer had turned into typical Hebridean winter by this time and we were greeted by high winds and driving rain as the ferry berthed.
I had acquired and learned to drive an old Hillman during the summer and, piling two tired and travel-sick children into the back with our parcels, we set off into the night.
Mercifully darkness obscured the dripping, gale-lashed countryside as we bumped our way down the unsurfaced track which led from the main road to Number Five, our new home.
Here we experienced the first of so many neighbourly gestures; a huge peat fire was blazing in the livingroom, there were flowers and a jug of fresh milk on the table.
This was evidently the work of Calum and Effie, our immediate neighbours, who soon greeted us in person and helped us to settle in.
Number Five was a common type of cottage built in Lewis after the "black house" era.
The walls were about four feet thick and consisted of two layers of stone packed with clay.
Downstairs there were two rooms, and a short staircase led up from the front door to two attic bedrooms with tiny skylights in the roof.
We were renting the cottage from a retired businessman who had recently added a lean-to scullery and installed water but there was no bathroom.
During the summer I had Snowcemmed  the exterior to brighten up the drab stonework.
The only two windows were at the front and faced south, but being just below the brow of the hill there was a poor view from these.
To our eternal regret there were no windows in the north wall which overlooked Broad Bay and, in the foreground, our five acre croft sloping gently away from the house to the top of sea cliffs.
It was frustrating to be cut off from such a view but of course the original builders of the house had not been impressed by such aesthetic considerations.
The front of the house was protected from the prevailing south-westerlies by the low hill and there were no loopholes at the back for the northerly gales to penetrate.
The south-facing windows caught all the available light which was meagre enough in the winter.
At that time of year the sun was so low that it shone directly into the livingroom during the whole of its brief traverse of the horizon.
However, sunshine was a sparse commodity and we found the short, dark winter days of these latitudes very depressing at first.
For six weeks after our arrival it rained almost continually and the wind howled melancholy dirges around our chimneys and doors.
It was an effort even to fetch coal from outside, and a herculean struggle was called for each time I opened the garage doors which faced the prevailing gales.
Inside the cottage it was snug enough, but we were living rough as our furniture had been unaccountably delayed.
To make our cup full the children and I went down with Asian flu which was prevalent at the time.
I need hardly say that my wife's first impression of Lewis differed somewhat from my own.
The kindness of our neighbours helped us over this difficult period.
We quickly made the acquaintance of everyone in our lane which was part of a very scattered village, and after the children started school there were always some of their friends around the house.
When our furniture eventually arrived the cottage felt more like home and some sort of pattern in our new life began to take shape.
One thing I had not bargained for was the amount of Gaelic spoken in the country districts.
While living in Stornoway I had heard it occasionally but it had been the exception rather than the rule.
Outside the town the country folk spoke mainly their native Gaelic and some of the very old could speak no English.
The only time English was used in our village was when incomers like ourselves were present.
The children rarely learnt English before starting school.
They began their lessons in Gaelic and were taught English in their first year quickly mastering the new language.
Subsequently all lessons were conducted in English and the use of Gaelic was not encouraged in the classroom.
Naturally the Lewis children reverted to their mother tongue outside school and this made things rather difficult for our two children at first.
However, they quickly adapted themselves and even picked up snatches of Gaelic much to the amusement of our neighbours who were quite proud of their accomplishment.
There was one village shop in our immediate neighbourhood where most necessities could be purchased.
Mobile shops, a rather grand name for some of the odd-looking converted buses and vans, played a big part in the life of the village and these varied in nature  from the butcher's van to a travelling bank.
There was no milk delivery in the country.
The villagers who owned a cow made arrangements with those that did not.
Our first Winter there was very cold.
We had a freezing spell which was exceptional for the islands.
There normally is plenty of wind and rain, but very little snow, owing to the moist, temperate Atlantic air streams.
The rest of that winter passed quickly enough.
There were ceilidhs round the peat fires and on the fine days we explored the moors and sea cliffs.
There was consolation for a treeless landscape in the ever-changing pattern of colour and cloud in the island skies.
On clear nights these same skies held us spellbound as Northern Lights flickered eerily and changed colour like some celestial cinema curtain.
In April a restlessness seemed to come into the air as the village began to throw off the lethargy of winter.
Donald, one of our neighbours, undertook to initiate us into the art of peat-cutting.
We served our apprenticeship in skinning, levelling, cutting and throwing.
In Lewis it is usual to work in pairs after the bank has been prepared by removing a width of turf.
While one cuts with the peat iron [Tarisker], the other stands catching the foot-square slabs of wet peat which are thrown flat for the first stage of drying.
We were taught to replace the turf at the bottom of the bank to preserve grazing and to leave the face of the newly-cut bank as smooth as possible.
Donald's father, the bodach [old man]as he was affectionately called, was most particular about this and his own banks were models of efficiency.
Each croft had its own allocation of peat banks, the location of which was strictly adhered to and controlled  by the local grazing committee.
This committee was composed of selected villagers and, as the name implies, settled any disputes over grazing rights and any other similar matters pertaining to a crofting community.
Chris and I soon fell into the swing of peat-cutting.
We worked alone so that we could choose the good weather on my off duty days, but the communal gangs were no fair weather workers and pressed on under any conditions.
The moor can be a very pleasant place on a bright spring day, and we never found the work tedious.
Sometimes we joined our friends for refreshments and I shall never forget those picnic teas shared with the neighbours on the moor.
Peat-stained hands, grace before the meal intoned in Gaelic, the taste of tea brewed over an open peat fire, and the smell of heather borne on a keen sea breeze.
Often there was a soul-stirring glimpse of wild geese arrowing northward across an ice-blue sky on their spring migratory flight.
The communal working system was used for other activities on the crofts such as planting and harvesting the crops and getting home the peat.
In a purely crofting community this arrangement must have worked well as it was a pleasant blend of work and social intercourse.
In present times the system is in danger of dying out in the Point district, as so many of the men and women have regular employment in town.
It was obvious that crofting alone could not support modern standards of living, so most of the families in our village supplemented their incomes by other means.
Many were employed in the wool-spinning mills at Stornoway, others worked at handlooms in their own homes producing the tweed for which the island is  noted.
This meant that the married women left at home came in for a large share of the work about the croft.
Morag and Mary were two such women and we never ceased to wonder at the amount of work they got through in a day.
After getting their men off to work every morning there were the cows to chase off to the moor, hens to feed and housework to be done, then the serious work could be tackled.
This might be anything from peat-cutting to planting potatoes, hoeing or harvesting, with little diversions such as milking the cow or preparing meals.
Sheep are the mainstay of crofting economy.
In May these were taken away from the home grazings and put out on the distant moors for the summer.
Some were transported by lorry, others were walked by their owners for distances up to twenty miles, through Stornoway and then south to the centre of the island.
Here also were the summer sheilings of the Point crofters.
The contemporary sheiling is a rather ugly corrugated iron or wooden structure, or perhaps an old bus body compared with the more permanent stone buildings of the old days.
With the good weather our thoughts turned seaward and at Whitsun we launched our nine foot dinghy which we had brought from England.
There was no lack of willing help to carry it down the croft to the cliff edge from where it was carefully lowered to the beach.
I spent many happy hours on this beach.
There was room to keep the boat on the shingle above high water mark, and at low tide there was a large expanse of firm sand which made an ideal bathing spot.
There were good lobster grounds just off shore, and most of that summer I kept a lobster creel set, occasionally moving it to fresh grounds.
I hauled it when the weather permitted and invariably found a lobster or two in it, or even a fish of some sort.
Sometimes I went trolling for lythe with rubber eels, or fly fishing for saithe and mackerel in the clear water around the rocks.
There was good cuddy [haddock]fishing from these rocks too.
The soil in this area was as good as anywhere on the island and was noted for potatoes.
By July the crops were strong and healthy-looking, wild flowers of every colour and description carpeted the hay fields and filled the air with their scent.
Yellow was the predominant colour everywhere.
Corn marigolds grew in profusion forming yellow strips in the oat fields.
The peats were ready to fetch home now.
Periodically we had lifted and turned them on the banks, where the sun and wind had shrunk and hardened them.
We helped several of our neighbours, learning how to make a neat and symmetrical stack that would survive winter gales.
After the children returned to school in mid-August there came haymaking and harvesting the oats.
Cutting was mostly carried out with a scythe although a few were able to hire machinery for the purpose.
Chris lent a hand with the binding and stacking, reliving her farming and Land Army days.
Later there were the potatoes and turnips to harvest, and a threshing machine visited each croft in turn to deal with the oats.
Then, with the return of the sheep to the village grazings, we knew that winter was once more upon us.
Looking back, it seemed that the villagers had crammed a whole year's work into that summer.
The following year I was offered a house in town and  moved into Stornoway to be nearer my work.
In spite of the more sophisticated pleasures of town life the period spent at Number Five made the greater impression on us and provided the picture of Lewis that we shall always retain.
Charter to Remoteness
A week's leave in August 1958 gave me the opportunity to share in another aspect of island life.
The night air was warm and humid as the small motor fishing vessel slipped out of Ness Harbour near the Butt of Lewis and steadied on a northerly course into the Atlantic.
We were bound for North Rona and Sula Sgeir, two little-known islands at the north west limits of the British Isles, some forty miles north of the Outer Hebrides.
These lonely islets are unlikely to attract the cruising yachtsman.
They lie in the track of the North Atlantic depressions which brew on the fringe of the Gulf Stream.
Sula Sgeir is a small rocky outcrop much akin to Rockall, and is one of the breeding places of the lovely Solan Goose, or gannet, from which the island takes its Gaelic name.
North Rona, twelve miles to the east, was once populated but is now deserted.
Its rich pastures are cropped by semi-wild sheep and fertilised by the prolific bird life.
Known to the naturalist as a popular breeding place for the Atlantic grey seal, Rona has personality as well as a strange history.
Our ship was Viking, a standard forty five foot Admiralty motor fishing vessel which served as training ship for the Stornoway Sea Cadets.
Built by James Noble of Fraserburgh in 1945, she was a fine example of her type but rather underpowered with her 60 h.p.
Atlantic diesel.
It was a very old tradition in the Isle of Lewis that every summer a party of stalwarts from Ness should make an expedition to Sula Sgeir.
Here they would spend ten or more days catching the young gannets which breed on the rock in thousands.
These young gannets, or "gugas" [the fat ones]as they are called affectionately by the Gaelic-speaking islanders, were plucked and salted on the spot, then taken home to be stored as food.
Considered an essential item of diet in the days when hazardous voyages to the islands were made by the Ness men in their open sailing 'sgothan, these days it was sought after as more of a delicacy, in spite of its rather revolting appearance when cured.
Tradition dies hard in the Hebrides and to be one of the guga hunters was considered a great privilege in Hess.
The ethics may appear questionable to present day conservationists, but it may be said in defence that the trip was made with the knowledge of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, whose observations at that time showed that there was no falling off in the numbers of breeding birds as a result of the annual slaughter.
It was the Guga Hunters who had chartered Viking to land the men and supplies' on Sula Sgeir and return for them at a specified date.
At the time, we had also been commissioned by a Hess sheep owner to take a party of shepherds and dogs to North Rona, where we hoped to cull the resident sheep flock, selecting a number for sale in Stornoway.
This operation is another Lewis tradition called the Rona Annual.
The weather is the sole deciding factor in any visit to either of these islands, for there are no good landing places and very poor anchorages.
We had sailed from Stornoway earlier on a perfect  summer's evening.
The crew were all old shipmates of previous cruises; Peter, the skipper and Commander of the Sea Cadet Unit, Alastair the engineer, with myself Alec and Sandy on deck.
A welcome addition to the crew was Angus, exRNR, now a fishing boat skipper and veteran of North Rona and Sula Sgeir.
Also with us was Jim McGeoch, naturalist and official warden for the latter nature reserve.
He was staying on Sula Sgeir with the guga hunters to make observations in his official capacity.
We were calling at Ness to embark the main party with their stores and hoped to be there for high water.
The light westerly breeze strengthened as we travelled north and we hoisted a large mainsail, borrowed from our 32-foot cutter which set well on Viking's stubby mast and gave us an extra knot.
A heavy ground swell was encountered off Tiumpan Head.
We entered the bay outside Ness harbour just after dark.
Here we were boarded by a local party who were to assist mooring.
Their assistance and local knowledge were essential for Ness harbour is no haven to make for on a dark night when seas run high.
A heavy swell pounded and cascaded over the broken pier at the narrow entrance as we made a hair-raising dash through to keep steerage way.
The formidable pile of stores on the pier was quickly demolished by a waiting crowd of willing helpers.
Casks of water, fencing wire, posts, bags of peat, dogs and even a pedigree ram were loaded feverishly until Viking was a stevedore's nightmare.
A stout dinghy capped the lot then, with farewell shouts fading astern, Viking threaded her way carefully through the broken water and turned  her bow northward once more.
Our twenty-odd passengers snugged down amongst the deck cargo and a merciful veil of darkness hid the unseamanlike chaos.
Pipes and cigarettes glowed in the darkness as we settled down for the six-hour passage.
I stood aft and watched the Butt of Lewis light for a while.
It was the only friendly thing in a lonely waste of unseen watery hills over which Viking shouldered her way at a laborious six knots.
The sky was now overcast and a damp darkness enveloped us.
Desultory Gaelic mutterings turned gradually to snores as cigarette glows faded, and with watchkeeping duties over I soon followed suit.
Long before dawn I awoke to see the darker mass of Sula Sgeir looming against the pale grey skyline.
We had made good time and had to ease speed to avoid closing the island in darkness.
In spite of our hopes the weather appeared to be deteriorating with a freshening wind and rising sea.
In the cold half-light the rock looked stark and forbidding; as we cruised slowly to leeward the most appalling stench drifted down wind.
Borne on the clean sea breeze this strange alien farmyard smell from bird droppings suddenly brought home to me the density of the bird population on shore which had yet to reveal itself.
We approached the east landing cautiously and the cliffs awoke with bird clamour which was to assail our ears until we left.
Most of the Ness men had been here before and, in the relatively calm water under the cliffs inside the bay of Geodha Phiall Bhain, a berthing party was soon away in the dinghy.
As Viking nosed up to the almost sheer rock walls landing looked impossible, but  the mooring gang was already scrambling goat-like up the rugged cliff in readiness to take our lines.
In no time we were moored securely a few inches from a slippery ledge, surging in a gentle swell with ropes secured to convenient rock spurs.
The disembarkation began immediately, and I took the opportunity of a run ashore with the others to survey our unique landfall.
A perilous leap to the edge was followed by a difficult scramble over slimy rock faces.
Finally, helped by a rope suspended from the cliff top, we found ourselves on the central plateau.
The first repelling impression I had received of the rock from seaward was endorsed as I looked around.
The dank and dismal cliff faces were hanging with squabbling bird life.
Everywhere was thick with greenish slime and off-white guano in this great bird slum.
It may have been the combination of the early hour and a squeamish stomach, but during the whole of our short stay on the island I had a most peculiar feeling of being transported back through time to another age.
There was a sense of the primeval about the place, and it would not have surprised me unduly to see a pterodactyl alight clumsily, or a dinosaur emerge from behind the rocks.
In the noisy gannetries the birds were at all stages of development.
While the crowded gugas clamoured petulantly on their narrow ledges, adult birds wheeled and soared above, with their great wing spans and conspicuous yellow heads.
On every hand we had to pick our way past fulmar chicks unable as yet to fly.
One of the Ness men was acting as guide and he took us to a rock bothy which the men use during their stay.
The bothy was entered by crawling through a low  doorway.
Ejecting a few birds we inspected the inside of the crude habitation where the men would live for the next ten days or more.
The walls and roof were constructed of loose, flat rocks, the usual drystone architecture common to the Hebrides.
To make the roof watertight during their stay a tarpaulin was secured over all.
The floor was thick with bird droppings but this would be roughly cleaned and a layer of straw put down.
The men sleep together at one end of the dwelling, on a raised ledge covered with more clean straw which, of course, must be brought with them.
Continuing our exploration we saw another similar bothy, built originally as a chapel.
Near to this was a small pool designated by our guide as Lod an Suidhe [Pool of the Sitting]where the guga hunters sit on surrounding rocks to wash their feet after the day's toil.
As there is no soil at all on this rocky islet vegetation is almost non-existent, but we did come across a few tenacious rock plants growing from the guano in rock crevices.
Peter, the most experienced ornithologist with the party, said he could detect the musky smell of storm petrel in the bothies.
Both the storm and the rarer Leach's petrel were known to frequent Sula Sgeir, but for my part the all-pervading guano stench made any other odour indistinguishable.
Our brief but interesting tour completed we returned to the landing place, negotiating the slippery descent with caution.
A stone dislodged would have endangered not only ourselves but also the workers below.
By this time it was broad daylight.
Viking slipped away from the shelter of Sula Sgeir and turned eastward to  where the distant hump of North Rona beckoned across a grey, breaking swell.
With a fair wind Viking made short work of the intervening twelve miles, lifting easily and striding down the long seas.
Fulmars, gannets and an occasional storm petrel performed aerobatics in our wake.
Soon we could see Rona in detail and skirting Gealldruig Mhor, the outlying skerry to the south, we could see by the white-based cliffs that a heavy swell was running.
In contrast to Sula Sgeir, Rona looked pleasantly verdant with its green hill criss-crossed with a network of sheep tracks.
It needed only a few palm trees and sand to complete the conventional picture of a desert island.
To our relief we found the seas calm enough off the normal east landing at Geodha Stoth and dropped anchor a few yards off shore.
In the heavenly quiet which followed we became aware that we were not alone.
Scores of curious seals, disturbed in their play at the foot of the cliffs, swum out to investigate.
A pair of black guillemots, already in winter plumage, fled in panic.
The guillemots and seals were to remain with us during the whole of our stay, providing a continuous source of interest.
So far our programme had kept well to schedule and we were feeling quite pleased with ourselves.
Certainly the weather was not all we could have wished for.
Although Viking was lying quietly enough at the moment we could tell by the sudden gusts which hissed down from the high southern cliff that it was blowing quite hard on the weather side.
As further proof of this there was a continuous drift of wind-blown spume shooting over us like blobs of candy floss.
The weather continued to deteriorate with low-flying  scud and rain squalls from the west.
In spite of this a chance to explore the island was not to be missed.
Sandy and I took first turn ashore.
We climbed the grassy Tor and looked round an unbroken horizon while the island lay at our feet.
On the west side we felt the full force of the wind which was by then force five to six.
The fierce updraft from the cliffs increased this to near-gale force at times.
Fulmars performed dizzily above and below our position, wings motionless as they banked and swooped in their exploitation of the wind eddies.
Sea swell thudded at the base of the cliffs far below, and above the wind symphony the weird crying of a seal echoed up from some hidden sea cavern.
Low cloud swept in from the west, outstripping the white-capped Atlantic rollers in their inexorable march eastward.
We soon came upon a fascinating group of ancient dwellings, all that remained of the old village where the last inhabitants of Rona lived in primitive conditions and awful isolation until their final evacuation in 1844.
The best preserved building is the partly roofed chapel where, thanks to the efforts of Dr Fraser Darling, the original floor had been uncovered.
As we explored the roofless shells of the other buildings we remarked on the way each dwelling was sunk into the ground.
A feature common to every building was the low doorway, access to the interior being only possible by crawling on hands and knees.
Although some of this effect was the build up of turf over the years, no doubt this type of architecture was made necessary by the wild weather experienced on the island.
Continuing our exploration we went northward looking for the Tunnel Cave.
This was one of Rona's  showpieces, and in fair weather would be the archetypal cave of smuggling fiction.
Today we halted at the grim-looking chasm which formed the entrance and watched a thundering swell drive into the cave mouth.
Misty spray shrouded the sheer rock walls which plunged out of sight beneath our feet, and the recoiling backwash of the seas was heaped with fluffy spume as if some giant hand had emptied a mammoth packet of detergent there.
As fast as it formed this spume was whisked away into the cave from where it was sucked into a natural wind tunnel and finally shot from a huge blow hole towards the centre of Fianuis.
This must be the ultimate exit of the cave, and here we had the explanation of the wind-blown spume which had drifted over Viking throughout the day at the east landing.
By this time Sandy and I were feeling the effects of our long day and by mutual agreement we made our way back to the ship.
On board Viking we lost no time in following the example of our shipmates who were sound asleep, blissfully indifferent to the activities on shore.
Towards dusk we were galvanised into action by a hail from shore, our boat was despatched and soon some very tired shepherds with their exhausted dogs flopped over the gunwale.
The Rona sheep had won the first round.
A council of war was held and it was decided to resume operations at 5 am.
The weather forecast was still blithely optimistic and made no mention of our private depression.
There followed the strangest and most memorable night watch of my seagoing experience.
Swiftly the last ragged cloud raced across the moon leaving a night of beauty.
The northern sky was resplendent in stars of  unbelievable intensity and flickered with a bizarre display of the Aurora Borealis.
For incidental music I had the haunting, almost human song of a seal choir which rose above the incessant roar of distant surf.
Promptly at 0500 hours the ship sprung to life once more.
After a hasty breakfast the diligent shepherds and dogs were put on shore.
Dawn came with a promise of fine weather.
This decided us on a bold move to facilitate loading.
Viking was gently warped into the landing place where she was soon securely moored with her bow overhanging the rocks.
A network of lines led from each bow and a kedge anchor was run out astern.
By this arrangement we could position Viking almost to the nearest few inches with all the lines taut, a degree of control which was most essential in view of our position and the variations of tide and swell.
We were quite proud of this achievement as it would seem to have no precedent.
As far as we knew every previous expedition had ferried the sheep by dinghy, a tedious operation which must have been hard on both men and sheep, to say nothing of the dinghy.
By 9 a.m. the shore party reported a swift victory and shortly after the first reluctant emigrant arrived at the ship's side.
One by one they came, and we on board Viking found it possible to grab their long shaggy fleeces and hoist them over the gunwale.
It was hot work for all hands.
Forty-five first year lambs were put below, then came the muscular double-fleeced adults.
These were great hardy beasts, survivors of two or more grim winters on Rona and well nourished by the fertile summer grazing.
Once on board the animals were pathetically docile and gave no more trouble.
We enclosed most of  the adults on deck within a rylock wire fence previously erected round Viking's gunwale.
By 1 p.m. we had another forty-five sheep on deck and decided to call it a day.
No time was lost in getting under way.
On shore the remaining sheep were released with their new stud ram, whereupon they scattered over the grazing as if nothing had ever disturbed their tranquillity.
The day was warm and sunny with a fair northerly breeze as Viking pulled away from the island, now transformed and softened by the good weather.
With mainsail set and at full throttle we steamed for home.
The verdant hump of Rona diminished astern to resume its remote and dreamlike aspect.
The eternal westerly swell rolled lazily across our wake and wiped out the last trace of our intrusion.
For me there is an aura of lonely sadness about all the Hebridean islands, but Rona had something else which I found hard to define.
Now I realised how aptly the poet Muir had epitomised the fascination that most people feel for Rona when he wrote those lines so long ago:
As we closed the shelter of Lewis we lost the wind and the swell was cut off like magic.
We slipped along smoothly in the darkness towards Stornoway harbour  accompanied by a small petrel which fluttered, bat-like in the glow from our starboard light.
We liked to think that this was one of Rona's sentinels seeing us off the premises.
Viking rustled on down the moon track under a star-studded canopy.
It was a lovely night and a perfect ending for our trip.
The lights of Stornoway floated on a soft haze as we passed Arnish Lighthouse and almost regretfully we tied up at Cromwell Quay.
Salt Spray and Heather
Long before I came to know north west Scotland I read an article in a yachting journal about sailing and climbing in the mountainous fiords of Norway.
The article made a deep impression on me and I thought what a wonderful coastline it would be to explore.
At that time I lived on the flat and rather featureless coast of East Anglia, and spent most of my spare time sailing its lonely creeks and estuaries.
It was here, however, that I learned to appreciate the beauty of wild, unspoiled places.
When I moved to the Western Isles of Scotland I found I had no need to go as far as Norway for my Elysian coast; there were mountains and sea in plenty right at my doorstep.
The sea was my first love, but now the hills have an equal claim to my affection.
I know that many others share this natural affinity, for the remote hill regions give one the same sense of independence and adventure as the sea.
In north west Scotland sailing and climbing are ideal combinations as much of the wilder country can be more quickly reached by sea.
Loch Scavaig in Skye, giving immediate access to the Cuillins, and the many sea lochs in the Outer Hebrides that snake into the hills of Harris  are typical examples.
I was lucky enough, through my association with the Stornoway Sea Cadets, to sail whalers and dinghies around the islands and to cruise extensively in their forty-five foot motor vessel and training ship, T.S.
Viking.
It was not under sail, as I would have preferred, but the next best thing, and in this boat we explored most of the Outer Isles from North Rona to Barra Head, and the mainland coast between Lochinver and Oban.
In order to arrive off difficult coastlines in daylight we often had to sail at night from the Outer Isles.
On one such passage we left Stornoway at midnight heading for Lochinver in Sutherland.
The moonless sky was overcast, and gliding into an opaque blackness we might have been in outer space.
I was standing in the bows looking forward when suddenly our gently hissing bow-wave turned into a glowing mass of green fire, which reflected from our hull and bathed us in a ghostly light.
Momentarily transfixed, I soon realised we had run into a very dense patch of  phosphorescence , a common enough phenomenon at sea which never failed to fascinate me.
Our bubbling wake stretched into the darkness astern like a subdued flarepath.
As I turned forward again I saw with alarm that we were running into apparently broken water.
Then, to my relief, what I had taken to be great patches of surf resolved into luminous shoals of herring or mackerel, which shot away at our approach, each individual fish an incandescent streak.
The whole effect was that of an underwater firework display.
Two dolphins joined in the fun, their tumbling, lithe bodies clearly visible as they weaved sparkling trails of fire at high speed under our  bows.
The whole sea seemed alive that night and there was little sleep for the crew, needless to say.
And who could have gone below to sleep when dawn broke to show the weird silhouettes of Suilven and Canisp against the glow of the eastern sky?
We cruised in company with pilot whales off the Butt of Lewis, ranged alongside the huge basking shark to compare its thirty foot length with our own and, on one occasion, witnessed an unidentified whale breach practically clear out of the sea like some mammoth salmon.
We explored the intricate channels of the Sound of Harris (in the days before it was buoyed), and poked our bows under the awful cliffs of Mingulay near Barra Head, where a thousand seabirds clamour and the sun is shut out at noon.
Most yachtsmen from the south think of the wild weather as the chief drawback to cruising in the extreme north west.
To a certain extent this is correct, but those who know these waters intimately will perhaps agree that their reputation can be exaggerated, and that there are advantages which other coastlines do not possess.
In my experience there is a  predominance of west to north west winds in the area which do blow hard quite often and create a permanent westerly swell on the Atlantic side.
In summer there is often plenty of wet weather too.
However, this means that the east coast of the Outer Islands is normally quite sheltered under the high land, and the many sea lochs and islands provide additional bolt holes should the wind change.
With the Outer Isles forming a breakwater against the Atlantic, the Minch is a much less formidable place than some people imagine.
With a stout ship and the right  sort of clothes to withstand the weather some good cruising can be enjoyed.
Summer gales were rarely of long duration in our experience, and if it blew really hard we used to snug down in the lee of one of the many anchorages and take to the hills for a change.
There is plenty of scope for walking or climbing in the Outer Isles and on the mainland, and the exercise is often welcome after being in the cramped quarters of a small boat.
One of the last cruises I enjoyed on Viking took us south as far as Oban.
Our start was delayed for twelve hours by a typical short but fierce blow from the south west which fell away during the night.
We sailed into a murky, airless dawn veiled by the thin drizzle of a Scotch Mist, and I turned in for a few hours.
When I came on deck to take my watch I found Viking swaying gently over a smooth swell, the cloud-wreathed Torridon mountains to port, and South Rona lighthouse fine on the starboard bow.
The art of coastal navigation, or pilotage, as it is known to seamen, can be an interesting but often tricky business.
My uneventful watch, as we steamed slowly south, gave me plenty of time to think about the many advantages of cruising in these waters compared to other coastal areas I knew, where complex systems of buoyed channels lead the mariner through an unseen maze of shifting shoals.
Here, the navigator has deep, clear water and, with a few exceptions, slower tidal streams.
There is often incredible visibility which is further improved by the high coastlines.
For me, overriding all practical considerations, there is the spiritual uplift which comes after a long sea passage when, at dawn or evening, I enter some tangle-fringed sea loch with the majesty of the hills reflecting  from its still waters.
A light breeze from the north cleared the air and the sun blazed out over distant mountains as we headed between the Crowlin Isles and shaped up towards the Kyle of Localsh.
No matter how often I arrive at Kyle, by land or sea, I can always admire its situation which, for a railhead town, takes some beating.
In those days, Kyle of Localsh was much busier than it is today.
After a brief stay at Kyle we were soon up to the house and burn near Sandaig Lighthouse, the undisclosed setting, I suspect, of Gavin Maxwell's otter book "Ring of Bright Water" , later to be filmed.
To port the dark gash of Loch Hourn cut into the towering peaks of remote Knoydart, while Isle Ornsay in Skye opened up to starboard.
Unlike Kyle, Mallaig has nothing much to commend it apart from being a busy fishing port and railhead which is, of course, its sole raison d'etre .
A nasty cross sea seems to haunt its approach which nearly always brings you beam on to a lee shore and makes steering difficult.
Today was no exception and we lost our tea of bacon and beans which had to be scraped off the cabin floor after mooring up.
The westerly wind freshened and howled dismally in our rigging all that night.
It kept us in harbour until the following afternoon when, we decided it had moderated enough to push on to Tobermory.
With a parting gift of prawns and fish from a friendly fisherman, we headed over to look at the islands of bum and Eigg on the way to Ardnamurchan.
The misty peaks of Rhum were draped in heavy cloud and shot with rainbows as we passed close to the curious Sgurr of Eigg.
Then, with a quartering wind, we rolled over the usual jobble of sea off Ardnamurchan, most westerly point of the mainland, and into the peaceful waters of the Sound of Mull.
The cloud had dispersed and it was a fine evening when we entered Tobermory which looked at its picture-postcard best.
We had timed our arrival well as the local Highland Games took place the next day.
We tarried awhile to watch Messrs Anderson and Rowe perform doughty deeds with caber and shot on a pleasant summers day.
The younger members of the crew may have got some sleep that night but the older ones, who should have known better, arrived back at four o'clock in the morning, with half the town and a piper who, traditionally, concluded the night's festivities on the pier.
Overcoming a certain lethargy we sailed for Oban a few hours later.
The green sweep of the wooded hills on Morven and Mull gave us an impression of verdant lushness after the naked rock and brown moors of the Outer Isles.
The Sound of Mull, sea-road to the Isles, was crossed by distant sails and arrowed by the wake of motor cruisers.
We passed the Gordonstoun yachts, Pinta and Soldian, regular visitors to Stornoway, and gave them a cheery wave as they beat to windward towards Lismore Island.
Later we saw the Duke of Edinburgh's yawl, Bloodhound.
The Duke, a keen sailor, is no stranger to the cruising grounds of north west Scotland.
The cheerful holiday atmosphere and sophisticated pleasures of Oban held us for the weekend, and we were involved in a very entertaining water carnival.
On Monday we left for Fort William and the long trek up Loch Linnhe.
It was a perfect day of hot sun with a light following wind, one of the few times that we were able to sunbathe.
Ben Nevis brooded benevolently over all.
A night at Fort William gave me a long awaited opportunity of making the ascent.
With regret I decided it was too risky for a party of cadets to accompany me — any way the island boys had their sights set on the night life of Fort William.
There was just time to buy a map before the shops closed.
By 7 p.m.
I was on my way to Glen Nevis with enough gear to see me through the night.
It was a fine evening as I passed through Claggan village and on to Achintee, but rather warm for the job ahead.
A swarm of midges decided to make the climb with me, enjoying the fresh blood of an Englishman.
I was looking forward to the thrill of reaching the highest spot in the British Isles.
At first.
I was sweating profusely in a wool shirt.
Soon, clouds spilled over Carn Dearg and it darkened suddenly as I ascended the mountain.
Far below in the glens, pinpoints of yellow light, growing in number as darkness fell, served to accentuate the loneliness of the scree slopes which I now traversed.
I was surprised to find quite a few patches of snow near the summit, which I reached at about half past ten.
It was not quite dark yet and the evening sky on the high tops was still aglow with delicate pastel shades.
The deep silence was disturbed only by an occasional flurry of wind echoing strangely around unseen rock faces — the giant sighs of a sleeping mountain.
After investigating the gaunt, rather eerie ruins of the old observatory it was too dark for further exploration  and I retired to the Lochaber Club refuge hut for supper.
I was on my way down at three o'clock in the strange light of an ominous red dawn, back through a sleeping Fort William and on board for breakfast, weary but elated with my stolen night on the roof of Britain.
As we sailed away down Loch Linnhe, Ben Nevis was shrouded in heavy cloud, the wind was piping up and the rain fell steadily.
The weather signs in the sky of the previous evening had foretold correctly but the Ben had been kind to me on my first ascent.
Contentedly I went below and turned in for a few hours, leaving my colleague to navigate.
On the passage home we retraced our outward course as far as Kyle of Localsh, and from there threaded our way into the Sound of Raasay via Caol Mor to spend the night at Portree.
We sailed northward up the Minch on a sultry, sweltering day over a most unpleasant ground swell.
The wind freshened from astern off Rudha Reidh and we just managed to beat a south westerly gale into Loch Ewe where we were weatherbound for the next two days.
Luckily, in spite of the wind, they were invigorating days of bright sun and we put in some grand scrambling on the heather-covered slopes of the loch.
The Sea Cadets had a summer camp in the naval base at Aultbea with good facilities.
Our time was running short now and on Sunday we made a dash across the Minch, an exhilarating run in hot sun, fresh breeze and white-capped seas, with our auxiliary sail pulling strongly.
We made our landfall just south of Stornoway and crept into the land-locked anchorage of Loch Beag, an offshoot of Loch Grimshader, to clean up the ship.
It was good to be back in the peace of  the Outer Isles, to swim and laze in the still of a summer evening.
Sun-tanned, fit and contented, we could look back on fourteen days of carefree cruising; four hundred miles through some of the finest scenery in the British Isles with the freedom of the hills for good measure.
RETURN SOUTH
In spite of our interest in island life, and all our new experiences there, my wife had never really settled down to the complete contrast in living conditions.
It was easier for me — with my work and other interests the days were fully occupied.
Unfortunately Chris's health suffered, and she became very depressed.
We were all ready for a move in 1964 when several posts in East Anglia became available.
Most of the East Anglian ports were enjoying their first spell of prosperity for many years, employment and trade was booming in the area and more customs staff were required at King's Lynn, Ipswich and Felixstowe, my old home and a natural first choice.
To our pleasant surprise we did not have long to wait before hearing that my application for transfer to Felixstowe had been successful.
With mixed feelings (on my part, anyway), we watched the lights of Stornoway recede astern from the deck of the old MacBrayne's ferry Lock Seaforth.
All our neighbours and friends had come to see us off and our minds were a turmoil of conflicting emotions, glad to be going home, but sad about friends and places we were leaving.
As we began to pick up the threads of life in the south once more I found that in my absence from the cutter scene a brand new purpose-built cutter Venturous was operating with great success.
The new vessel was one of  the last ships to be built at Philips Shipyard, Dartmouth and had been launched on 14th February, 1962 by Lady Crombie, wife of the Chairman of the Board.
The name Venturous was a break from the long line of traditional names for Cutters as it had never previously been used.
The dimensions of Venturous were length 90 feet, beam 18.6 feet, draft 6 feet with a displacement tonnage of 120 tons.
She was of a somewhat unusual design, rather narrow in the beam with a wide, bulbous underwater section midships, but in spite of a tendency to roll heavily in a beam sea she was a surprisingly good sea boat as she was to prove in the years that followed.
Venturous was already making cutter history with her size, speed of sixteen knots and the latest electronic gadgetry such as radar, Decca Navigator and modern communication equipment.
Her powerful twin Paxman engines gave her a range and reliability we had long sought after and the increased accommodation meant that more revenue work could be carried out by a crew of eight customs officers.
There was also a large saloon on the main deck which was a great asset for visiting V.I.P's and crew comfort.
With the increased comfort and greater operational range more ambitious patrols could now be carried out and Venturous began to be seen as far north as Islay on the west coast and the Tyne on the east coast.
One of her earliest V.I.P. cruises was to transport members of the Board of Customs to Port Ellen in Islay to open a new distillery.
Naturally I was very keen to get back into cutter activities as soon as possible, but it was year before I managed to establish myself into cutter crewing duties  once more.
Again, it was with the help of Phil Andrews, who was No.1 on Venturous at that time, with Bob Wellock, an ex air/sea RAF coxswain from Liverpool Customs in command whom I was meeting for the first time.
It was only a short spell of relief, most of it spent down Channel in atrocious summer weather as I remember, but it was enough to whet my appetite for more, and the start of a long love affair with Venturous.
Venturous, or the "Big V" as she was affectionately known by all who served on her, was the Department's most successful post-war cutter for both sea-going ability and success in revenue control.
She was a legend in her own right throughout her eighteen years of service and all those who were privileged to crew her held her in special regard.
She certainly lived up to her name, and was the inspiration for the poem "Revenue Cutter" which I wrote after a particular stormy passage in the North of Scotland.
1964, the year previous to my first spell of duty, had proved a particularly good one for Venturous.
She clocked up the largest number of seizures for any postwar cutter to date, ranging from the Polish fishing fleet on the north east coast, to yachts in the south and west.
One of the most interesting and widely publicised coups of the year had been made in conjunction with the Valiant from the Teignmouth fishing vessel Ann Lynn.
From information received it was thought that some illegal activity was afoot off the Teign estuary so Venturous and Valiant were detailed to keep watch on the movements of local vessels early in August, 1964.
Two of the Valiant's crew, posing as holiday makers, were on the beach studying vessels at closer range.
The  suspicions of the two shore watchers were soon aroused by the activities of the Ann Lynn, one of the local boats which had just arrived to land a party of sea anglers.
After the anglers had departed the skipper of Ann Lynn, assisted by two other men, proceeded to unload sacks from below decks which were then carried to a waiting car.
Out-numbered, the two revenue men attempted to contact the Venturous with their portable radios for assistance, but as so often happens they had no success, and were forced to act on their own initiative.
They had little doubt as to the contents of the sacks and their prompt action in jumping the men was vindicated when the sacks were found to contain large quantities of spirits and cigarettes.
The Ann Lynn was formally seized by the officers and the skipper, a well known local character, was "persuaded" to take his vessel into Teignmouth Harbour.
By the time Ann Lynn had berthed, Valiant had arrived, much to the relief of the two harassed officers, and a full rummage by Valiant's crew disclosed 74,000 cigarettes and 268 bottles of spirits.
During subsequent interrogation it was revealed that Ann Lynn had made a rendezvous during the night with a Dutch cargo vessel, had stowed the contraband below for later disposal, and calmly taken out the anglers for a day's fishing before unloading the loot.
It was obvious at the time that this was not the first operation of its kind.
The skipper and one other man were convicted of smuggling, each having to pay £1392, and were gaoled for six months, with a further sentence of six months should the fines be unpaid within three months.
The most bizarre and incredible aspect of this case was what  followed.
A former Chairman of the Teignmouth Council then organised an appeal in an attempt to raise enough money to pay the smuggling fines.
The appeal was called "Save our Smugglers" and special boxes marked "S.O.S." were distributed around the town.
He justified the appeal by claiming that the smugglers had done much for the town's "smugglers cove" image and that the town would benefit from the resultant increase in tourist trade.
The appeal was not very successful and was condemned by many prominent townspeople, but that it could have been launched at all goes to show that old traditions die hard in the West Country!
With the advent of Venturous, it was time for the old Vigilant to bow out and she was taken out of service in May 1962 when Venturous was commissioned and became operational.
No one was really sorry to see her go as she was very expensive to maintain and had never been very effective as a revenue vessel.
By this time the ex-naval HDML's Vincent and Valiant were showing their age, and their replacement was under consideration by the Board.
It was decided that their successors would be of similar size and anew steel cutter was designed by Technical Branch with a length of 80 feet, a beam of 16 feet and a draft of 6 feet.
The power units would again be Paxmans, of later design than those of Venturous which would give her a speed of 15 knots.
As in Venturous the superstructure would be of light alloy.
The contract for the first of these smaller cutters was given to Brooke Marine Shipyard at Lowestoft.
She was launched in 1965 to replace the Vincent and named Vigilant to perpetuate the traditional name.
She too  proved a good little ship and served the Department well during her career.
Vincent was sold into private ownership and was reborn as a very luxurious yacht a few years later, often to be seen and remarked on by cutter crews in yachting circles.
Phil Andrews and I became very friendly with the owner, a very talented engineer who then had an engineering works in Cardiff.
This period could be regarded as the time when our service began to emerge from a kind of amateur status to that of a more professional one.
I hasten to qualify this observation in that the cutter crews in no way regarded themselves as amateurs.
Although we were volunteers, doing a job we liked, we were fully trained and experienced customs officers who were also operating sea going vessels in a competent manner, taking great pride in doing so.
Our administration was beginning to take the cutter service more seriously and we, serving officers, began to feel as though we were becoming a more permanent and desirable feature of Customs controls.
Some of the old guard ashore still regarded us as playboys though, and resented the money that was being spent on the new boats and their equipment.
I even heard one supervisor, on being shown the new radio equipment on Venturous, remark that of course it was all very nice, but he didn't think the Waterguard Service was quite ready for radio yet.
In spite of this attitude by some of the die-hards, more and more money was being spent on new craft and equipment and our Technical Branch, which hitherto had concentrated on the maintenance on our fleet of small boarding launches, was being geared up to deal with the new cutter fleet.
To this end the workshop at  No. 4 Berth, Southampton Docks was being expanded.
Unbelievably, our boats were still being laid up during the winter months but with a more professional approach being adopted from topside, this policy was soon to be abandoned.
The Customs Waterguard Service was controlled from our London Headquarters at King's Beam House, EC3.
At this particular period the administration of the Cutter Service was laid to an Inspector in the office of The Inspector General of Waterguard (IGW for short).
It was the era of Len Battersby, Inspector, who had been the last Chief Preventive Officer on the revenue crew of the old Vigilant.
As an Inspector in the IGW's Office, his two main functions were the running of the cutter service and general service discipline, at which he was very efficient.
He ruled us with an iron hand and, while he was a very fair man, woe betide any officer who crossed him.
One of Len Battersby's regular visits was to each cutter in turn at the end of a crewing tour when he would sit all the crew round the messdeck table and ask each individual for his comments on the season's activities.
Sometimes I used to see the funny side of these sessions, but he was not one to tolerate flippancy and more than once I received the rough side of his tongue.
But you knew exactly where you were with him and I had the utmost respect for his judgement and management of the cutters.
As I began to serve more regularly I became more accepted amongst the older stalwarts of the service, my naval experience and general seamanship picked up on fishing craft and yachts standing me in good stead.
Surprisingly there was still no organised training for new entries to the cutters but at that time of course there were still plenty of ex-service personnel available.
With the increasing number of cutters and the decision to operate them on an all year round basis the closed shop tendency for crewing of the earlier days could not continue.
The pool of officers who could be called upon to man the general Waterguard Service and selected applicants began to serve as junior trainees on the boats, literally learning the ropes as they went along.
It was recognised, however, that as the crew members became more experienced and gained seniority there was a need for specialised navigational training so that they could replace No. 1's and eventually Commanders.
The Air/Sea Rescue training school at RAF Mountbatten, Plymouth provided the type of training course relevant to our needs and they kindly consented to a selected few of our senior crew members attending the school for the necessary three months session.
During the course they were given the facilities of the officers mess where they were fed and housed.
These courses proved highly popular with our lads and there was practically a hundred per cent pass rate.
Not so popular was the experimental survival section of the course which always seemed to be carried out in extremely inclement weather with a helicopter helping to increase the discomfort of tossing about on a life raft in Plymouth Sound.
At first the winter months were used for training but when the policy of laying up cutters for the winter was discontinued the courses were held throughout the year.
Several of my old shipmates from earlier years were now established on the cutters and were building up reputations as excellent navigators, boat handlers or engineers, as well as hitting the headlines occasionally with notable seizures or rescues at sea.
Ron McGregor, a junior officer with me on Vincent was not a regular Commander of the new Vigilant.
Other old shipmates like Phil Andrews, Eddie Clarke and Ron Giles were still crewing but others like Des Ferret, Vic Roberts and Bob Wellock were disappearing up the promotion ladder.
New characters were emerging and I began to meet cutter stalwarts such as Denis Mawe, Dick Fidler, Doug Thompson on the deck side, and veteran engineers Joe Reynolds, Eric Langmaid and Alan Cull, the latter two great friends of mine now sadly deceased.
As in the Merchant Service, a close friendship usually developed between the Commanding Officer and the Chief Engineer, and on the cutters the Commander usually tried to sail with the same chief whenever possible.
I was no exception to this rule when I graduated to command and number some very good friends amongst the chiefs with whom I have sailed.
With the call for a larger pool of officers to man the cutters grew the need for a more organised method of crew selection and the Cutter Manning conference was inaugurated.
Commanders were selected at top level of course, after which they were invited to attend at HQ where they would sift through the applications from prospective crew members, discuss them with the administrating Inspector and eventually come to a mutual agreement on the crewing of each cutter for the following year.
In the early days the Manning conference  was quite an informal one day session, but as the service grew and the numbers of boats and crew members complicated the issue it was found necessary to extend to two days.
Eventually, with seminars, and lectures from heads of department on current issues and policy, the conferences were extended yet again to a working week and held at centres other than London HQ.
The new Vigilant lost no time in making her mark when in June 1966 the Queen, after formally opening the new east wing of the London Custom House (restored after wartime bombing) embarked on the Vigilant at Custom House Quay for the short journey to Westminster Pier.
An auspicious day in cutter history as it was the first instance of the reigning monarch travelling by revenue cutter.
Shortly before this great day Vigilant's crew had made a large seizure from a Finnish vessel berthed in the Thames, the goods concerned being unearthed from a very clever concealment, and the Queen was very interested to hear about the incident.
Another notable seizure made by Vigilant was as a result of an operation in 1969, initiated by the Investigation Branch who had been tipped off by their Dutch colleagues that a suspected smuggling vessel had left Flushing bound for the Kent coast.
With customs and police officers deployed on shore Vigilant put to sea to patrol off the Kent coast.
In the early hours of 9th January, 1969, Vigilant sighted the suspect vessel entering the River Swale near the Isle of Sheppey and followed her in at a safe distance.
This area is notoriously shoal, with vast areas of mudflats, and after several attempts at finding the channel leading to a landing spot, the vessel gave up and anchored in  midstream extinguishing all her lights.
At this stage Vigilant moved in and the suspect was boarded.
There were three crew members and a rummage of the vessel revealed eighty cases of cigars (over 16,000 in number).
The three men on board admitted to the smuggling attempt and a fourth man was picked up by the police as the waited in a parked car at the landing place.
Subsequently all four men were convicted of smuggling and their defence counsel stated in court in their defence that they were "the dupes and pawns in a high powered enterprise while the real criminals behind the racket were getting away scot free." 
Ironically the smuggling vessel turned out to be the "Dunlin" , which was an ex-customs boarding launch, previously stationed at Erith and sold in 1967.
The smugglers were taking a chance in using the Dunlin for this type of passage in mid-winter as she was hardly built for open sea work although she was sound enough.
Possibly it was thought that for this reason, amongst others, she would not be suspect by our controls.
One of the earliest instances of this type of combined operation between the cutters and our Investigation Branch involved Venturous with Phil Andrews in command.
In September of that year a convicted smuggler, of Belgian nationality was released from prison.
He was soon up to his old tricks and with a view to recouping his losses he chartered a yacht called Filden I from its unsuspecting and perfectly respectable owner.
The owner subsequently found out his customer's identity, and having no doubt as to the use to which his vessel would be put, informed the British Customs.
We then had a stroke of luck as Filden I broke down in  Dieppe and the owner was sent to see if he could locate the trouble.
Continuing his co-operating with our department, the owner contacted us and it was arranged for one of our Investigation officers to accompany him to Belgium in the guise of a mechanic.
This enabled the movements of Filden I to be monitored closely from the time she left Dieppe.
Venturous was despatched to shadow her and to report back her movements to a reception party who were waiting on the UK mainland.
The first sighting of Filden I by Venturous was in a position six miles off Dunkirk from where she was shadowed at a discreet distance with radio reports of her movements being sent at regular intervals by Venturous to the shore watchers in the vicinity of North Foreland.
The operation was running smoothly as the yacht rounded the North Foreland when it seemed certain that a landing would be made somewhere in the Thames Estuary.
Suddenly the yacht changed course for Margate and at this point Venturous lost radio contact with the shore unit.
As mentioned previously, this so often happened with monotonous and maddening frequency during operations, but luckily radio contact was regained in the nick of time and the message was passed that Margate seemed the most likely landing spot.
Filden I did arrive alongside the jetty at Margate to be met by our Investigation officers, with Venturous close behind to cut off her retreat.
The yacht skipper played the innocent, but a deep rummage of the vessel revealed 20,000 Dutch cigars hidden in a clever concealment behind panelling in the saloon.
In the subsequent court case the Belgian was released on bail and not entirely to everyone's surprise immediately fled the country, escaping the consequences of his criminal act.
Phil Andrews was in command of Valiant two years later when Filden I was again intercepted and found to be attempting to smuggle a large quantity of cigarettes.
This time the wily Belgian was not on board and it was never proved that he was behind this particular incident.
Back on Venturous, Phil Andrews again hit the headlines in the early days of the pirate radio ships when, during a routine patrol off the Essex Coast he decided to speak to the Caroline to ascertain if bonded stores were carried.
At that time there were no instructions laid down for dealing with the radio pirate vessels and, although this particular vessel was outside territorial waters, there was no reason why a cutter should not make reasonable enquiries from vessels in close proximity to our coast.
Unfortunately Phil had unwittingly chosen a bad time to clash with the pirate radio vessel.
His presence was immediately broadcast in no uncertain terms to all and sundry by the DJ's who made exaggerated claims that they were being boarded by an unauthorised government vessel.
The press picked up the story the following day and gave it wide coverage.
All this proved most embarrassing for HMG as talks were in progress with a view to taking possible action against the pirates.
Of course there had been no intention of boarding Caroline — Phil better than most of our officers, knew the score.
Although the affair was soon forgotten it took a long time for Phil to live down that one!
I seemed to miss out on all the fun in those days, my spells afloat were few and far between, while ashore at Felixstowe I was very busy as trade in that port was building up rapidly.
However, everything comes to he  who waits patiently, as the saying goes.
My big break on the cutters came in 1968 when the new Valiant, sister ship to the Vigilant was delivered from Richard Dunstons at Thorne, in the Humber, and Phil Andrews asked me to sail with him as No. 1.
The old Valiant was pensioned off and spent the rest of her days as a workboat; approximately enough in later years, she was used to train some of our officers while in use as a navigational training vessel by the Lomar School of Navigation in the Solent.
Our fleet now consisted of three "V" vessels, Venturous, Vigilant and Valiant, all well equipped, modern, purpose-built patrol boats which were worked hard and served us well for the next ten years.
In preparation for my new job I had attended a three week Radar Observer's course at the Sir John Cass School of Navigation in London and obtained my certificate which is obligatory for budding Commanders and is identical to the ticket held by Masters and Mates of the Merchant Service.
As an ex-naval coxswain I was not obliged to take the Mountbatten course but did in fact take a refresher course at the Command Navigation Centre, HMS Raleigh at Torpoint which, under the auspices of a Lieut Commander fresh from training at Dartmouth Naval College, I found very arduous.
This was in connection with my RNR Sea Cadet duties but it gave me much more confidence on the navigational side of cutter service.
Over the years of cutter duties I had also obtained a Radio Operator's Licence, and on two separate occasions had attended Red Cross and St John's  Ambulance first aid courses.
A firefighting course at HMS Phoenix, Fareham was quite a terrifying experience — literally an ordeal by fire.
I rather think that the RN instructors on my course must have suffered at the hands of the Customs on returning from a foreign tour as they really gave us a hard time.
One particular sadistic character opened up his observation hatch while we were groping around a smoke filled tank, looked in with a satanic grin and shouted,"Ha!
Customs Officers eh!"and slammed it shut again.
Shortly after this I nearly suffocated when the pipe of my breathing apparatus came adrift.
I had to be dragged outside.
However it was all in a good cause and, like a lot of these things, fun when you left off and could look back and laugh.
Anyway, by the time I joined Valiant as Phil's right hand man I felt I could cope with most situations.
THE YEAR OF VALIANT
Although Valiant was of identical design to Vigilant with the same dimensions and general layout, we soon found out that in many ways she was a different ship.
It is a recognised fact amongst seamen that no ship, even when built by the same yard to identical plans, ever behaves in the same way.
That was certainly true of Valiant and Vigilant.
Phil Andrews was in the original delivery crew and brought Valiant from the Humber to Southampton where I joined in February 1968 as part of the regular crew.
Working up trials were carried out in the Solent area and we soon found that various modifications were necessary.
Some of them were quite elementary as when we first poked our nose out of Spithead one day and our first roll tore the fridge from its fastenings.
We found it had been secured only by one-inch-long wood screws.
A more serious incident was when Eric Langmaid, Chief Engineer, had to repeatedly stop the generators due to overheating.
Eventually we found that the water cooling intakes had been put too near the waterline and were sucking air as the boat rolled.
On more than one occasion it was remarked that ship designers tested their designs on duckponds.
Valiant and Vigilant were not beautiful ships to look at and at full speed (about 14 knots) looked particularly incongruous, as they seemed to be suspended between  their own wash and bow-wave.
However, at the time they were the best and most modern cutters we had sailed on and we were all very proud of the fact.
With our fast motor tenders for interception work in shallow water together with the inflatables carried, we felt we were ready to tackle anything.
We had a good write-up in the Southampton Echo, I remember we nearly drowned the reporter as he insisted on being put on a large mooring buoy in Southampton Water in order to get a photograph of Valiant at speed.
Phil took him at his word and charged up to the buoy, turning at the last minute to propel the buoy in the air with our wash while the reporter hung on for dear life.
After this we settled down to some serious patrolling and there followed a very strenuous tour of duty which lasted until the following November.
Our patrol area during that time was mainly on the south coast and the west country, with a longer patrol northward on the west coast which took us into the Bristol Channel, then to the Isle of Man, Workington and Northern Ireland.
We seemed to get more than our fair share of bad weather on that tour apart from an idyllic three weeks in the West country.
Anyone who has ever sailed with Phil Andrews will agree that there is never a dull moment or lack of sea time, and my time with him on Valiant was certainly full of those ingredients.
We had to spend a night off the approaches to the West Solent and Poole as a result of information about local fishing boats coopering.
Coopering was a old term used by the Customs service to describe the illegal traffic of contraband sold and transhipped from larger vessels into small local boats.
Some time in the early hours of the morning, Phil and another crew member, Mike Carsley, were on watch and spotted a target on radar approaching from seaward.
We were cruising slowly with no lights and as the other craft approached, it became obvious that she was also without lights.
I was off watch, sleeping forward, as was Ron Gibbs, my watchmate.
Suddenly the alarm bell sounded and hastily dressing I rushed up to the bridge.
There I found Phil and Mike discussing the next move.
Apparently the unknown craft had switched on a powerful searchlight to identify us and then gone on its way, still without lights.
We decided to follow it tracking it on our radar.
Only then I realised that Ron Gibbs had just joined us.
 "What kept you then?" 
I said.
 "Can't find my trousers," he said.
Looking at him in the dim light I saw he was clad only in vest and pants.
Then I realised why my own trousers were short and on the tight side.
With trousers restored to the rightful owner we proceeded to track the suspicious craft, informing our shore patrol by radio and deploying their car to Swanage bay towards which our target was obviously heading.
Excitement was intense, this was it!
Our shore patrol was in place and waiting to intercept.
Unfortunately it turned out to be somewhat of an anti-climax when a rubber dinghy with two occupants was found to be from a Fishery Protection vessel, the two officers concerned were landing to attend a wedding.
Despite this we were quite pleased that the exercise had showed the system worked.
We ran back towards the Solent for a rest day at Southampton.
As we entered the Needles Channel we  were signalled by Aldis lamp from the Needles Coastguard.
 "Would your Commanding Officer telephone NOIC Portsmouth at the first opportunity." 
We landed Phil at Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, to receive a mild rebuke from the Senior Naval Officer about lack of communication and swanning around without lights, but I rather think that Phil gave as good as he got.
Phil was always a fearless seaman, and I am a very cautious one.
As a result we often had differences of opinion.
Boarding large vessels in open anchorages was often a tricky business and we risked damage on many occasions to put rummage crews on board ships that were laying off awaiting a berth in the docks.
We did quite well with routine seizures in the anchorages of the Bristol Channel and even better in the more sheltered confines of the South Wales ports, which in those days were rather more busy than they are today.
One of the big disadvantages of crewing a cutter is that much of our revenue work has to be done after a long hard day's passage between ports when often one only feels like flopping down on one's bunk.
We did all our own cleaning and cooking, and our best — sometimes only — decent meal of the day was in the evening when we arrived in port.
A typical example of this was a patrol we carried out in Valiant that summer, which took us from Newlyn to Swansea, a passage of some ten hours.
We arrived in Swansea locks at about 1800, and were locking through in company with a small Channel Island registered coaster when a local officer passed a message down to us.
The gist of the note was that the vessel ahead of us was on the suspect list and had arrived from a foreign port.
Would we please give it a good going over?
After a hasty meal we assembled all hands, distributed torches and rummage equipment and set to with forced enthusiasm, as we knew from experience that often these hot suspect ships had been hammered unmercifully by a succession of rummage crews at every arrival, besides which we were not feeling at our best.
However, the job had to be done, and our training asserting itself, we began to pic up a few bits and pieces.
I remember doing the mate's cabin and being mildly surprised to find two cartons of cigarettes and two bottles of whisky in an obvious place under the bottom drawer of his bunk.
I was in charge of the rummage crew, and feeling that I had done my bit went to find the others.
They all seemed to be down the after ballast compartment so I called down something like, "Come on lads," I've got my seizure, what about yours?"
Back came the retort, "Hang on, boss, think we've got something big here." 
At this I quickly joined them at the bottom of a long rickety iron ladder which led into the water ballast tanks and found them hauling out several cases which had been concealed there.
Assembling our find on deck we found that it consisted of a case of 10,000 cigarettes and several cases of spirits.
We reported our finds to the local office where we were able to borrow the official car to transport the goodies to Valiant.
Our work was still not finished.
Enquiries on the ship to establish ownership of the goods went on well into the wee small hours, continuing the following day, Sunday.
Eventually ownership of the large seizure was traced to the Captain, in connivance with the Chief Steward.
A successful prosecution was concluded at the local  magistrate's court on Monday morning.
We emerged from the court room at midday with the rest of the lads and the local senior officer who had taken charge of the case.
Congratulating us, the senior officer said, "Well lads I think you deserve a drink for that." 
Our smiles of anticipation dimmed somewhat when he led us into the coffee shop, but he was a good sort and I hope we did not embarrass him.
He probably realised we were just going to sea.
An hour later we were locking out of Swansea once more.
Phil was so anxious to get to sea that I was finishing typing my report as we entered the lock, and handed it up to the local officer as the seaward lock gate opened.
We covered a lot of sea miles in the Bristol Channel that year, taking in most of the ports, including the long haul up the Avon to Bristol Docks which in those days were still open to commercial traffic.
It was obvious however that Bristol's days as a commercial port were numbered.
Towards the end of that summer we had worked our way up the Irish Sea visiting most of the west coasts ports including Fishguard, Holyhead, Liverpool, Heysham, Workington, and a host of smaller estuaries such as the Dee, Menai Straits, and the very tidal Preston river.
We also managed visits to Belfast and Douglas, Isle of Man, and had an interesting run down the east coast of Ireland with a short stay at the fishing village of Donaghadee.
Just previous to our visit to this latter small harbour a well known German smuggling vessel had been coopering off the coast and local boats had been landing cases of spirits.
In the ensuing raid by our officers, who  had been tipped off about the smuggling run, a pitched battle between our men and the smugglers had led to several amusing incidents, related to us by local officers.
It was said that one of our very junior officers, with more enthusiasm than judgement, had been setting about a smuggler with the help of a dinghy oar when the "smuggler" yelled,"Stop it you silly b…,
I'm on your side."
— it turned out to be one of the senior investigating officers.
On the same night, a follow up to a known address in the village in a hunt for a missing suspect led to vehement denials from a mother who said her son had been in bed all the evening.
So he was — with all his clothes and boots on.
By October most of the crew of Valiant had seen enough of the west coast and the weather was closing in with a distinct wintry look.
We left Swansea tentatively with the idea of getting round Land's End, but with a south westerly gale forecast it was a forlorn hope.
After a short respite in the lee of Lundy (one of Phil's minor ambitions) we fought our way in towards Clovelly against the rising sea and wind.
At one stage Eric, our Chief engineer, had to batten himself in the engine room with the deck air intakes closed as the engines were getting rimed with salt spray.
Most of the electrics went off the board with damp and the violent motion by the time we thankfully dropped anchor off Clovelly near the Bristol Class Lifeboat on station there.
At least we were in good hands while we licked our wounds.
For three days and nights we laid there and rolled, and rolled, and rolled, while to seaward we could see huge tankers disappearing in the tremendous swell.
At one stage we ran short of supplies and Phil, no doubt feeling  responsible for our predicament, volunteered to take the rubber duck into Clovelly.
With some trepidation I went with him with the trusty Seagull Outboard chugging manfully over the huge swell.
We made it without much trouble, but it was a different story on our return, when the tide had receded causing the swell to break.
One of the locals volunteered to stand on the end of the little harbour arm to con on out when there was a lull in the surf.
Positioning ourselves just inside the sheltering arm, outside which we could see an alarming amount of white water, we awaited his signal.
In response to a frantic waving of arms a few minutes later, I opened up our trusty Seagull motor and chugged round the harbour arm to brave the swell.
Just as it began to break we burst through to the other side and we were safe into smoother water.
It was then we saw that the small rescue boat from the lifeboat was standing by so they had obviously not thought much of our chances.
But the time the weather improved we had run out of bread again and I tried my hand at making some.
It was not a great success as I remember.
It took about ten minutes to chew through one slice and only two very heavy loaves lasted us back to Newlyn.
Valiant always got us home but I was never very happy about her performance in bad weather.
Her round bilge construction and narrow beam made her pitch and roll excessively, I always thought she had a bad feel about her.
I believe Vigilant was a better seaboat, but I never served any time on her in adverse conditions to find out.
They were both very wet in a head sea.
This tour of duty also included my first spell in command when Phil took his three weeks' leave.
It  turned out to be a real disaster when, in the first few days, we had an engine room fire which kept us alongside at Torquay for practically the whole three weeks.
At the time we were alongside Vigilant when our port engine mysteriously started while we were all having lunch.
Thinking it was some practical joke by Vigilant, our engineers went to accuse Vigilant's crew, but noticed smoke pouring our of our engine room.
A dripping waterpipe had shortened out the starting motor which had been activated and started the main engine.
In the process the wiring had become overloaded and was almost red hot by the time the trouble was diagnosed.
A major fire was only averted by the quick action of Vigilant's Chief Engineer, Alan Gregory.
Realising what had happened, he dashed into the smoke-filled engine room with a wet cloth over his head and disconnected the main power cables from the batteries.
By this time the wiring was a complete write-off and had to be replaced during lengthy repairs.
We laid up Valiant in the Hamble river in November.
The office at Felixstowe seemed a very dull and prosaic place after those hectic nine months.
In those days all the cutters were laid up on the trot piles in the river Hamble during the winter months.
With the Technical Branch based at Southampton it was very convenient for them to carry out maintenance and to turn the engines over occasionally during the cold weather.
Our other main base was at Gravesend on the Thames, but until the new pier and floating pontoon was built in 1980 it was not a convenient place for laying up the cutters.
IN COMMAND
Venturous
1970 saw the start of a long and happy period for me in command of Venturous.
By this time the cutters were being kept in commission throughout the year, the practice of laying them in winter had been abandoned so that more crews were needed to maintain continuity.
I shared command of the big "V" with two other skippers, Doug Thompson and Denis Mawe, as H.Q. frowned on any policy that kept an officer away from his home port and normal customs duties for too long a period.
This would have led to specialisation, staleness, and a situation where an officer would lose touch in a world of changing regulations.
Normally our tours were confined to three months but occasionally, according to the availability of experienced officers, this might be extended to longer periods.
Those were the days of the Board's Cruises when, traditionally, a few members of the Board of Customs would carry out a seaborne inspection of a chosen area in the United Kingdom.
Venturous was ideal for the purpose with her comfortable cabins and large deck saloon.
We all looked forward to these occasions as it was  a chance to meet and converse with V.I.P.'s on our own ground in the relaxed atmosphere of a cruising holiday.
I was in command for two such cruises.
One of these took Venturous to the Bristol Channel and the South Wales' ports, and a later one was made to the north of Scotland with the Board joining us at Aberdeen.
From there we cruised northward to Inverness and the Caledonian Canal, a convenient area for them to make day trips to the various distilleries, strictly on business, needless to say!
On the Scottish cruise I distinguished myself by bending our port  propeller on a rock in the Caledonian Canal whilst negotiating a shallow bend, and although we could still use the bent prop I was very conscious of the faux pas with our Chairman on board.
The Chairman at that time was Sir Louis Petch, now sadly deceased.
Sir Louis was a great advocate for the cutters and in addition to the official cruises he often spent the odd informal day out with us, sometimes bringing his wife, family and little dog.
For this Scottish cruise the Board stayed with us as far as Tobermory on the Isle of Mull.
As we steamed down the Sound of Mull one fine afternoon, my No. 1, Dave Scadding, who was a keen fisherman, noticed a flock of gulls screaming on the water ahead.
 "Mackerel, Ron!" he whispered to me on the bridge.
 "What about getting the lines out?" 
Rather dubiously I put it to the Chairman and I was relieved to find that he was quite enthusiastic about the idea.
Soon we were all jigging with mackerel feathers, V.I.P.'s included, and before long had several pails of twitching mackerel on deck.
These went down well as  the fish course for our evening meal at Tobermory and formed a good foundation for the liquid refreshment at the Mishnish Hotel which followed later that evening.
I often wonder what the Hon. members of the Board thought about that trip, but they seemed to enjoy themselves and there were no repercussions.
Our distinguished guests left us at Oban where we returned the following day.
Sadly, when Sir Louis retired, the Board's cruises came to an end.
After this we were due to return south, via the west coast, but before leaving it was necessary to replace our bent  propeller .
The only available slipway that could take Venturous was at Stornoway and we made arrangements to call there for repairs.
First we had to find a new  propeller and this was delivered by Sam, an engineer from Technical Branch, who made a record marathon run in his tiny van from Southampton to join us at Oban.
We had a fast and uneventful run to Stornoway where the new  propeller was fitted but, to my horror, in the haste to re-launch us the same prop.
fouled the slipway cradle as we floated off and was bent as before.
All our efforts had been to no avail.
At dinner that night we were discussing the whole affair and I said: "Oh well, you can't make an omelette without breaking some eggs," which led to the classic retort from Ed Prior, my engineer: "Yes, but you didn't have to break the whisk!" 
I walked right into that one, I suppose.
That was the first of many returns to Stornoway with the Cutters.
Although this particular occasion was rather marred by our mishap it was great to meet old friends again.
To cap it all, we then made a forced passage back to Oban in a force eight south west gale as Sam wanted to  get back to Southampton in time for a wedding.
We had a very bad trip, needless to say, and we saw very little of Sam until he emerged from his cabin at Oban looking very much the worse for wear.
He has never forgotten that  disastrous voyage.
In the early seventies an interesting development on our operational side was the emergence of illegal immigrant running by sea.
Several successful interceptions were made by Venturous, Valiant and Vigilant, most of them in the Thames Estuary and Ramsgate area.
Although I took part in countless operations of this type from the Isle of Wight to Lowestoft, I never actually made any captures.
Our crews felt no great satisfaction when Pakistani nationals were intercepted on these operations, rather they were subjects for sympathy.
Our stronger feelings were reserved for the unscrupulous organisers of this sordid trade in human cargoes who were profiting from the Asians' misery.
Illegal Immigrants
One incident in which I was involved followed a report from the pilot of an incoming merchant ship entering the river Thames.
He had seen a row of black faces staring at him from the platform of one of the Red Sand Towers in the Nore approaches.
Could we investigate?
I took Venturous out from Gravesend early next morning and managed to land a party on the Towers with my No.1, Mike Carsley, in charge.
Our landing party found much evidence of recent occupation such as up-to-date papers and fresh food stocks, but no bodies, and wandered around in a kind of Marie Celeste situation for  a while before finding a locked door.
Strongly suspecting that someone was hiding.
Mike took the initiative, kicked down the door and went in with guns blazing, so to speak, to find — nothing!
We discovered later that a crowd of drop-outs had been living rough on the Towers, using local fishing boats to ferry them to and fro.
No doubt a lack of soap and water had accounted for the black faces, and not the pigment of their skin.
This incident was some time after the Red Sand Towers had been used as a pirate radio station (Radio 390).
The activities of illegal immigrant vessels were as manna from heaven to the media who naturally gave them much publicity.
Often spurious information was relayed to our controls.
Vague information was worse than none at all as far as we were concerned, as we were obliged to do something about it, however hopeless it might seem.
A few weeks after that incident we received a so-called hot tipoff that an illegal immigrant run was to be made the following night "somewhere between the Thames and Lowestoft!" 
Airily we were told by our controlling officer at Gravesend to investigate on a night patrol, and anyone who knows the maze of creeks and rivers on this part of the coast will realise that the odds were much greater than finding a needle in a haystack.
However, we had to go, so we steamed off once more from Gravesend into the murk of a drizzly winter's night without much hope of success.
We actually found a small vessel without lights off Southwold on our radar but to our disgust, when challenged, the target proved to be a genuine fishing boat saving his night vision.
We arrived back in Gravesend the next morning having consumed a  lot of diesel and patience.
Ninety nine per cent of our work was of this nature but the other one per cent of excitement seemed to compensate for the disappointments.
There is no doubt that large numbers of illegal immigrants infiltrated the UK by sea in small craft which managed to evade our controls.
They also arrived by many other ways.
Some came in large commercial vehicles and private vehicles with specially constructed concealments and were driven through our controls at various ports.
The build up of roll-on, roll-off traffic at that period, with a new system which allowed loaded vehicles to be cleared at inland depots also facilitated illegal traffic.
My own port of Felixstowe was an example of this, and several attempts at illegal entry by Asians were intercepted, some by routine searches, others by use of dogs, and in one case by accident when emergency toilet arrangements by the concealed men revealed their presence in no uncertain manner!
With this type of traffic came the added danger of drugs and/or other contraband brought in to finance themselves, although this combination of smuggling was not common, probably because all their cash had been paid to the organisers of the run.
The cutters of that period had plenty of alerts for illegal immigrant runs and most of the crews, apart from myself, had their share of successful interceptions.
A typical example of such a run originated with police information that a motor yacht named Glisseuse was picking up Asians from Nieuport in Belgium and running them into the Thames Estuary.
At that time Venturous was undergoing engine repairs and some of  the crew were on rest days when the call came.
With repairs completed in the nick of time she sailed for the operation with a depleted crew.
Vigilant was also called upon to stand by in the Thames approaches to assist as necessary.
At the appointed time Venturous' was in position near Nieuport just outside the three mile territorial limit and in due course picked up a small craft leaving the Belgian port.
She proved to be the Glisseuse, a rather shabby forty foot motor cruiser, difficult to see on Venturous' radar, so that much of the time she had to be kept at visual distance, especially as she approached the busy traffic lanes of the Thames.
It was soon obvious that Glisseuse was making her way up Thames by way of the shallow inshore Four Fathom Channel which leads inside the Margate Sands to follow the North Kent coast.
The shore units were alerted, Vigilant was informed and the trap was set.
Off Whitstable, Glisseuse changed course and made for the Swale channel which leads between the Isle of Sheppey and the main Kent coast, a popular short cut into the Medway for small craft when the tide is right.
While Venturous bottled up the seaward end of the Swale, Vigilant waited in the Medway near Sheerness for signs of the quarry.
As Glisseuse emerged from the Swale channel at the Queenborough end, she was picked up by Vigilant and followed to the upper reaches of the Medway while Venturous made all speed round the outside of Sheppey to catch up on the operation which was now well under control.
The destination of the immigrant runner proved to be the Marina above Strood Bridges, where the cutters and shore units converged to arrest fifteen Asians and the crew of Glisseuse.
The  smuggling vessel was later towed to Gravesend by Venturous where she was officially seized.
One unusual craft used for this type of smuggling was a very fast power boat race competitor approximately named Who Dares.
Valiant had a near miss at intercepting her one day as she homed into the Thames after a channel crossing but lost her on a chase up the Medway in which they stood no chance with the power boat's superior speed.
When Valiant finally caught up with her in a Medway marina she was found to be clean.
A few months later Who Dares arrived at a channel port on a trailer, completing her journey by road after taking part in a power boat race abroad.
This time the mechanic in charge, a well known character with a police record, had pushed his luck too far, and several illegal immigrants were found hiding in the covered power boat by our shore controls.
We knew that there were several organisations with international connections specialising in the profitable game of illegal immigrant smuggling.
One fishing vessel that we had been watching for a long period had more than one narrow escape from detection by British controls, but was finally turned back by Dutch customs patrols shortly after leaving a Continental port with a cargo of immigrants on board bound for the UK.
I had rummaged this same vessel with my crew after she had arrived at Lowestoft at midnight some weeks previously, with a suspiciously empty fish hold and a dripping wet rubber dinghy on deck.
As always, we needed good information, and sometimes this came our way by sheer chance.
Phil Andrews was involved in a very successful interception  of illegal immigrants which started with a chance conversation overheard at Victoria Station and ended up uncovering a well organised international smuggling network.
Following up on this information our investigating officers found that a Pakistani who was running a shop and a travel agency in the UK arranged illegal immigration for his countrymen.
He had even established a system for sending money home to their families once they had set up house in this country.
The whole system was financed by smuggling gold purchased by his clients' money, and the organiser made fat profits.
But one day his luck ran out.
An ex RAF pinnace, Spring Flight, was being watched at Ramsgate.
Soon after she left harbour bound for the Belgian coast with the owner and one crew member on board, Valiant, with Phil Andrews in command, was despatched to cover her movements.
Phil now takes up the story.
"We stood off the Belgian coast near Nieuport that evening and received information that Spring Flight had embarked a party of Pakistanis and was leaving harbour.
It was a clear night, but the radar was a mass of echoes and I asked the Belgian contact to give me an estimated course and speed of our quarry, and as a result of this we were able to pick it up.
We proceeded without lights and I did the whole thing by radar with my eyes standing out like organ stops.
All went well until we were approaching Ramsgate and about to cross ahead of two coasters that were coming up from the south.
In view of our darkened ship I told No.1 to slow down and take any avoiding action while I remained at the radar, not  wishing to lose our target.
"There was some confusion at this stage because the target began to behave in an odd way, we knew she was supposed to go up the River Stour to off load, but finally I made the decision to go alongside her at sea.
Later we discovered she had hit some obstruction and lost an engine — hence her strange behaviour.
After arresting the launch we took off six illegal immigrants and proceeded to Ramsgate together with Spring Flight.
Our shore controls continued to watch the original landing place.
In the early hours of the morning they arrested the pick-up vehicles with their drivers.
"The subsequent court case was heard at Lewes when the boat's owner pleaded guilty, but his accomplice pleaded ignorance and managed to get away without a prison sentence, his excuse being that once he realised what was happening he felt obliged to remain on board as it would have been dangerous to leave the owner alone to handle the boat with a load of passengers.
For some reason, the Pakistani who set the whole thing up almost got away with it, but fortunately there was a retrial at which he was found guilty.
Vital evidence was found by Eric Langmaid, Valiant's engineer, on searching Spring Flight next morning when a diary was uncovered.
This contained some very relevant names and addresses which the Pakistani owner had obviously tried to dispose of during the night, but in the confusion and darkness he had failed to realise it had not gone overboard."
This operation is another example of how things do not always go according to plan, but with a little luck and a lot of hard work a successful conclusion can be reached.
THE MIDDLE YEARS
In 1971 I was in command of Venturous when she was sent to the North West Coast of Scotland, a winter patrol specifically designed to keep a check on the foreign fishing fleets engaged in "Klondyking" .
Briefly, this trade consisted of large factory ships or latterly, freezer trawlers, lying in the more sheltered anchorages around the coasts of the UK where they would load fresh herring and mackerel from British fishing vessels directly arrived from their fishing grounds.
These anchorages were usually remote and difficult to control, particularly those of the Outer Hebrides and the north west mainland coast.
This trade was hardly predictable, relying as it did on the uncertain movements of the pelagic fish shoals, but it always attracted large fleets of foreign vessels, mainly those of the Eastern Block states.
The temptation to their crews to barter their duty free stores for sterling constituted a high revenue risk at times.
Although this particular patrol was not successful in terms of concrete results, it was quite significant in that it was the start of an increasing interest in Scottish Waters by Cutter Management, up until then most of the Cutter patrols had been concentrated in the south.
A stormy passage up the west coast in Autumn gales gave us a taste of what was to come, and those among the crew of that time will remember it as the Force Ten winter.
There  were very few days of that three months patrol when the met.
office did not warn us of gales, most of them severe, and a large number of storm force tens.
I even composed a ballad on the subject which was subsequently printed in our Cutter Magazine.
I well remember I promised the crew some spectacular coastal scenery on first arrival after an overnight passage up the east coast of Ireland, dashing across the North Channel during a lull in the gales with a tremendous swell rolling us on our beam ends until we reached the lee of Islay.
As we entered the Sound of Islay the gale renewed its fury, whipping the strong tides of the Sound into white water and the picturesque shoreline disappeared into low cloud scud and rain, only appearing intermittently as shadow all the way to Oban.
So much for the scenery, but it was good to be back.
In spite of the stormy weather we managed to carry out fairly regular patrols between Oban and Stornoway, covering the principal fishing ports of the mainland coast and also those of the Outer Hebrides.
High land and island studded seas provided enough cover to make our patrols possible even during gales, but we had some pretty miserable days weatherbound in some very isolated, though wildly beautiful places.
Not all the crew was impressed with the wild beauty however, although Dave Scadding, my number one really fell in love with Scotland, so much so that he applied for a transfer to Kirkwall on our return to Southampton.
In fact, before the end of our patrol he heard that his application had been successful.
We found plenty of interest in the area but not many Klondykers and somewhat thankfully broke the ice through the Caledonian Canal to return via the East  Coast to Southampton for Christmas.
To dwell on the Caledonian Canal for a moment, this was my first of many passages through which is for me the most beautiful of all the canals — the ultimate in inland waterways, so I had been looking forward to it immensely.
After locking into the Corpach sea basin the previous day we nosed into the narrow canal leading to Neptune's staircase towards a spectacular sunrise somewhere over the summit of Ben Nevis, a crackling of thin ice at our bows and a thick rim of white frost on the teak gunwhales.
So far, so good.
Unfortunately after negotiating the long stretch of locks and leaving this unique western end of the Canal, a thick low fog descended and blotted out our fantastic surroundings leaving me to navigate by radar the tortuous bends of the channel and through the shallows of Loch Oich.
Never before or since that day have I encountered fog here, which is extremely rare, although poor visibility caused through low cloud and rain is common (the well known Scotch Mist).
However, we ran out of the fog somewhere near Fort Augustus and all was well for the rest of that trip.
Fine weather stayed with us for the remainder of our passage down the East coast.
Calling in at Lowestoft I found to my surprise that I was on the promotion list and viewed the prospect with mixed feelings as at the time this meant that I would no longer be eligible to crew on the cutters.
About ten years later this policy was changed, enabling senior officers to take command.
However, in the meantime it was a daunting thought that if I took promotion I would have to give up the job in which I was most happy.
There is no doubt that this was the main reason why I delayed  accepting a promotion post until it was too late and I ran out of time.
I never really regretted opting out, and I know that I could never have settled down to a steady shore job while the cutters were still available.
I stayed with Venturous throughout the seventies with the occasional trip on Valiant and a very short period on Vigilant.
Routine patrols were producing regular revenue seizures, mostly of tobacco goods and spirits as a result of interceptions of yachts, fishing vessels and rummages of merchant ships within the various ports visited.
I suppose it was around this period that our Investigation Department began to involve the cutters in some of their more interesting operations.
Previous to this we had been left very much to our own resources.
Although we often mounted exercises with our local port investigation units with varying degrees of success, our access to reliable information was limited.
Our London-based Investigation Department, with its provincial branches, had both national and international contacts and was mainly concerned with large scale fraud and smuggling.
The cutters often worked in a vacuum, so to speak, relying on spot checks and routine searches during their patrols.
What we needed desperately was more good information to put our resources to the best use.
Where our Investigation Department operations involved shipping and small craft we were the specialists to whom they could turn for practical assistance.
All this may seem obvious, but in fact it had not worked out like that in the earlier days of the cutters as I recall.
It seemed to me that no one really took us seriously, or perhaps both the Cutter Service and the Investigation Division  were still getting their acts together.
The seventies were certainly a period of great change in attitudes within the Customs & Excise in general, and on the cutters in particular we saw great improvements in many ways with the acquisition of better technical equipment such as highly sophisticated radio communication, and the development of international relations.
Large scale drug smuggling was on the increase, and a more professional approach to combat this was being used by the law-enforcement teams.
Most of the changes came about because of our entry into the EEC.
The Customs and Excise, with all its ancillary departments, were forced to re-structure their systems to bring them into line with European countries and this reorganisation took place over the next few years.
A lot of our well established traditional methods of control were abolished, the emphasis being away from routine checks at the ports towards specialised task force operations directed from central intelligence information centres.
Our information sources were being developed and made more rapidly available by access to a central computer in line with police methods.
The ultimate aim was to create a Central Intelligence Unit to correlate all information received from Customs and Police sources in both the UK and at international level.
This goal was achieved in later years and was to prove invaluable.
It was soon realised that the Cutters fitted into the new approach to Customs work very well.
They had always been a task force in their own right and had a head start in this respect with their trained crews specialising in interceptions at sea and rummage duties, traditional skills which could now be deployed more swiftly and  utilised more  efficiently by use of new radio equipment and position finding navigational aids such as radar and Decca Navigators.
But however professional we may have considered ourselves as seamen, our administration never allowed us to forget that first and foremost we were customs officers.
The boats and their equipment were merely instruments with which to carry out our prime duties of protecting the revenue.
This was drummed into us at all times by management.
Sometimes this could be rather deflating to our egos as we enjoyed handling our ships, keeping them smart and clean and maintaining all the equipment and machinery in good operational order in readiness for any job we were asked to do.
However, like it or not, this policy, together with our alternating crewing system was a very wise move on the part of management.
I realised, perhaps more than most, that it would have been so easy to become absorbed and involved with the boat to the extent of the customs work taking second place.
There is always so much to do around the boat in the way of maintenance, cleaning, taking stores, fuelling or just shopping for domestic needs that strict self discipline must be imposed to keep revenue work in the forefront.
The obvious answer to all this may seem to be a separate crew to work and clean the ship and a team of specialists for the revenue work.
This had already been tried and found to be unsatisfactory with the old Vigilant.
The chemistry simply did not work in the same way.
The seamen were concerned only with their ship, the revenue men did not fully understand the sea and the conflict of interests resulted in too much wasted time.
However unorthodox our dual role on the cutters might seem to professionals it works out in practice and has stood the test of time.
The cutters were beginning to feature in an increasing number of combined operations with the Customs Investigation Department.
Some of these were connected with exchange control offences, and a few concerned illegal immigrants in which the police also features; there were also the usual run of the mill revenue offences involving large consignments of spirits and tobacco goods, but towards the end of 1970 drug smuggling was rapidly increasing.
This meant that often we were called on to provide more than one cutter the larger operations when sometimes the whole cutter fleet would be involved in shadowing or static surveillance.
While in command of Venturous I missed out on a lot of the big drug operations through being in the north of Scotland, but I always enjoyed working as part of a team with the other cutters or any of the shore units.
On one of our south coast patrols I managed to be in at the kill on what turned out to be one of our more amusing combined operations.
This one concerned a motor yacht making a run with spirits from the Channel Isles.
The groundwork had been carried out by the Southampton Special Unit and Vigilant and Venturous had been deployed to cover the approaches to the Solent and Poole Harbour.
After several unsuccessful interceptions of yachts during the night hours both cutters adjourned to anchor in Studland Bay, hoping that  the Poole based yacht would return home and be spotted on her way into harbour.
The Chief Engineer, was on the dawn watch and shook me with a cup of tea at daybreak saying, "Hey Ron, I think that boat we wanted has just passed on her way into Poole." 
I passed the information to the shore patrol.
 "Good, I said," Get everyone cracking, did you give the shore gang our position?"
 "Yes." 
he said, "I told them we were anchored off the Needles!" 
Well, I suppose the Old Harry Rocks do bear a slight resemblance to the Needles, but I forgave him when I went up on deck and saw that Vigilant's motor boat was following the yacht into Poole and had confirmed our proper position with Southampton.
The crew of the yacht must have realised that the game was up by this time.
Hastily mooring up in the Wareham Channel they rowed ashore to disappear rapidly westward in a fast car, followed discreetly by some of our Southampton colleagues.
Our orders were to keep a low profile while keeping watch on the yacht which we did for about twenty four hours.
Eventually the yacht's crew was arrested near Bristol and we unloaded the yacht in their absence, taking off twenty four cases of whisky during a hilarious evening operation involving our respective motor boats to ferry the goods back to Poole Quay.
Shortly after this Marty Stone, our second engineer, and I re-enacted the whole thing for the benefit of two Daily Mirror journalists who were supposed to be writing an article about the work of the Cutter Service, but nothing ever came of this.
Very rarely, a vessel challenged at sea by a cutter would refuse to stop.
On one such incident I was in command of Venturous patrolling in the Straits of Dover at the end of a very busy Bank Holiday, during which we had followed  a suspect yacht from just outside Calais, and handed her over to our special unit in Dover.
We were looking forward to a meal and a quiet evening in Dover when a radio message via Dover Coastguards informed us that another suspect vessel had been spotted heading west through the Straits after sailing from Belgium where she had given the local customs a false destination in Sweden for a large consignment of spirits loaded.
We were given a reliable position for this vessel and soon picked her up on our radar when we were able to close and positively identify her.
By then she was off Folkestone, well within the three mile limit and in fact also inside the official designated limits of that port, so that there was no question of our right to challenge.
The suspect was a converted Swedish fishing vessel, owned and skippered by a German Merchant Service Master, whose former ships had figured on our suspect lists.
The only other crew member was a woman.
We were soon alongside the small vessel as she pitched uncomfortably in the short Channel seas at about six knots, and we requested her in our usual polite manner to divert into Folkestone for a customs examination.
Our first request was completely ignored but after repeated less polite challenges and several near collisions, coupled with a threat to call in the British Navy, the skipper became more amenable and followed us reluctantly into Folkestone.
A subsequent search and investigation of her papers, such as they were, revealed a very large cargo of brandy in the hold, damning correspondence with the ships' agent in Belgium, and some unconvincing reasons for her change of destination from Sweden to Spain.
Eventually we were forced to release her on a technicality.
Subsequently this craft turned up on the south west coast of Southern Ireland and was proved to be a regular smuggler in those waters.
The whole incident was a very sore point with my crew, who had worked very hard for long hours on this one, and it was a classic illustration of how our laws often seem to lean over backwards to protect the lawbreakers.
I had even been accused, in a jocular way, by one of my senior officers, of operating a blockade of the Channel.
I was not amused by such remarks in the circumstances.
Although such incidents rankled, the cutter crews' sense of humour soon surfaced to erase the bad memories.
Shortly after leaving Folkestone we were preparing to enter Ramsgate harbour on a cold, blustery day which prompted me to go below for my duffel coat as I normally conned Venturous alongside from the open bridge.
Donning the coat I felt something attached to the shoulder and in my cabin mirror was reflected a very gaudy and lifelike plastic parrot which some crew member had stitched there.
Feeling in one of the pockets I found a black eye patch for added colour and realised that my crew were endorsing the senior officer's joke about piracy in the Channel.
 "Right" , I thought, "if that's how you want it!" 
To the crews' embarrassment I stumped up on the bridge wearing the eye patch and the parrot on my shoulder with the added embellishment of an iron hook up the loose sleeve of my coat, to take Venturous alongside in full view of a crowd of holidaymakers lining the pier who, although somewhat mystified, obviously enjoyed the show.
The joke turned against me a few days later as we were preparing to go alongside a ship at Baltic Wharf on the river Crouch.
The ship was an ex-pilot cutter in use as a Royal Naval Auxiliary, manned by civilians on minewatching exercises.
A man and a woman watched as we came alongside with myself leaning over the side of the open bridge of Venturous.
Just as I realised that we would have to abort our manoeuvre in view of the ship's overhanging davits there was a loud exclamation from the man on deck, "I say, Cynthia, the captain's got a blasted parrot on his shoulder." 
Too late I realised I had forgotten to remove the plastic bird.
In some confusion and embarrassment I removed Venturous from the vicinity as quickly as possible.
Unfortunately I had not realised that a stern rope had already been passed to the ship and an indignant shout from my crew on the after deck drew my attention to the long nylon rope which was now snaking dangerously round the bollards as we drew away.
The whole show was assuming the aspect of "The Navy Lark" .
We got away with it somehow, but it took a long time to live that one down.
This was the start of the parrot legend which stuck to me for the rest of my career.
That old plastic bird appeared on all my ships from then on and became a kind of ship's mascot, travelling all over the UK with us.
The training courses on Venturous usually produced a good crop of "funnies" !
Such incidents were not always so funny at the time, though, in retrospect we always had a good laugh.
Spontaneous humour from innocent remarks often kept things in perspective.
I was taking Venturous alongside the jetty arm at Lowestoft on day to await the road bridge opening when  Marty Stone, our second engineer, poised on the gunwale for a jump ashore to take the ropes, slipped on the wet rail and to my horror disappeared over the bow.
As he hit the water, his legs flailed in the mid-air running motion like a character in a Tom and Jerry cartoon and he quickly struck out for a convenient ladder as I hastily brought Venturous to a standstill some feet off the pier.
At that moment one of our more naive trainees appeared on deck, saw Marty swimming for the ladder and remarked in amazement, "What's Marty doing in the water then?" 
Quick as a flash one of our older officers answered"the breast stroke, I think.
Captain's sent him ashore to take the headrope."
By this time Marty was scrambling up the ladder, and in our relief we were convulsed with laughter.
We were brought back to reality by Marty, who stood dripping on the pier head in a bitter east wind shouting, "Come on, when you lot have finished, what about giving me the headrope?" 
A practical outcome from this incident was a new pair of deck shoes for Marty who had been campaigning for a replacement from Stores Branch for some time.
My accident report ensured success.
We tried to profit by our mistakes but were not always allowed to forget them by fellow crewmates.
One engineer made the fatal mistake of putting Bluecol anti-freeze in the header tank of the toilets instead of the main engine fresh water header tank.
As the former had a habit of overflowing at times when carelessly topped up it was not long before the bridge deck, lower deck and surrounding fittings were stained a delicate shade of blue.
Going to his cabin one night the guilty engineer found  his bulkheads papered with blue toilet paper and Bluecol stickers everywhere.
I was by no means immune from this brand of humour.
Following inadvertent groundings on the mud, which happened occasionally, especially in my early days of command, I would pick up my cap to find an insert in the badge reading "Bayly Dredging Co." 
I also had a reputation for antics in the rubber dinghy.
At Falmouth one sunny day with Valiant, I received a frantic call from our catering officer who had gone ashore with the motor boat on a falling tide.
In spite of my warnings about leaving the boat where it would stay afloat, the inevitable had happened and he was stranded.
Could I send help?
Everyone else was busy, so I launched the small rubber dinghy and started rowing.
I soon discovered that one of the two compartments of the dinghy had sprung a leak and it was a race against time to reach shore before it deflated completely.
I lost the race and finished up trying to row half a dinghy with the crew cheering in the distance.
On another occasion I had set out alone across Peterhead Outer Harbour with our 17ft Searider to fetch the rummage crew off a ship when careless stowage of the bow rope resulted in the trailing end catching the propeller.
The result of such a mishap is often spectacular with the eighty h.p. engine trying to wind the rubber bow back to the stern, but on this occasion the engine quickly stalled and I was left drifting helplessly in a strong wind with rope from the outboard propeller stretching from stern to bow in an  inaccessible position.
After some thought, I was able to cut the rope near the stern with my pocket knife lashed to a paddle.
It then took some time to  raise the heavy engine and cut the rope from the  propeller , but I finally managed it before drifting ashore.
Needless to say I was not allowed to forget this incident and cartoons appeared all over the ship.
This sort of incident, and all the "in-jokes" we shared, perhaps not so funny to those outside the job, although trivial in themselves helped to keep up morale, and I think were a necessary part of the team spirit.
But, of course, there was a more serious side of the job.
Sometimes, in fact very often, combined operations with our Investigation Department were inconclusive as far as material results were concerned, but a picture would be built up, or a missing piece in a jig-saw puzzle would be provided.
the crews of the cutters did not always see the completed puzzle, and for obvious reasons were only given sufficient information on a need-to-know basis.
An example of this was a long shadowing operation carried out jointly by Venturous and Valiant which started in the Thames and finished in Southern Ireland.
The vessel in question was the old favourite, a converted fishing vessel, destination unknown on leaving the Thames, in which our Investigation Officers were very interested.
Valiant started off the surveillance as she left the Thames while we on Venturous came into the picture down Channel in the Isle of Wight area.
We lost her twice through faulty intelligence as she moved westward, but she was finally tracked down by our shore controls at Falmouth where she was apparently undergoing a mini refit.
It was at this point that Venturous took over the job completely and we holed up discreetly just round the corner in Helford River to await news of the suspect's  departure, to be signalled to us by our Investigation colleagues ashore.
I well remember a cold, dark night while we were anchored just inside the entrance to Helford.
A very cloak and dagger episode followed when I had to meet a colleague on shore after landing on a remote beach by motor boat.
The purpose of the landing was to collect an identifying photograph of the boat we were shadowing.
The whole operation was developing like a Grahame Greene novel as I walked up a dark country lane to the waiting car.
Later that night, after I had returned to Venturous, we received the signal from Falmouth that our suspect had sailed.
The bad news was that for some reason our shore watchers had missed her actual departure and could only guess that she had been gone about an hour.
We hastily put to sea in deteriorating weather conditions, the freshening easterly wind pushing up a lumpy swell for which this area is notorious.
Our trusty shore controls informed us, somewhat naively in view of the fact that the black night outside was dotted with the myriad lights of fishing vessels, that they thought she was just passing the Manacles.
In spite of our scepticism, to our relief the first boat in that area to be investigated proved to match the photograph and we slunk off into the night, doused our lights, and prepared to follow her at a safe distance.
It was not a comfortable night as we rolled slowly westward.
Apart from the difficult steering in a heavy following sea our suspect could maintain only a speed of about five knots.
This was well below our own dead slow speed so that we had to keep stopping, or steam in wide circles to hold our position astern.
In these circumstances which often arose  on such operations, our Chief Engineer was wont to complain bitterly that his injectors or blowers, or what have you, would soon be fouled up.
By dawn, after a long, tedious night we were leaving Land's End well astern, still heading west, and we had to drop even further astern of our quarry to avoid suspicion.
Later in the morning we were able to confirm that she was heading for a port in Southern Ireland.
After passing the information to our shore controls we were told to call off the operation and return to Southampton.
NORTH SEA OIL
A week after the operation that took us to Southern Ireland, I was told to take Venturous up the east coast to Hull and from there, after a crew change, we were to carry out extended patrols northwards which would eventually involve us in a complete circumnavigation of the British Isles.
By 1974 the North Sea oil boom was gaining momentum rapidly.
Our brief was to visit all the oil-related ports and anchorages to assess the impact that the extra traffic was having on the Customs work of these areas.
At the end of the patrol I was to submit a comprehensive report of our findings.
In addition to our reconnaissance, this was also to be very much a working patrol.
It seemed quite a tall order at the time but in practice it worked out well and proved to be a most enjoyable experience as well as one of our more memorable tours of duty.
There were, of course, adequate Customs shore controls at ports visited, but we were mainly concerned with the more remote areas and anchorages which tended to be used more and more by the various types of oil exploration craft and drilling rigs when sheltering inside our territorial waters.
Venturous slipped out of Hull sea locks quietly on 2nd April 1974, destination all points north including oil supply bases in the Orkney and the Humber was blanketed in a dense yellow fog as we picked our way  carefully seaward through treacherous tides and sandbanks of the estuary, thankful for our trusty radar.
The fog stayed with us throughout the night as we made painfully slow progress towards Hartlepool with bedtime stories on the radio of ships colliding and running aground to cheer us on our way.
After Hartlepool we crossed the border, calling at Leith, Dundee, Montrose, Aberdeen, Peterhead and Invergordon.
At all these ports we found a mounting oil-related traffic boom and at several like Dundee, Montrose and Invergordon, parts of the harbours were being extended to accommodate supply vessels and rig construction work.
Of course, much survey and exploratory work on the North Sea Oil fields had been carried out in the years previous to our patrols.
Gas and oil pipelines were already being laid and the first oil and gas field at Eckofisk was more or less ready to come on stream at that time.
The further north we reached the more weird and wonderful floating contraptions we encountered, merchant ships converted to drilling barges, special pipe-laying barges which were mini-townships within themselves with populations of up to 200 crewmen.
Then there were the accommodation ships and specially built modules, and the familiar four-legged semi-submersible rigs surrounded by flocks of supply vessels and tugs, and everywhere a sense of urgency.
Since our last visit to Aberdeen, which had been before the oil boom, the port had been transformed.
Previously Venturous had been a noteworthy arrival to be written up in the local press.
Port authorities were then most helpful and the local folk very sociable.
Now we were  hard put to find a grubby corner of the upper dock in which to berth Venturous.
Unless you were oil-related it was quite difficult to get equipment serviced and to obtain certain stores.
Scores of supply vessels, tugs and survey ships filled every nook and cranny and even spilled over into the fish docks.
Many of the local trawlers were being converted to rig safety vessels.
Sadly, morals and behaviour ashore had deteriorated too with more drunks and ladies of easy virtue in evidence.
Two of the latter were fighting for possession of a rather inebriated seaman on the quayside by Venturous one afternoon, an unusual entertainment but one we could have well done without.
Needless to say we did not stay in Aberdeen longer than necessary.
As we reached the more remote areas of the north where the increase of oil-related activity was in inverse proportion to our shore controls, our rummage crews found plenty of work and seizures of dutiable goods began to mount.
Our last port of call on the mainland was Wick after which we crossed the Pentland Firth into Scapa Flow and the Orkney ports.
We found the two principal ports, Stromness and Kirkwall fairly quiet still, although things in Scapa Flow were hotting up, with the site of the new oil terminal on the little island of Flotta a churned up mass of mud and peat mountains, raped by the monstrous earth moving machines and disfigured by half-completed structures of rusty steel plates and girders.
On one of our visits we found a representative of the Occidental Oil Company stranded there, looking most miserable and bedraggled in the morass of mud and pouring rain.
He gladly accepted a lift back to Stromness on Venturous and repaid me by filling in some details  for my report on the development of the terminal and the Piper Oil Field which would be supplying it.
A monobuoy mooring terminal was to be established in the middle of Scapa Flow where the large tankers would load crude oil from storage tanks on Flotta.
Over the next few years we were to see the terminal in all its stages of construction on our various visits to Scapa Flow and we were to become very familiar with Flotta not only in the earlier days, but later when the terminal was operational and our crews began their real work of checking the large tankers.
However, all this was in the future and hard to visualise on our first visit.
Even with the bustle of oil activity, Scapa was a lonely place with an aura of sadness, forever haunted by its sad history of scuttled and torpedoed ships; each time I passed the Royal Oak buoy on our way into Scapa Pier I was reminded of this history.
The buoy is somehow a fitting monument to the crew members who lost their lives here.
It was a rare warm sunny evening for our first arrival at Kirkwall and a homecoming for our No. 1 Dave Scadding as we steamed into Kirkwall Bay with the little township colourful in the low evening sun.
I think we all felt a little like Dave as we saw his wife and two sons on the quay and met many of his friends.
The atmosphere and hospitality of the Orkneys made a great impression on all our crews.
Dave's house was a surprise; a very comfortable modern bungalow with all mod cons, a few miles outside Kirkwall, with all the fishing and shooting he could wish for right on his doorstep.
He had a fishing boat of his own and after a year or so on the island had adapted to  the life as a native.
In addition to acting as local pilot to some of the remoter islands during our stay, there were trips by car to all the more interesting spots on shore such as the old village of Skara Brae, the Churchill Barrier and the Italian Chapel.
Then of course there were the social occasions and Dave threw a truly memorable ceilidh at his house before we left, which went on well into the wee small hours.
Chris Wolley and Dave Carter were wizards of the guitar and song, while the Captain made a modest contribution with his harmonica.
I still have the tape on which I recorded the songs and music of that evening.
We did find time for some work at Orkney which even produced a few seizures, but we were a little early for the oil traffic which was only just beginning to affect the island.
We left these friendly isles on a fine May morning, weaving our way northward through a string of green islands with magical names, Eday, North Ronaldsay, Sanday and a host of other outlying skerries which formed a fascinating pattern and exercised our navigator's skill.
The blue sea and bright sun belied the occasional grim reminder of the other side of the picture; the broken, rusting hull of a merchantman or trawler, perched high and dry in a rocky grave.
Lunch, as we cleared Orkney, consisted of whale steaks and salad, the former by courtesy of a Norwegian whaler which called at Stromness.
Our menus in Scotland included smoked salmon, smoked sea trout, crab and scampi, to say nothing of most varieties of fresh fish in copious quantities, some caught by ourselves.
The weather held fine and a slight deviation from our course to Shetland brought us to Fair Isle which that day  was living up to its name.
However, as I steered our motor dory into the tricky south landing with the tide pouring through jagged rocks, intermittently obscured by swell and sea tangle, I could well imagine the island's isolation in winter and bad weather.
Our landing party managed to crowd a lot into their brief visit.
An interesting patrol of the island was made by courtesy of a friendly crofter in his ancient car (no MOT test here!).
We chatted with the locals at the island Post Office where we stopped to buy postcards (which would bear the famous puffin postmark of Fair Isle), and visited the local shop for souvenirs, both establishments being opened especially for our benefit.
Before leaving we cemented our friendship with the local schoolteacher's family by giving their small daughter a birthday joyride round the bay in our dory.
It was a day to remember; we were all quite taken by Fair Isle and I took the opportunity to dig out a few facts and figures about this remote island.
Standing lonely and remote in a geographical position roughly half way between the Orkneys and Shetland Islands people that know Fair Isle would perhaps agree that on most days it rather belies a somewhat optimistic name.
Lying in the track of the depressions which so dominate our climate the island catches more than its fair share of bad weather and this, coupled with the conflicting tides of the North Sea and North Atlantic, makes the surrounding waters very troubled for most of the time.
Cutter crews based in the north usually see Fair Isle as a faint blur through misty rain or flying spray, or  in darkness and fog as a characteristic shape on the radar screen as they try to beat the next gale to Shetland, or conversely, back to Orkney.
Some of us have actually seen it on better days and a few have actually landed there, finding to their surprise that Fair Isle can be a pleasant green island with a fascinating geological structure and a friendly people.
The Island is composed mainly of red sandstone.
Except at the south end, which is low and bare, the coastline consists of high inaccessible cliffs which are fissured by numerous clefts and inlets known as geos, with many small islets and detached rocks at their foot.
The island's highest point is over 700 feet at the summit of Ward Hill and on clear days this can be seen from seaward at distance up to thirty miles.
There are no trees or shrubs on Fair Isle for obvious reasons — what few survive the gales and salt spray are soon nibbled down to the ground by sheep, but the ground is well cultivated in the more sheltered parts.
Most of the inhabitants, about fifty in number, are crofters and live in substantial houses in the south part of the island.
The island is best known of course, for its traditional Fair Isle knitting patterns.
Some of the old skill is perpetuated on the island as a cottage industry but the patterns are now used and often machine-knitted by mainland manufacturers.
A few of the population are employed in maintaining the two lighthouses, Skroo at the north end and Skaden at the south end.
Then there is the bird observatory at the North Haven where the unique position of Fair Isle enables many species of migratory birds to be studied by visitors and RSPB staff.
A little fishing is carried on, mostly for local  consumption and although most supplies have to be imported, milk and eggs are readily available.
There are two possible landing points on the island of which the North Haven is the only safe harbour in average weather conditions, being free from tide and most other hazards if entered with caution.
Here is kept the "Good Shepherd" , a small MFV run by the islanders as their only sea link with the outside world, it carries most of the stores, mail and passengers.
There is also an air link by Loganair.
The south landing is approachable by small boat on good days but is studded with hazardous weed-covered rocks, and strong cross tides at the approach add to the dangers.
However, landing at a natural rock jetty is possible in good conditions.
There are good fishing banks in the vicinity of Fair Isle and on most days several large trawlers are to be seen there.
Because of this vessels have often been stranded on the island in the past and there is a Coastguard Life Saving Apparatus team stationed there.
Well, no smugglers on Fair Isle but it had been a pleasant interlude and we headed back to Venturous with yet another "first" notched up in our visitor's book.
Now it was on to "Ultima Thule" and we felt we were really in the far north, nearer to Norway than to the UK mainland as we approached the jagged headland of Sumburgh, ringed ominously with the chart symbol for a "rost" [tide race]on our chart.
It was peaceful enough now but there was menace in the heaving swell and a chill in the evening air as we tan up the east coast of Shetland.
We reached Lerwick at dusk to moor amongst the varied  fishing craft at the fish quay.
As we moored up the late shipping forecast was giving warnings of south-easterly gales for the area, so we had just made it in time.
The weather broke overnight and it blew hard from the south east for the following week which, while postponing our patrols to the north islands, was no great setback to our plans.
There was plenty of work for us at Lerwick harbour and around Bressay Sound at the new oil bases, some of which were already operating.
A good cross section of rig support vessels came our way including tugs, survey ships, safety vessels, rig supply and small merchantmen with supplies like cement, chemicals and drilling mud.
Unfortunately a flu bug attacked most of the crew during this week which clouded our impressions of Shetland.
It put Dave Scadding in hospital for a few days, but did not prevent the crew members still on their feet from putting in some hard graft, and rummage successes began to roll in.
Contraband was discovered in interesting concealments such as a spare piston assembly in the engineroom of a Dutch ship (found by Bob, our chief engineer, of course), and a spare drilling core at the bottom of the hold of a Spanish ship contained products more akin to a Spanish distillery than the bed of the North Sea.
No large spectacular seizures, but all good old fashioned smuggling.
Of course, our rummage crews were working on more or less virgin territory, where no customs rummage crew had been before.
In fact, towards the end of our week at Lerwick a rather embarrassing state of affairs had developed, where every other seafarer we met ashore seemed to have received our attention, the inevitable result of us all being  weatherbound together.
However we have always found that most seamen are good natured fellows, and they seemed to bear us no malice.
On the contrary many of them came to inspect the "little blue customs ship" and stayed for refreshments.
In addition to their port duties, Lerwick staff had to cover controls at Sumburgh Airport which was thirty miles south of Lerwick over a bumpy switchback road.
Helicopter traffic to and from the rigs and foreign flights to Norway and Holland were building up rapidly as a result of the oil boom, and with the small numbers of customs staff on shore our crew was often asked to help out while we were in port.
The airport duties made a pleasant change for a few of our lads, and one of them was offered a helicopter flight to the rigs one day.
He came back full of the experience and made us all quite envious, but he was able to see first hand what went on at the business end of the oil industry and picked up some useful knowledge for future reference when dealing with the oil men.
After a week in Lerwick the work there and the night life began to lose its attraction and with the first lull in the weather we poked our nose out of the north end of Bressay Sound — and wished we had not.
A heavy south easterly swell rolling in through the wide sounds to the north of Bressay threw Venturous on her beam ends several times, so much so that fuel oil spilled over through the deck breather pipes.
With decks awash with diesel we beat a hasty retreat back to Lerwick.
Two days later the sea had settled down after the prolonged gale and we headed north once more through the rock strewn channels and islands.
 "Drewy" Leask, one of our local  customs staff, same with us as local pilot, and very glad I was to have him on board as he was able to show us many remote anchorages and isolated harbours that I would never otherwise have dared approach.
Our first port of call was the island of Whalsay which had a fine modern harbour, a fish processing plant and even a cooper's shop where we watched fish barrels being made.
The large fishing vessels we saw were all well maintained with modern equipment.
The friendly community there all appeared to be fishermen or on some way connected with that industry.
We found it altogether an extremely fascinating place to wander around, but not much revenue work for us apart from "showing the flag" .
Then it was northwards again heading across the more open stretches of sea towards Colgrave Sound, the rather dark and forbidding cliffs of Fetlar on the starboard bow with the low lying Out Skerries islands well out to the east.
It was hard to believe that most of these islands were populated and we often caught glimpses of island ferries plying industriously between lonely rockbound piers.
Through the Sound of Grunay, ever threading through a procession of rock islets and on to the northernmost island of Unst, where we tied up for the night at the little pier in Baltasound.
Here we were met by our most northerly customs officer, Bob Anderson, who had a surprising amount of work to do in connection with calling Norwegian and Swedish fishing vessels.
In later years, after the oil fields were established, he was to be even busier when a helicopter pad was built in Unst.
We spent a pleasant evening with Bob at the Springfield Hotel, the most northerly pub, in the British Isles where, amongst other anecdotes, we were told about the customs officer from Lerwick who was staying on Unst one very wet and stormy night, and awoke to find the roof of his bedroom had blown off.
I was reminded of the Beaufort Scale for wind strength which describes gale conditions ashore as "whole trees in motion" , and made a mental note that in Shetland where there are no trees it must be "whole roofs in motion" .
We were glad enough that the weather seemed set fair for the remainder of our voyage and next morning set off on the last few miles of our northerly course to round the utmost tip of Shetland.
Muckle Flugga light was abeam at noon and we turned south after many weeks of heading north, toasting our furthest point north in the traditional Scots way.
The wide mouth of Yell Sound, leading to Sullom Voe opened up to port.
At the time of our first visit the construction of the large oil terminal was at the planning stage.
There was little to indicate what a busy area this was to become, with buoyed channels for the large tankers, and the storage tanks and quays of Sullom Voe tucked away neatly out of sight amongst the low hills.
Now, in spite of the spring sunshine, it would be hard to imagine a lonelier place in the British Isles, and it was here that Bob, the chief engineer, chose to announce that he would have to stop engines to effect repairs.
We drifted for an hour while Bob and his men replaced some leading injector pipes until the sudden welcome roar of our trusty Paxmans sent us southward again, across St. Magnus Bay and outside Papa Stour, finally leaving the straggling tentacles of land and long voes of West Shetland to reach Scalloway as darkness fell.
Scalloway was our last port of call in Shetland, from there we retraced our route but westabout, via Orkney, Stornoway and the lovely west coast of Scotland.
All too soon the islands were a memory, as we steamed down to England, with calls at Liverpool, the Isle of Man and Welsh ports.
On this leg of the patrol it was mostly long steams southward with a few breaks for routine rummage, and we saw little in the way of oil related activity.
A pleasant week in the Bristol Channel when we reached Bristol once more, then on to the Scillies in a nasty little summer gale, finally reaching Southampton at the end of June.
it had been a great patrol during which we had made a lot of new friends, carried out a great deal of work en route and broken into completely new territory for the cutters.
In doing so I like to think that we had been good ambassadors for the Department; I know we all enjoyed every minute of the three hectic months.
That we arrived back at base in such good shape was largely due to the magnificent efforts of our engineers Bob McSmythurs and Dave Parker who had to work hard to keep our ageing engines turning over.
But really it is the crew as a whole which counts in the long run on a job like this.
Eight individuals living and working together in the confines of a ninety feet steel hull for three months and still parting as friends at the end of the trip says a lot for  compatibility of the cutter crews.
I know I was sadder than at the end of most commissions when we finally broke up the team in the refreshment room of Waterloo Station after we had left the ship in Southampton.
In spite of frequent attention, the old Paxman main engines on Venturous were breaking down more and  more often, until the port engine finally gave up on us during Scottish patrols the following year.
A north-west gale had given us a good shaking up crossing from Peterhead to Wick resulting in a cracked cylinder head.
This was replaced by Alan Cull, our chief engineer, during the evening at Wick, and a short trial showed it to be satisfactory.
We left Wick at five in the morning the following day to catch the tide through the Pentland Firth, on passage to Stornoway.
We had just passed Duncansby Head when there was a very expensive noise from the engineroom, the port engine revs rose to a crescendo, then the engine stopped with a sickening crash.
Apparently a crankshaft bearing on the port engine had gone, the crankshaft snapped and ran riot in the engine completely wrecking it before the fuel could be shut off.
Glumly we returned to Wick on one engine knowing that it would probably be a pay off job in the middle of our tour.
It was, and Venturous was laid up at Buckie for nearly ten months while new Cummins engines were fitted.
At one stage it was thought that the old lady would be written off, but luckily it was not to be and the following year I was able to take her from Buckie with a new lease of life.
We found Venturous better than ever with her new engines and at fourteen knots was much quieter and free from the old vibration.
During the lay up of Venturous I spent a brief interlude in the Solent area evaluating the performance and suitability of a thirty two foot fast motor cruiser Gazelle which had been purchased by the Department as an experiment.
The idea was to use her for short patrols inshore and around the large estuaries and harbours of the south Coast.
She had a very strong hull for her type, was capable of about thirty knots with her twin Sabre engines, and I found her surprisingly sea-kindly.
It was my first real experience of handling a fast planing hull.
Although I did not care for her looks, the yacht-like appearance had great potential for undercover work and after about two months working her around the Solent and Poole area I was quite impressed.
However, opinions of the other crews and skippers were not unanimously in favour, I think most of our chaps had the big cutter complex by then, so the idea was dropped and Gazelle was eventually sold.
A pity really, as I thought Gazelle had great potential with a few modifications.
As it was, a few years later another similar boat, a Fairy Swordfish, was purchased for the same purpose which in my opinion was a much inferior seaboat.
The 1970s rolled by and increasingly I found myself spending most of my time in Scottish waters with Venturous, based either at Aberdeen or Leith.
One of the recommendations to come out of our first extended patrols was that the crews should be allowed air travel to return home for rest days.
Our two days off duty every twelve days could now be spend with our families, flying either from Aberdeen or Edinburgh airports and this made all the difference to working in Scotland.
It was my first experience of flying and I soon came to like the journeys, usually from Aberdeen to Norwich for me, in the low flying Fokker Friendships of Air Anglia, later to become Air UK.
On clear days it was like flying over an Atlas map of the British Isles and I picked out all the familiar landmarks in about two hours, which had probably taken me days to cover by sea.
Most of the cutter officers have memories, good and  bad, of the North Sea Oil boom in Scottish waters.
One either hated it or loved it.
For myself, forgetting the continuous battle against the elements in which Venturous acquitted herself well, it was a good time.
I enjoyed the hurly burly of working with the oil men and fishermen on the wild coastlines of the north west and the islands.
The Pentland Firth and Scapa Flow, Lerwick and Sullom Voe were soon as familiar as the south coast and the Solent had become in the past, but familiarity would never make us treat these places with anything but respect and I tried never to take chances.
Whenever possible I chose crews who liked working in the north and they always backed me up well.
When we were fed up, or when the going became rough, which was quite often, a spontaneous sing song would usually start up.
Chris Wolley emerged as a great choir leader and guitar player at this period and his strident voice leading the crew seemed to calm the roughest sea or cheer us up at the right moment.
Our experiences during this era would probably fill a whole book by themselves.
It was a unique experience to rummage the various weird oil-related craft, construction barges, pipe-laying barges, drilling rigs etc., some of them like small townships afloat with huge crews made up of separate groups such as divers, riggers, welders, roustabouts and supervisors.
Working on what in effect was virgin territory for customs officers our crews produced fantastic results in the earlier days.
But as the oil men realised that we meant business, seizures began to drop.
We could not claim all the credit for this as our administration was coming to grips with the situation ashore.
Shore-based task forces and rummage  crews based on Aberdeen and in Shetland were organised as awareness of the potential revenue loss from oil-related traffic grew at HQ.
Each time we returned to Scotland we found change in this respect and more competition from shore based crews.
This could only be good news and we were thus able to turn our attention to even remoter areas of the north.
I liked the oil men.
They were good natured and got things done without a fuss, usually on a grand scale.
On one occasion we were lying alongside a pipe-laying barge in a remote anchorage with a six feet swell grinding Venturous against the chain secured tyre fenders when the superintendent of the large leaned over and shouted down to me.
"You want for me to lift your little boat out on to our deck until your boys are finished searching.
It'll be a lot more comfortable for you up here."
Their one hundred and fifty ton heavy life crane would have coped with that job easily enough but I hastily declined his offer which, apart from any other consideration would have placed me at a slight disadvantage.
As it was, we were often on a sticky wicket when the rummage crew had to deal with the crane drivers for a smuggling offence.
On one occasion when our boys were returning in the basket lift, which was the only way of reaching the top platform of a rig from sea level, the crane driver had temporarily suspended out crew a few inches above the water in mock punishment for their temerity in fining him.
All in good fun of course, but we were always in a rather vulnerable position with the good natured rig workers.
In fact it was surprising how good they were to us on most of our official visits.
There was nearly always coffee  or a huge meal of steak or fish and chips going for any of our officers who were searching the large rigs and barges.
The rigs were all dry of course, but they carried huge stocks of other duty free goods, mainly tobacco and cigarettes.
It was quite normal for us to find large quantities of the latter goods stowed away by crew members against the possibility of long stays in UK waters.
The oil men were always amazed to find a customs vessel operating in their area.
The American captain of a supply ship was chatting to me one day and asked me where we were based.
When I told him we had recently come up from Southampton he said, "Gee, I wouldn't go to sea in that little tub for double my wages." 
His present salary was probably at least double that of mine already, but I wouldn't have swopped jobs with him anyway.
From our experience with the weather conditions of the North of Scotland we had decided that it was impracticable to operate the cutters up there in winter.
An additional reason for this was that the oil rigs were established and "on stream" and things were very quiet in the area, any new developments occurring in the summer months.
With plans to expand our cutter fleet in the offing Venturous took on a new role as training ship during the winter periods for the next few years.
With some of the other interested officers I worked out a syllabus for training selected junior officers in the rudiments of seamanship and navigation using Venturous as a practical training ship.
A six week period for each class of six officers consisted of theoretical training using the  saloon for the classroom, followed by working patrols during which the trainees would apply their newly acquired knowledge, and also do the normal work of a cutter crew, rummaging as time permitted.
We usually carried three or four experienced deck and engineer cutter officers who doubled up as instructors.
It was a period I very much enjoyed, hard work but made easier by my colleagues, mainly Chris Wolley, Bob McSmythurs, Marty Stone and Pat Duff, who shared the lectures with me as well as giving practical assistance in every day.
Our trainees always found their cooking day the biggest ordeal, and we had to put up with some unorthodox meals at times.
But we survived, I don't quite know how.
Most of my summers were spent with Venturous in Scotland where there was still plenty of work for us.
As the oil-related traffic quietened down we turned our attentions to the Klondyke fishing industry in the northwest which was picking up dramatically.
As with the oil boom, Venturous pioneered operations with the Eastern Bloc Klondykers in places like Ullapool, and later in Falmouth.
THE KLONDYKERS
Since our rather unsuccessful sortie to Scotland during the winter of 1971 the Klondyke trade had revived and was bringing a new prosperity to the north west.
With the decline in the herring fishing, followed by a complete ban on all herring catching in an endeavour to build up stocks again, the pelagic catchers turned their attentions to mackerel which hitherto had been despised as food in the North of Scotland.
With the improved methods of catching, both in the design of nets and the new highly sophisticated electronics for finding the shoals, large catches were being made.
Inevitably this began to attract the foreign fleets back to the Klondyke trade.
The ships of these fleets had also undergone a radical change.
Where in previous years these vessels had been purely large fishing vessels loading salted fish into barrels for immediate export to their own ports, now there came great numbers of large factory ships and modern trawlers which could process fish, package it and freeze it for indefinite periods.
This was the situation when we returned to Scotland in the late seventies with Venturous and were called upon by our liaison officer at Aberdeen to patrol round the west coast principally to assist local staff in the control of a large fleet of Eastern Bloc ships which were anchored in the approaches to Ullapool.
As we steamed into Loch Broom after an uncomfortable overnight passage through the Pentland Firth and the North Minch an amazing sight met our weary eyes.
As far as we could see, ship after ship was anchored all down the outer loch, and as we progressed towards Ullapool we could see that the anchored ships extended right into the bay past Ullapool piers.
There were at least four large Russian Factory ships just inside the Summer Isles, the rest consisted of a mixed bag of Polish, Bulgarian, and even Italian freezer trawlers, in all we counted more than thirty ships awaiting their turn to load mackerel from the Scottish purse netters.
The latter sturdy little ships were two and three deep alongside the large vessels discharging their cargoes in a frenzy of activity while overhead the air was thick with gulls, diving and squabbling over the loose fish as it spilled from the swinging baskets.
Around the factory ships the normally crystal clear water of the loch was rapidly turning brown and smelly from the pouring discharge pipes of the processing plants.
Wondering what we had let ourselves in for we anchored as near as possible to Ullapool and contacted the local staff which at that time consisted of local patrol officers backed up by two visiting officers from Dingwall.
Our brief was to board and rummage as many of these foreign vessels as possible and at the same time carry out checks on the British boats to control any possible lead in duty free stores.
Quite normal duties for a revenue cutter, but there was nothing normal about that particular week we spent in Ullapool at the end of which we all felt as though we had been through a wringer.
We were mentally and physically exhausted.
Boarding and rummage of a merchant vessel presents no particular problem to us.
The same duties on a fishing vessel may present a few more difficulties as their crews do not normally have to cope with customs procedures.
Add to this a language problem, surround the ship with smaller fishing vessels and throw liberal quantities of slimy mackerel underfoot, anchor it in a remote Scottish loch with vicious squalls of wind and rain roaring down from the surrounding hills, try working for days on end with very little sleep in these conditions and you have some idea of our difficulties.
We also had to look after our own ship, often plunging and breaking ropes alongside the larger vessels, prepare our own meals and keep the ship clean.
Unable to berth on the pier, night anchor watched were essential, hence the lack of sleep.
One night we were allowed alongside the pier.
I was awakened from a deep sleep at about 5 a.m. by a bump, alongside, the roar of engines and much shouting.
Tumbling blearily on deck in my pyjamas I was confronted by the huge bulk of a klondyke trawler ramming alongside us, and I was just in time to see her huge fender catch our motor dory and sink her where she was tied to our stern.
Soaking wet and with some difficulty I managed to salvage the dory, with one brand new Mercury outboard from underwater and, backed up by my crew, asked the skipper what the blazes he thought he was up to.
The rather unco-operative harbourmaster intervened and said he was coming alongside for water and that we should get out.
After some heated argument in which I pointed out that it would have been more courteous and certainly more seamanlike to ask us to move before attempting to sink us as well as our motor boat, the skipper agreed to accept liability for the damage, and we moved off to lick our wounds.
That was the sort of thing we had to contend with at Ullapool; no one really wanted us around, it was no wonder that this jewel of the west was most unpopular with our crews.
Other reasons for the unpopularity of Ullapool with our lads were the lack of social relaxation and travel facilities.
It was a long haul across the highland roads to the nearest airport and railhead at Inverness.
Once there it was a choice of one train or one flight per day, either  method of transport being both time consuming and expensive, for most of our crew, who lived in the south of England.
Rest days from Ullapool were really out of the question so we either had to take the ship on the long sea passage to Aberdeen or down to Ardrossan.
Eventually we settled for a base at Ardrossan which was not too bad in later years when we had acquired much faster cutters.
Our practice for rest days was to find a safe harbour for the ship where she could be left alongside with two standby crew on board while the rest of the lads went home.
The two standby men would then take their rest days when the main body of the crew returned and the cutter operated during their absence.
For various reasons the main one of which was a lack of understanding of our problems, our local administration were often unsympathetic and went so far as to accuse us of non co-operation at times, especially in the matter of rest days.
As far as I was concerned these were absolutely sacrosanct, especially when working in the Klondyke ports for period of up to twelve days.
I was not prepared to disrupt our rest day schedules for routine work, although when on a special operation or in an emergency we often had to do just this and all the crews were conditioned to flexibility in special circumstances.
So, taking all this into consideration, it was hardly surprising that we were all looking forward to our next set of rest days.
First there was a welcome break when we took Venturous westward across the Minch to Stornoway where we had arranged to pick up Reg Clarke, our reigning cutter management Principal, who was flying up from London HQ to see some of our work first hand.
We had already amassed quite a pile of seizures  following irregularities uncovered during the previous week's work at Ullapool, and we returned with Reg Clarke on board to have another bite at the cherry.
Once more our rummage crews hit the jackpot with several newly arrived Klondykers in the anchorage and Reg Clarke, as a former uniformed Customs Officer, was able to re-live his earlier days as the duty free goods were ferried across in our motor boat.
The following day we left Loch Broom for a passage south to Oban.
It had been a hectic period during which we had been under some pressure.
But there were some good memories, particularly of one Polish vessel after we had rescued their lifeboat, broken down and drifting in adverse weather in the outer reaches of the lock with the mate and several crewmen on board.
After towing them back to their ship we were friends for life and the word soon went round the fleet.
Our own hardships palled to insignificance when we learned that often their ships were away from home for six months, and that they could be roaming as far afield as Nova Scotia after leaving Scotland.
We knew also of the conditions on the poorer nationality ships which were often rat and lice infested, as our rummage crews had experienced.
As so often happens with VIP; s on board, the weather suddenly changed to high summer for our passage down the west coast, and as we cleared Rhu Rheidh with the dramatic back drop of the Wester Ross mountains astern, and a calm blue sea ahead, the world seemed a different place.
On a clear summer's day there is no finer sea passage than the one along the eastern edge of the Minch, taking in all the sheer rugged beauty of the western highlands, then into the narrows of Raasay and Khylrea, the Sound of Sleat, on past the magical islands of Skye, Eigg Rhum and finally through the lovely Sound of Mull to the safe harbour of Oban.
One fine day and such a trip as this more than compensates for all the bad ones.
After putting Reg Clarke on the train for Glasgow we were due at Corpach and the western end of the Caledonian Canal for another traverse of this fascinating inland waterway, after which it was home and rest days, leaving the ship at Muirtown Basin near Inverness.
It was always a debatable point with us when working our way from west to east, or vice versa, in the north of Scotland, whether to take the open sea route northabout, or to undertake the canal route.
Both ways had their disadvantages.
The open sea route was probably less time consuming providing the weather was kind.
The canal route led through pleasant scenery and was more congenial in every way apart from being quite hard work through the many locks.
However, navigation on the canal is only allowed between about 0800 and 1700 daily, and not at all on Sundays when the lock keepers will not operate.
This means that the traverse across Scotland usually takes two days, three if you are marooned in the middle of a Sunday.
On this occasion we had no option but to begin our traverse on Saturday which meant a compulsory day of rest somewhere en route.
We made the locks at Gairlochy on Saturday evening and found it no great hardship to lay there throughout the following Sunday.
It was part of my planning to use this day to catch up with the vast mound of paperwork, documentation of seizures and reports, which always accumulates after a  successful revenue operation.
Surely no civil servant had more unique or peaceful surroundings in which to work than we did on this day.
Nothing seemed to disturb the tranquillity of that Sabbath in the heart of the Highlands, with the scent of the warm conifers and the distant shimmer of sun on the calm waters of Loch Lochy.
To facilitate the sorting and parcelling of seizures, we had piles of cigarettes, tobacco and spirits spread around the deck and on the quayside which we would never have dared to attempt in any other place.
Here we were disturbed by no one, it seemed that the whole world had stopped on this Scottish Sabbath.
I often wonder what the casual passer-by would have made of us, as we must have looked a really piratical bunch with piles of American cigarettes and Polish vodka spread around our decks.
The faint aroma of stale mackerel still hung around and did nothing for our personal charisma either.
We finished the day with an impromptu game of football in a nearby meadow, followed by a visit to a local hotel which catered for travellers, and who else were we but that?
The stricter licencing laws were in force at that time, of course.
The variety of our work and that of our surroundings was the main attraction of a cutter life and nowhere was this more true than in the North of Scotland, which was why I liked working the area.
I personally felt a great affinity with the people of the highlands and islands, although I know this was not so with many of our officers who preferred to work in the south.
WIND OF CHANGE
Back at HQ, the plans for modernising our fleet of cutters were crystallizing.
But however essential a modern cutter service was considered to be, building costs had rocketted and pressure was on the Treasury for economy in all departments.
The entry of Britain into the Common Market in 1973 had given us access to a 10% repayment scheme of the Consolidated Fund, allowed under EEC rules, and it was from this source that the money would come for the expansion of the Customs fleet.
In my opinion this was one of the few good things to come out of our membership of the Common Market.
The man behind the final stages of the planning was the then Deputy Chairman of the Board, Mr J M Woolf, CB, a great advocate for and a frequent visitor to the cutters who had seen our need for more sophisticated and faster boats.
It was largely due to his efforts, backed up by our management, Secretary and Principals at HQ that the Treasury was finally persuaded to sanction the necessary £4,500,000 to finance the expansion programme.
With construction costs for purpose-built vessels so high, the hunt was on for production-type boats that would keep within reasonable limits of the budget.
Reg Clarke, our cutter Principal, was actively involved in the final selection of the Fairey Marine Tracker patrol vessel  which was built exclusively by Fairey's in their workshops at Hamble and Cowes.
The sixty four feet hulls were constructed in GRP with a beam of sixteen feet four inches and a draft of four feet nine inches.
Powered by two General Motors diesels, each 645 hp, they had reached speeds well in excess of twenty knots on trials, and being also good seaboats they seemed eminently suitable for our purposes.
There was some doubt expressed about the vulnerability of their GRP construction by some diehards in our service (myself included), but time was to prove that our doubts were unfounded.
After our first Tracker, Alert, was launched in November 1976, others followed rapidly in her wake, the last one of six being launched in 1979 to form the backbone of our new, modernised fleet.
Other plans in the pipeline at that time included two new cutters, longer and beamier than Venturous, capable of high speeds and suitable for working the stormy waters of the north.
Another innovation introduced by Mr Woolf about this time was a change in the title of the cutters.
Deciding in his wisdom that the modern craft deserved a more streamlined collective description he decreed that henceforth the Trackers would be known as Customs Cutters, and the larger steel boats when built would be called Cruisers.
I think it was also about that time when it was decided to phase our the old term of Customs Waterguard for the uniformed branch, with Waterguard becoming a dirty word.
Thus the time-honoured name of Revenue Cutter was dropped after so many years of tradition.
Most of us, myself included, thought that this was completely pointless as the old name had a better  ring to it and most people still referred to our boats as Revenue Cutters in preference.
Perhaps Mr Woolf had overheard that classic remark by a member of the public who said to me one day when we were negotiating the locks of the Caledonian canal in Venturous, "I didn't know we had Inland Revenue Cutters." 
Well, after all, we were in the middle of Scotland at the time.
However, what's in a name?
We had the boats which was the main thing, and for this we were truly grateful to Mr Woolf.
With her sophisticated electronics and sleek grey hull capable of speeds far in excess of anything we had previously experienced in the Cutter Service, it was an exciting prospect for our crews when Alert was commissioned in 1977.
She carried six crew, including Doug Thompson, Commander, who was an appropriate choice being an ex-RAF pilot, for the Trackers were certainly flyers.
This year heralded the Queen's Silver Jubilee, celebrated with the Spithead Review.
To my pleasant surprise Venturous was chosen to represent our Department.
Brian Seymour's crew brought her down from Scotland for the royal occasion and my crew joined at Southampton to put the final touches on the paint and brightwork.
We did not have much time to smarten up the old girl and it took much hard work to soften the ravages of time.
The weather as usual was all against us even in June, but the appointed time saw us anchored on our allotted station, near the East Bramble buoy in the East Solent.
Two very interesting and memorable days followed.
The highlights for me were the climax of Britannia's stately progress through the Fleet lines and my own  personal visit to the reception for Commanding Officers on board Britannia during the evening.
Our official party on board Venturous was ferried out by Valiant and comprised members of the Board with other heads of Department and their wives.
We lined up on the foredeck to give the traditional three cheers for her Majesty at the appropriate moment.
Later that evening we watched it all on television again.
The simultaneous switching on of their stem to stern illuminations by the ships of the fleet at dusk was also a very impressive moment.
Then it was time for me to attend the evening reception on Britania.
With slight butterflies in my tummy I joined all the other Commanding Officers from the ships of the Fleet Review at the King's Stairs, Portsmouth.
All commanding officers present at the Review had received the Queen's Silver Jubilee medal to mark the occasion.
It was the first time in my life I had experienced anything like this and was nervous but deeply honoured.
Impressions of that evening still remain.
Treading the red carpet to Britannia's canopied and gleaming gangway, the smile and gracious handshake from Her Majesty, looking cool and regal but friendly as ever.
A rather curious look from Prince Philip wondering, no doubt, how this lowly two-ringer got into the act.
Then on to the spacious dining saloon with its white and gold decor, now alive with the movement of gold-braided, be-medalled uniforms alongside glamorous ladies in evening dress.
Cocktails and snacks borne on silver platters by ship's officers, and a very grand piano on which to lean while I absorbed the experience of a lifetime.
My detachment was not allowed to last, I was soon chatting to the ex-Lady Mayor of Portsmouth and later made friends with the Commanding Officer of one of the Army supply boats stationed on Benbecula with whom I was able to swap experiences in the Outer Hebrides.
At the other side of the piano James Callaghan, then Prime Minister, was talking animatedly to a very distinguished-looking Admiral, while through it all the Queen and Prince Philip moved easily, chatting to their guests.
During a quick wander round the accessible parts of the ship at the end of the evening I noticed a wonderful old binnacle, preserved from the former Royal Yacht, Victoria and Albert, and before leaving I rested by the quarter deck rail to listen to the ship's Royal Marine Band play classical selections on the quayside.
As I waited at the King's Stairs for my boat back to Venturous I was approached by two very splendidly attired and heavily braided Merchant Service Officers whom I had noticed staring at me curiously during the reception.
 "Here mate," one of them said in a puzzled voice,"You're a customs officer, what the hell were you doing in there?
We expected you to start rummaging or checking the bond, or something!"
They were senior captains from the flagship of Everard's coasting fleet and they were somewhat surprised to learn that we had a flagship too.
We had a good laugh together and so ended the Spithead Review.
A few days later we were on passage up the east coast to Scotland and the North Sea Oil scene once more— after the Lord Mayor's show!
While we had been lording it in the Solent, Alert had  been making a name for herself in Shetland as a stand in for Venturous.
In the process she had made a lightning circumnavigation of the British Isles and was now steaming hard down the west coast while we returned by the eastern route.
Alert's flying tour of Britain brought home to us that the new GRP planing hulls could be used for long range patrols when required and that they were not just "hot rods" for use in sheltered waters.
Living conditions on board during winter obviously would not be as comfortable as those of the larger steel boats, and condensation was a problem, but on the whole our crews were adapting well.
With the proven success of Alert, five more Trackers were launched over the following two years, the last four of these were slightly modified to provide more accommodation aft and were known as Mark II's.
By 1979 our fleet of cutters had grown to nine vessels and with the old "V" boats, Venturous, Valiant and Vigilant supported by our new dashing Trackers, Alert, Active, Champion, Challenge, Swift and Safeguard we had a force to be reckoned with as at last the big drug smuggling syndicates began to find to their cost.
THE WAR AGAINST DRUGS
For many years our shore-based rummage crews had been picking up increasing quantities of drugs from routine searches of merchant vessels within the ports, but often these smuggling attempts were "one off" jobs by crew members.
Our airports too were reporting a rapid growth in drug offences by passengers, some of these on a very large scale.
With the decline in moral standards and large profits to be made from relatively small amounts of drugs, quite easy to conceal, the increase of this evil trade was inevitable.
There were many different drugs coming into use.
We were, of course, concerned with some of the more lethal forms of amphetamine tablets and the more dangerous LSD, although the latter was manufactured in the UK by highly organised gangs as highlighted by the police Operation Julie, later made into a television documentary.
But the largest and most common seizures were normally of cannabis either of the herbal type or the more concentrated cannabis resin.
In recent years the trend is towards heroin, the dirtiest trade of all.
With the increased vigilance of our officers at seaports and airports and the need to import large consignments of drugs to feed the growing habit of users the obvious answer was to charter or buy a small craft capable of long sea voyages.
A yacht or fishing vessel would find it quite easy to evade  our controls and could carry large amounts of contraband.
Careful planning and the use of modern aids such as two way radios, and radar were making the job of the modern smuggler easier, and working to the disadvantage of the law enforcing teams.
We were well aware of the problems facing us in the future, and the pressing need was for more and more information about the operations of the big smuggling syndicates.
Our Investigation Department were not dragging their heels in this respect and had already pulled off several coups as a result of painstaking groundwork with contacts abroad and in the UK.
One of the first of our combined operations with the ID was in 1978 and heralded anew era in co-operation between our sea and shore based officers.
It concerned a smuggling gang who had previously used a minibus to bring the drugs from Morocco, but because of increased activity by the Spanish Customs they decided to operate a seaborne campaign using a yacht called Cornish Lady.
Investigations into the activities of this particular gang had been carried out over a very long period and they had been kept under constant surveillance by our officers who were thus able to feed us all the necessary information towards a successful interception.
The climax came when Cornish Lady appeared in the western Channel, her progress was monitored and the cutter Alert, with Jim Cameron in command followed her into the river Exe, keeping in close radio contact with the waiting officers on shore.
These officers watched sacks being off-loaded into a dinghy for transfer to another vessel.
When this operation was completed our shore unit moved in to seize a total of 196 kilos of cannabis  which in those days was worth well over £300,000, while Alert intercepted Cornish Lady before she was able to escape.
The four smugglers involved in this case were subsequently gaoled for a total of thirty one years.
In his summing up the prosecuting counsel said,"this was a highly sophisticated and skilful drug smuggling racket, involving detailed planning, substantial finance and ingenuity.
It also involved the use of ship to shore radio, a chartered yacht, inflatable boats and a skill matched by the Customs and Excise themselves."
After the court hearing a BBC television unit in the southwest filmed on board Alert and reconstructed the smuggling exploit on the theme of the West country as a traditional smuggling coastline.
The use of chartered vessels for smuggling runs became increasingly common in the years to follow.
In this way, if caught, the smugglers had little to lose in way of investment, it also made the job of our investigators more difficult, especially when often a foreign national would charter a UK vessel.
Operation Cyril One of our biggest successes against the rapidly growing menace of drug smuggling with the new cutter fleet was code-named Cyril.
To my sorrow I missed out personally on this one as I had been "grounded" at that period for various reasons.
Cyril stemmed from a tip-off in June 1979 to the Central Intelligence Unit, a joint customs and police body.
The information tied in with a jig-saw of international intelligence laboriously pieced together over several  years, and a decision was made to lay a trap, involving on the I.D.
side a third of its 120 strong drugs staff.
At sea the scene was set with the cutters Vigilant, Swift, Alert and Active patrolling about thirty miles offshore at midnight on September 16th to the west of Plymouth.
On shore, police and customs investigation officers deployed themselves along the Cornish coast between Looe and Polperro.
Some of these men had been posing as caravan holiday makers for some weeks and now settled for a long, cold night on the clifftops.
At about 0230 hours the fishing vessel-cum-yacht Guiding Lights, which had figured on our suspect list since 1974, but had never been sighted in British waters, sailed into the trap, heaving-to off Talland Bay, about half a mile off shore.
Guiding Lights was showing normal navigation lights but the pitch darkness made distance deceptive and the watchers ashore strained their ears for signs of shore contacts.
First one engine powered inflatable was heard to leave the shore in the direction of Guiding Lights.
At the same time another craft was heard to approach shore and then to return to sea.
It was later learned that this was a boat from the Guiding Lights which had brought her drugs ashore while the first inflatable ferried our food and fuel.
At this stage Vigilant was ten miles away moving in at eleven knots while the three other cutters were twenty miles away converging at twenty knots.
Having completed loading and unloading, the still unsuspecting Guiding Lights headed our to sea.
The cutters were then ordered by a signal flashed from the clifftops to close in at top speed.
Straining the last possible revolutions from her roaring Paxman engines, the old  lady of the fleet, Vigilant was first to reach Guiding Lights, but despite darkness and mist had to wait no more than a few minutes for the other cutters to join her — a feat of seamanship that later lead to great praise from their Investigation colleagues ashore.
One of the cutter commanders remarked later, "I shall never forget the radar picture that night with the four of us closing in on the suspect." 
The cutters then took up position in a square around Guiding Lights which was still moving at about ten knots.
Jim Cameron, commander of Vigilant, called on the yacht to stop but received the reply that her gears were jammed so that they were unable to comply.
Although this was later found to be correct, there was no way of telling how true it was at the time.
Vigilant therefore rammed in alongside the suspect and Bristol ID officer John Cuthbert, assisted by Stephen Pullar and Harry Hampton of Vigilant, made a perilous jump across to the smuggling vessel.
The three crew members of Guiding Lights were then arrested and ordered to put into Plymouth.
Meanwhile two members of Swift's crew had also jumped on board to ensure that all persons on the vessel were accounted for.
As usual none of the customs officers was armed.
The inflatable boat we had heard had in fact transported the drugs ashore and ferried out food and fuel.
Back at Talland Bay our Officers let the smugglers do the heavy work of loading the huge two and a quarter ton cargo of cannabis resin (street value £2,500,000 wrapped in Christmas paper into vans before moving in to arrest them while cottages and a cafe in the area used by the UK based gang were also raided.
At 0800 hours Guiding Lights steamed slowly into Millbay Docks at Plymouth flying the blue "under arrest" ensign and escorted by the cutters.
Then began the long, painstaking job of deep rummage.
No drugs were found on Guiding Lights but two extremely clever concealments were uncovered.
As the story unfolded during questioning it was revealed how Guiding Lights had stayed safe for so long.
She had refined the smuggling operation between Morocco and the UK to such a pitch that it was no longer necessary to put into a Mediterranean or UK port and in this way had succeeded in making over twenty runs bringing cargoes of cannabis into Britain since 1974.
The ex MFV had been fitted out to be self sufficient in every way, with the latest navigational aids, long range fuel and water tanks and a very comprehensively fitted out workshop on board for mechanical and other repairs.
Concurrent with the arrest of Guiding Lights, a combined police and customs task force swooped on twenty five addresses in London to unearth a further cache of over two tons of cannabis in a garage.
Fifteen people were eventually charged and sentenced.
Guiding Lights started life as a Scottish fishing vessel registered at Fraserburgh.
She was bought for about £20,000 in May 1974 by a smuggling syndicate based in London and after being fitted out with no expense spared she was mainly based in Portugal from where her smuggling trips started, loading from supplying craft off the coast of Morocco, thence back across the Bay of Biscay to the Cornish coast.
In the first year the smuggled cannabis was landed at Torbay.
Then the gang bought Rotterdam Cottage in  Talland Bay, a cove used by generations of smugglers.
Under the kitchen floor they built a brick-lined store, so cleverly concealed that anyone lifting the floorboards in a random search would see only the earth beneath.
The earth had to be scraped away to uncover a trap door.
From Rotterdam Cottage the cannabis was moved by road in vans to a garage in Station Road, Penge, South East London which, in the words of Scotland Yard's drugs squad chief was "fortified almost as well as the Bank of England" .
From the outside, the double doors of the garage appeared to be only weathered planks, but there was steel lining inside, reinforced by double padlocks.
The windows were bricked up.
As every new discovery was made it was evident that with Operation Cyril a gang of really organised and astute professional smugglers had been broken.
 "Mr Big" of this particular syndicate turned out to be a wealthy bookmaker who owned a Newmarket racing stable.
For his part in the crime he was sentenced to ten years and went down with thirteen other accomplices for a total of fifty five years and £675,000 in fines.
Possibly no one will ever know just how much this particular gang made in ill gotten gains over their evil enterprise, but there was little doubt at the time of the trial that quite a fortune had been amassed and that most of the principals would be rich men when they came out of prison.
At that time money made in this way could not be touched.
Later the law was amended so that profits from such activities could be confiscated.
It was estimated that the gang had probably managed to shift about forty tons of high grade cannabis resin into the UK during the four years of operating the Guiding  Lights.
We derived a lot of job satisfaction from this one, but unfortunately we knew that it was only the tip of the iceberg.
Following the success of their efforts with Guiding Lights, early in 1980 the cutters were again called upon to assist investigation officers in the final stages of a similar operation code named "Yashmak" .
Investigations into the activities of this particular smuggling gang had been going on for nearly twelve months prior to the climax of Yashmak and were initiated in Sussex.
It was soon realised that there was a gang operating on an international scale and as the investigation grew it eventually involved Sussex police No 6 Regional Crime Squad and customs authorities in the Mediterranean area.
Even so it was only twenty four hours before the actual landing that the time and place were known.
Operation Yashmak
The vessel used by the smugglers on this occasion was the sailing yacht Eloise, a forty five feet sloop which had loaded her illicit cargo in the Mediterranean.
The place chosen for the UK landing was a complete surprise to all concerned, Llanddwyn Bay on the south side of Anglesey, near the village of Newborough.
It is a Forestry Commission area, intensively patrolled for fire and there is only one single track road leading to the beach from the village where any nocturnal traffic might cause suspicion.
To reach the mainland from Anglesey, vehicles must go over the Menai Bridge where any road barrier could not be avoided.
No doubt there was method in the smugglers' madness, perhaps the very unsuitability of the area was a ploy to put us off the scent.
On the night of the operation two hundred police and customs officers were hiding on the holiday beach at Anglesey when a rubber dinghy from Eloise nudged into the sand.
The occupants jumped out and began to load packages into a waiting truck.
Scuffles broke out everywhere as our officers came out of hiding and pounced on six members of the gang who bolted into the woods and sand dunes around the bay before being rounded up with the assistance of police dogs.
Meanwhile our three cutters, Active, Safeguard and Swift also came out of hiding, the roar of their engines sounding a death knell for Eloise as they closed in to arrest the white yacht.
While Eloise was sailed round to Holyhead with a prize crew from the cutters on board, more arrests were being made around the country and suspects were picked up in Sussex, Dorset, London, South Wales and County Durham.
The total number of people arrested was twenty, four of whom were women.
All were British.
Chief Investigation Officer, Peter Cutting said later in a statement:
This was a particularly successful operation.
We feel we may have arrested all the gang, financiers and organisers as well as the landing party.
We have had very good co-operation with the police in this widespread operation.
Our officers are getting much more professional.
This highlighted the real success of such operations — the netting of the big men behind the scenes who so often escape while the small-fry are caught red-handed.
The quantity of cannabis seized on this occasion was 1.5 tons with an estimated street value of 1.5 million  pounds.
This brought the total of cannabis seized by Customs and Excise in  preceding twelve months to eleven tons with a probable street value of £11,000,000.
Compare this with the value of £100,000,000 netted in 1985, which included 317kg. of heroin and it will give some idea of the growth rate and size of the problem we were tackling.
Even these statistics palled to insignificance a few years later when cocaine joined with heroin in the hard drugs scene and the high value of low bulk concentrated drugs made it so profitable and easy to smuggle.
Early in 1981, our liaison with the French Customs was now well established and we often worked together to our mutual advantage.
The French cutters were run on rather different lines to our craft.
They had many more boats, most of which were smaller and faster than our own and, generally speaking, carried out shorter patrols, returning to a fixed base where the crews tended to live ashore.
Operation Geneva II
British cutters made regular visits to French customs bases such as Lezardrieux and Brest, and the French in turn made reciprocal visits to our waters.
Over the last few years we had worked out a system of radio communication and coded grid references for use in joint exercises and actual operations against smuggling.
Our operations controlling officer, Sammy Powell, often accompanied us to France and always worked hard on both sides of the Channel to establish good relations with our French colleagues.
This was to pay dividends, and we had not long to wait.
An incident occurred in March of that year which brought a new depth and meaning to the "war" on drugs.
For some time the activities of an ocean-going tug named Sea Rover, registered under the Panamanian flag and run by a Dutch captain, had been attracting the attention of British, Dutch and French customs authorities, and their movements had been monitored whenever possible at each sighting.
One of Sea Rover's methods was to lie outside territorial limits selling huge quantities of cannabis "by appointment" to smaller coasting craft.
This was the old traditional smuggling game known as "coopering" .
The mixed crew of Sea Rover was commanded by a wily Dutch captain who had more tricks up his sleeve than the proverbial monkey.
He was always careful to have no vestige of drug cargoes on board when entering port and openly admitted that he dealt in drugs, always doing business in the safety of international waters.
He had even been overheard on the radio by British Coastguards as he arranged a rendezvous on one occasion, but in spite of a tip-off we had been unable to trap him.
His luck ran out in the early hours of March 4th when French Customs controls identified Sea Rover homing in towards French waters at Ushant after a passage to North Africa for another cargo.
From there her progress was monitored into the English Channel by four French customs cutters, and the British cutters Seeker, Challenge and Safeguard.
So commenced a dramatic operation, code named "Geneva II" , for which the whole of our cutter fleet, together with more than a hundred shore-based officers, had been on standby for several days.
By the afternoon Sea Rover was well up channel when  the French customs cutter Vent D'Aval ordered her to stop.
When she failed to respond the French cutter opened fire with her bow chaser, hitting the superstructure of Sea Rover which by then was obviously making for the English coast.
Ignoring all orders to stop the tug continued up channel, still under fire from the French cutters.
No shots were fired from the British boats as these are not armed in any way.
The 499 ton salvage tug then sent out a Mayday distress call to the effect that she was on fire and sinking.
Clouds of smoke were indeed seen billowing up from her deck but it was later established that her cargo was being burnt to destroy the evidence.
In addition, several bales of cannabis were jettisoned and later recovered in an air/sea search.
The old Dutch captain was up to his usual tricks.
After a further two hour chase the Sea Rover was within our territorial waters where she was stopped and arrested by Seeker.
Our boarding crew found the tug looking like a war survivor, her funnel riddled with bullet holes, her decks a charred mess.
She was then ordered into Newhaven for examination in accordance with normal British customs procedure.
It was obvious that the Dutchman had, very wisely, decided to take his chances with British justice rather than with the French.
A thorough search of the Sea Rover revealed only the charred remnants of what was later analysed as cannabis, blowing around the decks.
Sea Rover's nine crew members, five Dutch nationals, two Moroccans, one Canadian and one Briton were detained for questioning at Newhaven, while French customs in Calais arrested four Dutchmen.
In London another UK citizen was also detained for questioning in connection with the case.
After a preliminary hearing at a Lewes court the detained men were released on bail.
The Dutch captain immediately flew back to Holland and freedom, for there was no extradition treaty existing to bring him back.
Only three of the original gang, one Briton and two Moroccans appeared in court to stand trial and they were acquitted.
The prosecution alleged that they took part in a plan to offload cannabis resin at the Norfolk coast, the accused maintained that they had helped to load the cannabis on to the tug, but the drug was destined for Holland and not the UK.
The wily captain's luck was holding in more ways than one for the customs search team found that one of the French shells had ricochetted down an alleyway, through the door of the Captain's cabin and had embedded itself in the leg of a table where the occupant would have been sitting.
There, for the time being, the matter rested.
What had started out as a dramatic sea chase and developed into a running battle had fizzled out in a disappointing anti-climax.
The battle-scarred veteran, Sea Rover, was eventually sold back to her owners for a relatively nominal sum, and sailed back to Holland to fight another day.
The following summer I was in command of Searcher when we paid a courtesy visit to Holland.
Sailing up the North Sea Canal from Ymuiden to Amsterdam we passed a familiar-looking tug being re-fitted in one of the Dutch shipyards.
It was the Sea Rover, soon to be a'roving once more with her old Captain at the helm.
Twelve months later the Captain of Sea Rover pushed his luck once too often.
Returning to  Scheveningen with an unsold bale of cannabis on board he left it rather late to lose it overboard.
Witnesses saw him dump it, and the Dutch authorities were able to prove a case against him, at last, when the drug was recovered.
Sea Rover's Captain and crew were jailed in Holland after two years of cat and mouse games with the Customs of several nations.
To the public it must seem incredible that this sort of thing can happen but all too often the loopholes in our laws are exploited by rogues like the crew of Sea Rover.
Fortunately, many of these loopholes are now being closed by new amendments and, hopefully, there will be less frustration for the law-enforcers who, in the past, have seen many villains slip through the net after they have worked hard to bring them to justice.
This incident inevitably raised the old argument of whether or not it would be wise to carry arms on our Cutters.
The policy of arming any law-enforcement officer brings its own problems, particularly those of a psychological nature and the aspect of proper training in their use.
The French customs are para-military and have less problem in this respect.
The question of arming our cutters has been discussed fully on several occasions and a decision against this step has always been reached.
Flak jackets are available to our crews and issued for some operations.
Whether this policy can be continued for much longer in the face of the decline in scruples shown by the large drug syndicates who are raking in huge profits from sales of cannabis, heroin and cocaine, remains to be seen.
Personally I think not.
I must emphasise that this is entirely my own opinion  and that the Board of Customs has stated as a matter of policy that there are no plans or intentions to arm customs officers or the cutters.
The existing arrangements of asking for police assistance when the presence of weapons is suspected are considered to be quite adequate.
Certainly in my own experience I have never come across armed smugglers, although on at least one occasion I was threatened with a knife when attempting to stop a seaman leaving a ship, and once I was attached by a ship's steward when attempting to relieve him of a briefcase full of uncustomed goods.
This was in my earlier days when carrying out general duties ashore.
Thank goodness these incidents were few and far between.
As a rule, even the more hardened cases respond to authority when they realise the game is up.
Some take a little longer to persuade than others, and, like many of my colleagues, I have been involved in a few "Sweeny" type incidents ashore and afloat.
One of the most arduous of these was in my junior days when I picked up a seaman in the docks attempting to sell cigarettes to a factory worker.
He immediately took to his heels with is case of cigarettes and led me a merry dance away from the docks, through a council estate, finally finishing up on the perimeter track of Ipswich Airport where I was rescued in the nick of time by a squad car full of policemen just as I was about to be filled in by the burly seaman.
After a chase on foot of over three miles he had finally run out of puff and offered to fight me for the goods.
I have never had much stomach for fighting and I certainly did not relish the prospect of having my head knocked off for a few cigarettes!
By way of variation I was coming off night duty one  cold, grey winter's morning and very much looking forward to a warm bed when, for some unknown reason, my revenue conscience was aroused by the sight of a man, whom I recognised as an engineer from one of our early morning ferries, hurrying up the road towards town.
This led to a two mile chase on my bicycle following his refusal to answer my questions and a final on the deserted marshes where large quantities of tobacco had to be recovered from the long grass in a grey December dawn.
Then there was the ship's agent who made a run for it in his car, guessing we would search his house after picking him up with some uncustomed goods.
A cops and robbers chase through the docks with our official mini caught him in the act of phoning home, where we arrived just in time to stop his wife disposing of a large bag of goodies.
These types of situation are faced by most law-enforcement officers at some time during their careers and can usually be resolved by keeping one's temper and sense of proportion.
Since those early days there have been many sea chases with much bigger things at stake, but broadly speaking the same rules apply, although it is sometimes difficult to be dispassionate where hard drugs are concerned.
The Sea Rover episode was the only occasion I have known a smuggling vessel to be fired upon directly during my time with the customs, as a result of failing to heave-to for customs examination.
In this case the circumstances were unusual in that the suspect vessel had been intercepted in French waters and was being chased legitimately by armed French Cutters.
Sea Rover did not have the speed to escape, or the guns to retaliate, but it is interesting to speculate what would have happened if she had been armed or whether she could have been persuaded to stop by less drastic means.
By 1987 the street value of cocaine seized by Customs in the United Kingdom reached £54,000,000 while the figures for heroin seizures had risen to £17,000,000.
The total value of all drugs seizures topped a record figure of £116,000,000.
Impressive statistics, yes, but a chilling reminder that the detections only represented a mere trickle in the rising tide of illegally imported drugs which could be pouring through our controls.
Seizures of cannabis and amphetamines were dropping as the hard drugs began to dominate the scene, but as far as amphetamines are concerned it must be remembered that the seizure figures relate only to illegal imports.
There is a strong possibility that once again amphetamine-type drugs are being manufactured in secret laboratories around the UK, and that in fact there is no falling off in demand and use of this dangerous substance.
There is some evidence that LSD is making a come-back in recent years.
In spite of denials from the managers of the so-called "Acid Music Houses" , that the name has no relation to LSD or Ecstasy (the new similar drug to LSD originating in the USA), the police and drugs councillors are very disturbed about this latest dangerous trend.
The effectiveness of the new law allowing confiscation of drugs profits was amply demonstrated over the years that followed and soon the extent of the huge profits being made by the big drug smuggling rings was revealed.
In October 1988, after a two-year investigation by top  American, British and French anti-drug officers, a whole major international bank, together with eighty four persons were charged with conspiring in a world-wide plot to launder drugs profits.
Former and present staff of the Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International were rounded up in "Operation C Chase" during raids in Britain, the US and France.
Customs sources claimed that the alleged ring laundered some £19 million in drug profits for Colombia's Madellin Cartel, believed to be responsible for nearly eight per cent of the cocaine smuggled into the US.
Looking to the future, in the 1990's the Channel Tunnel is due for completion and the flow of traffic generated by this new route will, no doubt, be fully exploited by the drugs runners and pose new problems for British and French Customs controls.
There can be no let-up in the war against drugs.
DOMESTIC AFFAIRS
By 1978, the wind of change was freshening to a full gale in the cutter service.
Quite apart from the impending expansion and modernisation of our fleet, we had been going through a difficult period in the prevailing political climate at HQ.
Changes in the grade structures following re-organisation of the general service had repercussions on crewing, some of our friends at HQ had moved on or retired and a harder line was being taken by their replacements towards our hitherto fairly flexible conditions of service.
Not unnaturally, there was a certain amount of resentment on both sides as the changes were implemented, but after the initial shock was over and it was realised we must adapt, things simmered down.
Our enthusiasm for getting afloat was an overriding factor — that part of the job remained the same and made up for a lot of hassle.
One of the things that helped us over this difficult period was the fact that earlier that year the cutter crews had decided to form their very own association.
After some lengthy discussion by some of our leading lights, plans were given substance and the Revenue Cutter Association came into being.
It was considered that our pool of crewing officers had now grown to such an extent that we needed a forum where we could air our views and keep in touch both socially and with official trends, bearing in mind that our officers were now drawn from every part of the UK and from many different aspects of Customs and Excise.
In no way did we want a union type association, it was all to be kept low key and friendly, which suited both ourselves and our administration, for we already had an official union which catered for the needs of the Customs and Excise in general.
It was not easy to avoid domestic politics but we tried hard to achieve a delicate balance.
Because of our volunteer system and our love of the job I think we always succeeded in this aim.
I, personally, always tried to avoid being drawn into any kind of union or political affairs, but in the case of the Association I made a slight concession in that I agreed to become Editor of our newsletter, which started out as a news-sheet and eventually grew into a magazine called "Coastlines" , featuring articles, reports from the cutters, poems and competitions.
Publication tended to be erratic and material often hard to come by but I usually managed to get three or four copies to press every year.
I enjoyed writing the editorials in spite of getting my leg pulled about sermonizing — looking back I suppose I was inclined to pontificate slightly.
I believe the magazine was read quite widely even by some of our hierarchy, and sometimes I felt obliged to censor the odd more outspoken word when I considered it might cause trouble.
I was criticised for this at times, but still think I was right to do so as it was in line with association policy.
We held an annual AGM in conjunction with a dinner dance, usually at the Post House Hotel, Southampton, which rapidly grew to the social event of the year and  was even attended by some of our upper echelons at HQ.
On the official side it was a great help to be able to speak with one voice, especially where our specialized knowledge of equipment and operational needs of the boats were concerned.
In these matters we were often able to avoid costly mistakes being made, and on other occasions improve the operational efficiency of our craft with advice on training and equipment, although I must admit that our requirements seldom matched the amount of money available.
It was becoming more widely accepted by our management that, with the increasing sophistication of our craft and equipment and the growth in crew numbers, proper training for all crewing officers was becoming essential.
About this time a change in the Department of Trade regulations regarding the qualifications of ships' officers was being introduced.
Although we were in fact exempt from this, our management wisely decided that we should fall in line with the principle of the new regulations.
Plans were formulated for DTI courses and examinations for our officers at all levels, comparable with those of the Merchant Service.
At the time of my retirement in 1983 the new scheme was being fully implemented with our officers being enrolled at the Warsash school of Navigation.
Our two eight foot steel cutters, Vigilant and Valiant were now nearing the end of their useful life and were not really fast enough for our purposes.
For the time being it was decided to retain Venturous mainly as a training ship until the DTI courses were started.
More Trackers had been ordered, and early in 1978 we were told  that the Department had also ordered two of Brooke Marine's thirty-three metre standard patrol boats.
Many of these boats had been supplied to foreign naval powers and had been proved able and fast in all sea conditions.
They would, of course, be modified from normal naval requirements to suit our purposes.
It was an exciting prospect, the new cruisers would be the largest and most sophisticated vessels ever commissioned by the Department with a top speed in excess of 20 knots and such innovations as stabilizers, gyro compass and an automatic pilot.
Even more exciting for me was the news that our Principal, Reg Clarke, had decided to entrust me with the command of the first of the 1.5 million pound cruisers to be named Searcher.
This act of faith by the Department was one which I hoped would be justified and I was very much looking forward to the challenge.
Because of this new development I was taken off the training scheme with Venturous at Christmas 1978 and returned to Felixstowe office to work ashore until Searcher was launched.
My last trip on Venturous with a training crew was a momentous one.
At that time, following the fitting of new engines by Mackenzie's Shipyard in Buckie on the Moray Firth, this firm was carrying out all our refits.
Our last patrol before Christmas was to be up the East coast to Buckie where we would leave the ship and travel home by train.
Late November found us weather bound at Gt Yarmouth with a stiff north-easter which, after one aborted attempt at continuing northward, had sent us scurrying back to Yarmouth.
Here we berthed ahead of a small German coaster which was discharging timber  from Finland on a regular run.
To keep the training crew occupied I sent them away to this vessel for a day's rummage and to my pleasant surprise it was not long before they returned with the news that they had unearthed a vast cache of spirits and cigarettes in the ship's hospital.
This was owned by the skipper who had stocked up well for some unofficial business on his return to Finland.
(That was his story anyway.)
This incident kept us in Yarmouth the following morning for a court case which resulted in a heavy fine for the erring skipper.
We then left Gt Yarmouth for another attempt at a passage northward and found less wind but a nasty swell outside the harbour.
However we pressed on to the increasing discomfort of our training lads.
The weather improved gradually as we worked our way towards Scotland throughout the following night.
As we were a few days behind schedule by this time I decided to press on while the weather held and the following morning saw us off Montrose with an ominous early shipping forecast of a southerly gale.
At least the gale was from astern, but by the time we were abreast of Aberdeen the wind had increased to a storm force then, several ships were in difficulties and Venturous was becoming difficult to steer, the helmsman being forced to use the engines in conjunction with the wheel to prevent a broach.
In the worst of the motion the fuses on the steering motor went and Bob, our engineer, had to brave the open quarter deck to effect repairs.
he managed the job with great difficulty.
We corkscrewed on our way working towards the lee of the Buchan coast, where it turns westward into the Firth.
We made it in a smother  of white water close inshore towards Buckie.
It was one of the worst trips I ever made in Venturous and it was my last.
As one of the trainees said to me over dinner that night, "If this is a training course, what's the real thing like, skipper?" 
However, that was not Venturous' last word; on her final voyage before being decommissioned the following year, while under the command of Jim Cameron with another training crew, their rummage crew found 108 kilos of cannabis deeply concealed in ballast tanks on a Lebanese vessel at Dover.
At that time this was the largest drugs seizure ever made by a cutter crew.
The big V remained big to the very last and went out with a flourish.
In more ways than one 1979 was to be a momentous year for me.
I knew that I was being considered for the MBE, to be announced in the next Queen's Birthday Honours, and to say I was stunned at the thought was an understatement.
I was glad to accept the honour not so much for myself but for the cutter service as a whole when it was confirmed that I was to attend at Buckingham Palace the following summer.
The first of the Brooke Marine 33 metre Customs Cruisers was launched on schedule at Lowestoft on February 28th by Mrs Valerie Lovelock, wife of the Chairman of the Board.
It was a typical winter's day on the east coast, with a chill, sleet-laden wind which caused the official party to make a hasty withdrawal to the reception lounge after the launching ceremony.
I was present, of course both in a capacity as future commander  and as the reporter of events for "Coastlines" .
An excerpt from my coverage read:
In this welcoming speech Mr M A Prouten, executive chairman of Brooke Marine, recalled that Searcher was not the first ship to be built at his yard for the Customs Department.
Their previous cutter Vigilant was still going strong and it was hoped that Searcher would have an equally successful career.
In a reply, Mr Lovelock gave a short historical background to the choice of the new cruiser's name, pointing out that although it was a precedent for a Departmental vessel, Searcher is an appropriately traditional name in the Customs and Excise with all its connotations.
He also stressed the need for faster and more sophisticated vessels to combat modern smuggling by sea.
The cold buffet lunch, of high standard, included a large cake in the shape and colours of Searcher.
During the reception a beautifully made scale model of Searcher was presented to the Department for display at Headquarters alongside all the other models of cutters through the ages.
With their long history of shipbuilding Brooke Marine certainly knew how to organise these occasions.
Throughout the months preceding the launching I had paid numerous visits to Brooke Marine yard, either calling there in Venturous with the training crews, or latterly driving down from my home in Felixstowe, conveniently situated a mere forty miles up the coast.
It was the first time I had seen a ship built from scratch and it was quite an experience to watch the steel plates being cut by their ingenious machine which controlled a cutter as it drew our the required shapes direct from the blueprint, converting everything to full scale as it cut.
Later, as the plates were welded I watched the hull take form, the bulkheads put in place and, scrambling around the apparent chaos of electrical cables and skeleton framework inside the hull, it was hard to visualise all this as our future living quarters, or that we should ever take her to sea in a fully operational capacity.
At the time of her launching Searcher was still far from completed and much work remained to be carried out, including the installation of the Paxman Valenta engines, delivery of which had been delayed.
In fact, immediately after the launching she was hauled out of the water again and it was to be the following September before she was actually ready, even though an optimistic delivery for June had been promised.
Needless to say, before the actual commissioning I got to know the Brooke Marine Yard and staff very well, and made many friends there.
I was at all times impressed by their standard of workmanship.
Some of the delays with Searcher were as a result of their thoroughness and quality control, others occurred as a result of last minute changes occasioned by our own requirements.
The weeks and months of 1979 passed quickly.
I had plenty to do between normal routine work at Felixstowe and preparation connected with taking over Searcher.
The crew had been selected but our joining date became progressively later with holdups on the new ship.
With the installation of the engines, Bob MacSmythurs, the chief engineer, had gone down to Lowestoft to stand by the ship during the last stages of installing the complex machinery.
On top of all my other problems I had something of an upheaval on the domestic front when my daughter and her two children had to move in with  us for a while.
Soon, a long hot summer was upon us, and my trip to Buckingham Palace became imminent.
A few weeks before the investiture I contracted chicken pox from my grandchildren and, unfortunately, in the way that these childish ailments have with older persons, it affected me very badly.
Apart from being laid low by a raging fever and covered in spots for several weeks, a mysterious stomach ailment left me very shaky.
At the end of all this I had lost about two stones and for the first time in my life, felt very nervy.
However I had no wish to disappoint everyone concerned by postponing by visit to the Palace and, with a lot of help from friends and family I finally made it to London on the great day albeit a shadow of my former self.
Of course I would have enjoyed the occasion much more had I been in better shape, but in the event it all went better than I had dared hope even if I was near to passing out at times.
It was actually my second visit to the Palace, as in 1964 I had accompanied one of my Sea Cadets from Stornoway on the occasion of his Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award presentation.
At that time I happened to be running the scheme as a leader and officer in the Stornoway Sea Cadet Corps and the boy's mother had asked me to attend in her place.
Today it was my turn to be on the receiving end.
It was extremely hot in the glare of the sun outside the Palace and, leaving my family in the courtyard, I was glad to get inside to join the other recipients of medals in the cool of the assembly rooms.
Here we were sorted our into groups according to the types of honours and quite a long wait ensued.
However, time passed pleasantly enough, chatting to other members of my group and absorbing the atmosphere of the building.
It is difficult to define this atmosphere which I find exists for me in many of our traditional buildings and churches.
There is a visual impact of the interior of the palace, of course, the impressive architecture with its pillars and lofty sculptured ceilings, the restful colours of pastel shaded walls with contrasting richer hued drapes and carpets.
A feeling of pride, the presence of history, whatever it is, the end result is a unique blend of peace and dignity.
After a wait of about two hours we joined the long crocodile winding through corridors to the ballroom, with anxious ushers ensuring that we were all in the right order of presentation.
On a balcony in the background an immaculately uniformed band of the Household Guards played selections of light classical music to relax everyone.
Eventually, taking my cue as previously coached, I found myself shaking hands with Prince Charles.
He was making the investitures in lieu of his mother who was touring Africa at the time.
As expected, I found Prince Charles very easy to talk with and we had quite an informal chat, mostly about boats of course, before I stepped backwards along the red carpet with my medal pinned on.
This was immediately whipped off by a waiting attendant who then passed it along a table for it to be boxed up and returned to me in the ante room.
As I walked back through the ballroom past the seated guests I saw my wife, daughter and son waving and smiling and waved back, relieved that it was all over.
At the end of the investitures I was joined by my family and we walked to the exit through the long corridors  joined by small flights of deep-carpeted stairs.
My daughter was intrigued by the statue-like posture of members of the Household Guards who stood at strategic points en route, not moving an eyelid.
 "Are they real, dad?" she whispered, as we passed one young guardsmen, his burnished helmet reflecting the glittering chandelier above.
She was reassured when he suddenly looked down at her and winked appreciatively.
After a photographic session near the Palace Gates I was just about at the end of my tether and was thankful to catch a taxi back to Liverpool Street Station and home.
It was, of course, a very great occasion for myself and family for which, along with all the other highlights of my career, I shall always be deeply grateful to the Department of Customs and Excise.