

THE INITIAL DESTINATIONS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ADVANCED COURSE STUDENTS
Summary and Conclusions
Part A of the interim report is based on a survey of the initial destinations of 1984 Information Technology Advanced Course students as they completed their courses.
It is the first assessment of the expanded IT Advanced Courses programme.
The returns from 55 courses have been used in analysis, but more have been received since the survey was temporarily closed to allow for the preparation of this report for the Science and Engineering Research Council.
Returns from up to 70 courses are anticipated.
This chapter provides a brief summary of the main findings of the initial destinations survey.
Further details of the methodology and results are contained in the chapters that follow.
The results will be updated to include the additional returns referred to above in a second interim report planned for June 1985, along with information on the findings of a follow-up survey that is to take place in Spring 1985.
The main findings to date are: 923 destinations questionnaires were sent to the 55 courses so far included in analysis: 624 were returned completed by students, giving a preliminary response rate of 68 per cent;
71 per cent of Advanced Course students included in this stage of the analysis had been funded by SERC.
One in ten had employer sponsorship;
while four-fifths of the students were studying on IT Advanced Courses that finished in September, 1984, the survey did include those whose courses finished right through from June to October;
women still made up a small proportion of postgraduate IT students in 1983–84 — just 13 per cent;
in spite of continuing claims of IT skill shortages in 1984, one-third of students completing IT Advanced Courses did not have a job to go to and were seeking employment at the end of their courses;
34 per cent of SERC funded students were looking for work at the end of their courses;
one half of the students commenced employment at the end of their courses; a further 8 per cent had received a job offer and would be  starting work shortly;
polytechnic students were rather more likely to be seeking employment than those studying IT at university;
at the end of the course 47 per cent of women students were looking for employment, compared to 32 per cent of the men;
conversion students were more likely than IT specialists to be both in work and to be seeking employment.
This is explained by the much greater propensity of IT specialists to carry on their studies (three times more likely);
for SERC funded students, 56 per cent of conversion and 48 per cent of specialist students would be in or about to start work at the end of their courses;
the greater propensity of specialist students to carry on their studies further reinforces the view that conversion courses add to the stock of those with IT skills in a way that specialist courses do not;
a much higher proportion of conversion students was available to employers because they were less likely to carry on their studies after the Advanced Course;
students in the two largest IT subject areas of computing and micro-electronics were more likely to be in employment than the average;
the two IT subject areas which, for SERC students, had the highest proportions in employment and the lowest seeking work, were microelectronics and IKBS/MMI/AI.
Computing had the third highest percentage of SERC students in work;
the 363 students in or about to start work were being employed by 192 different employing organisations (see Appendix A);
employers in the IT industries and in education dominated those recruiting from the Advanced Courses.
Education was the single largest employing sector but mainly because of non-students being  sponsored by their educational employers;
the employers of 1984 IT Advanced Course students did include some user companies, but the numbers were small in comparison to more mainstream IT work;
computer programming was the single largest employment activity;
those seeking work were looking for the same kinds of jobs as those that had found it;
students without jobs clearly wanted to use the IT skills acquired on their Advanced Courses in the world of work;
nine per cent of students were continuing their studies, mainly doing research for a PhD qualification;
92 per cent of students provided their names and addresses so that they might be contacted for a follow-up postal survey planned for Spring 1985 (571 students).
The Survey of 1984 IT Advanced Course Students
3.1 Introduction
In addition to providing information to the Science and Engineering Research Council on the initial destinations of IT Advanced Course students completing courses in 1984, a secondary objective was to test a method of monitoring the output from the courses that may be adopted in future years.
For the 1984 exercise it was decided to involve course organisers in the collection of information, so that they would have an improved awareness of what their own students were doing after course completion.
Preliminary work carried out by [MS during 1983 found a generally low level of information in departments about the initial destinations of their postgraduate students (1).
By involving course organisers in the distribution of destinations questionnaires and in the collection of completed questionnaires for despatch to [MS for analysis and interpretation, it was felt that this mechanism would assist the flow of information.
In the parallel exercise to information engineering research students (see Part 0) a different method of data collection was used, with questionnaires being sent directly to named students in departments, together with a reply-paid envelope addressed to IMS.
The difference in response rates achieved is of more than passing interest.
3.2 Preliminary Information
In early summer 1984,[MS wrote to the organisers of the 77 conversion and specialist information technology Advanced Courses running in 1983–84 (see Appendix [I).
The course organisers were informed about the study and its objectives and were asked for their cooperation in data collection.
In order that the correct quantity of numbered questionnaires could be despatched close to the course end date, organisers were asked to advise [MS on the number of SERC supported students still on the course, and the number of non-SERC "home" students completing in 1984.
A simple slip was completed and returned to [MS.
Of the 77 courses contacted in this way, 74 provided the information requested.
In a number of instances reminders were required (both written and by telephone).
Repeated attempts to gain information from the remaining three produced no results.
3.3 Timing
Because the Advanced Courses officially finished at any time from June through to December 1984, the question of timing became significant (one course officially ends in early 1985).
The intention was for students to complete a short initial destinations questionnaire as they approached the end of their course, and it was suggested that this might be done in the last formal course session, or when projects were handed in (if appropriate).
While the course organisers were able to operate in this way in a majority of cases, for a small number of courses which either finished early in the year, or employer.based project work was being carried out over the summer months, organisers posted on the questionnaire on behalf of[MS.
Timing was also a significant factor in the production of this interim report.
Questionnaires returned by course organisers up until 8 November 1984 have been included in analysis.
Others have been returned after this date, and some are still outstanding at the time of writing.
Reminder letters have been sent to those course organisers with courses ending by 31 October, who have still to send in completed questionnaires.
Questionnaires received after 8 November are being added to the data file, and revised estimates of key variables will be included in the second interim report In June 1985, along with information from the planned follow-up study.
3.4 Sample Size
Of the 74 courses providing student numbers data to [MS, two had no students and one course was being rapidly phased out.
As noted above, one course finishes in early 1985.
All course organisers returning slips showing the number of students on their courses were sent questionnaires.
In all, then, questionnaires here sent to 70 courses for completion by finishing students.
Table 3.1 shows the number of questionnaires sent out.
Table 3.2 shows the balance between conversion and specialist courses In the distribution of questionnaires.
3.5 Response Rate
As noted above, this interim report is based on an analysis of initial destination questionnaires returned to [MS by 8 November 1984.
It includes returns from 55 course organisers.
However, not even all these returns are complete, and some organisers still anticipate a further trickle of completed questionnaires from students.
Since the survey has yet to be formally closed, an interim response rate has been calculated on the basis of the number of questionnaires sent to these 55 courses and returns to date from them.
Since returns are still anticipated from most of the remaining 15 courses, the response rate has to be regarded as a preliminary indication of how well the survey worked using course organisers as distributors and collectors.
The 55 courses from which completed questionnaires have been received had been sent 923 questionnaires.
Table 3.3 shows the breakdown of questionnaire distribution for these 55 courses.
This report is based on the analysis of 624 completed questionnaires, returned to [MS from 55 courses.
The response rate on returns to date, then, is 68 per cent.
And even if based on the assumption that no more returns can be included In analysis, the response rate is over 50 per cent of the total number of questionnaires sent out.
(In fact, over fifty additional questionnaires had been sent in by the third week in November).
The 624 IT Advanced Course students returning questionnaires consisted of 137 completing specialist courses and 487 conversion students.
Within an overall response rate of 68 per cent, then, the response rate for specialist students was 64 per cent , and 69 per cent for conversion students.
Two-thirds of SERC-funded students on the 55 courses completed questionnaires.
3.6 Type of Course of Respondents
Seventy-eight per cent of IT Advanced Course students included in the analysis were completing conversion courses in 1984: 22 per cent were specialists.
Of the SERC-funded students alone, there was an 80:20 split between students on conversion and specialist courses.
Overall, four-fifths were studying at university and one-fifth were polytechnic students.
Seventy three per cent of the SERF students were studying at university.
All the polytechnic students were studying on conversion programmes.
The distribution of students according to IT subject area is shown in Table 3.4.
It can be seen from Table 3.4 that the students returning initial destinations questionnaires to IMS were dominated by those studying computing: six in ten were completing computing Advanced Courses.
One in five were studying micro-electronics.
The number of students involved in the other IT subject areas varied — between 3 and 6 per cent in any one subject.
One in five of the SERC funded students had studied on a specialist course: four-fifths were conversion students.
Students in receipt of TOES awards, were self.financing and even those sponsored by their employer were similarly split.
3.7 Gender, Student Awards and Course End Date
The relatively small number of women studying on IT Advanced Courses was confirmed again by this study: women made up fourteen per cent of the students returning questionnaires.
They made up 16 per cent of conversion students but only 4 per cent of those studying on specialist IT courses.
Four-fifths of the women were studying on computing courses.
Thirteen per cent of the students funded by SERC were women.
Just over 70 per cent of students had been in receipt of an SERC award whilst on their Advanced Course.
Over one in ten were sponsored by their employer.
Table 3.5 gives details.
Of the 442 SERC students, 73 per cent were studying at university and 27 per cent at a polytechnic.
Overall, four-fifths of students were studying on courses that finished in September 1984 (Table 3.6).
But one in ten students ended their studies in June, July or August.
Eight per cent finished in October, but at the time of writing many of the October course organisers had still to return questionnaires to [MS for coding and analysis.
3.8 Follow-Up Study
In Spring 1985 a follow-up survey is planned to examine the employment and other destinations of students some six months after the end of the IT Advanced Course.
Students were asked to provide their names and an address where they could be contacted then.
Five hundred and seventy one students provided this information (92 per cent) and will be involved in the follow-up exercise.
Four hundred and five of the 442 SERC students so far included in the initial destinations survey will be contacted for the follow-up study.
(1) Gordon A and Pearson R. (1984).
Manpower for Information Technology.
[MS Report lumber 83.
Institute of Manpower Studies.
References
The Initial Destinations of Advanced Course Students
4.1 Introduction
This chapter is concerned with the immediate post-course destinations of the 624 IT Advanced Course students who had returned questionnaires to [MS by early November 1984.
It considers their employment status at the time of the survey, the likelihood of being in or about to start work according to the IT subject studied, the type of institution attended and other key influences.
Students provided this information as the end of their course approached.
4.2 Destination at the end of the Course
Just over one half of IT Advanced Course students completing in 1984 entered employment immediately on completion of the course.
A further 8 per cent had received an acceptable job offer and would be commencing work shortly after the end of the course.
Table 4.1 provides summary details of the very first destinations of students at the end of their courses.
From Table 4.1 it can be seen that almost one-third of IT postgraduates would be unemployed and looking for work at the end of their course.
Just under one in ten were continuing their studies.
Thirty-four per cent of the students funded by SERC were seeking employment.
Students who had studied IT at a polytechnic were rather less likely to be In employment or to be continuing their studies than their university peers, and more likely to be looking for employment (Table 4.2).
This was partly a reflection of the balance between specialist and conversion course provision on either side of the binary line.
4.3 Employment and IT Course
Students studying on specialist IT programmes were less likely than conversion students to be in employment or to be seeking work (Table 4.3).
This apparent contradiction is explained by the fact that, overall, almost one in five IT specialists were continuing their studies, usually aiming for PhD qualifications.
SERC funded students in both specialist and conversion courses were more likely than the average to be continuing their studies.
In terms of availability on the labour market, then, 93 per cent of conversion students were in work, waiting to start work, or looking for work.
Eighty per cent of specialists were available to employing organisations in this way.
There is particular interest in the initial destinations of IT Advanced Course students according to the main information technology subject area studied on the course.
Following the subject breakdown into the seven categories suggested by the SERC IT Directorate, it is possible to see whether employment chances were better or worse than the average, depending on IT course content.
The  basic statistical problem with this type of analysis, of course, is that some of the subject areas contain small numbers of students.
Analysis of this kind, then, can only be suggestive of the influence of IT subject.
Table 4.4 shows the initial destinations of students and the main IT subject followed.
According to the information collected to date, students in the two largest subject areas, computing and micro-electronics, were more likely than the average to be in employment.
Students of communications, instrumentation, special applications and (marginally) computing were more likely than the rest to be seeking work.
The variation in the proportion of students carrying on with their full-time education was large, as Table 4.4 shows.
4.4 Employment Status and Source of Finance
As noted in Chapter 3, 71 per cent of students had been in receipt of SERC finance for their Advanced Course (Table 3.5).
The Science and Engineering Research Council are clearly interested in the initial destinations of those students they have funded.
Table 4.5 shows the initial destinations of students according to their source of funding for participation in the Advanced Course.
Just one of the students sponsored by their employer was seeking employment on completion — not surprisingly, the rest had jobs.
Fifty-five per cent of SERC students finished their courses and started employment immediately or shortly thereafter.
Thirty-four per cent were seeking work.
Eleven per cent were continuing their education.
Excluding those sponsored by an employer, SERC students were finding or not finding jobs much in line with other sources of funding.
Students who financed themselves through their courses were the most likely of any  group to be seeking employment.
4.5 Initial Destination and Type of IT Course: SERC Students
For those funded by SERC, 56 per cent of conversion students would be in or about to start work at the end of their courses.
The figure for specialists was rather lower at 48 per cent.
However, in line with students as a whole, SERC specialists were also less likely to be seeking employment than those who studied on conversion Advanced Courses.
Specialists were three times more likely to be continuing their studies, mainly registering for PhD higher degrees.
The much higher propensity of specialists to carry on their studies this way further reinforces the view of some employers (1) that conversion courses add to the stock of those with IT skills in a way that the specialist streams do not.
While women only comprised 13 per cent of the students financed by SERC, they were finding it rather more difficult to find work than the men.
And while the fact that the women were almost exclusively found on conversion courses, and in computing, the difference between men and women cannot be explained by IT course type alone.
As Table 4.6 shows, 32 per cent of male SERC students were looking for work at the end of their courses: 47 per cent of the women were in this position.
The difference was just as large if one compares men and women studying on conversion courses only.
The conversion men were also twice as likely to be continuing their studies.
4.6 Initial Destination and IT Subject: SERC Students
The two IT subject areas which had the highest proportion of SERC-funded students in employment and the lowest levels seeking were micro-electronics and the IKBS/MMI/AI group.
Computing had the third highest percentage in work, but was average in terms on those still looking at the end of their courses.
Table 47 shows the employment status of the 442 SERC students according to their IT subject area.
This table combines specialist and conversion students.
Higher proportions of instrumentation, control, communications and IKBS/MMI/AI students were continuing their studies.
As noted earlier, however, for some IT subject areas only a small number of students were involved.
Tables 4.8 and 4.9 further divide the IT subjects and conversation modes, and show the initial destinations of students according to the type of course pursued as well as subject area.
While further compounding the small numbers problem, there were interesting differences between the two course types.
For example, specialist students of control were almost twice as likely to be in work than those pursuing control in conversion mode.
Micro-electronics and IKBS/MMI/AI were well placed in both.
And while computing conversion and specialist students were seeking work in similar proportions, there were marked differences in their propensities to actually be in work or to be carrying on their studies, as Tables 4.8 and 4.9 show.
4.7 Students in Employment
The 363 students in or about to start work at the end of the IT Advanced Course (58 per cent) were working for 192 different employing organisations (see Appendix A).
Recruitment by any single employer varied from one up to 25.
The employer taking 25 recruited both from specialist (5) and conversion (20) courses.
Students funded by SERC were working for 133 different employers.
The maximum taken on by any single employer was 14.
The activities of employers varied enormously, from the IT industries to retailing, transport and other user companies.
However, it was concentrated in the IT industries and in education, as Table 4.10 shows.
Education was taking one in ten of the output of students and employed 18 per cent of those with jobs.
In fact, even if one considers just those with jobs, only four business areas employed 10 per cent or more of students with work, and only seven had 5 per cent or above.
The main employers then, in descending order of importance, were education, software support services, electronic information systems (design and manufacture), telecommunications, aerospace, instrumentation and control work, and local government.
Conversion students were well represented in all these areas.
As Table 4.10 shows, there were interesting differences between the SERC and non-SERC students in the pattern of employers' business activities.
Only one in ten of the SERC students were employed in education, whereas almost one in three of the rest were working in education.
This was because so many of the non-SERC students had been sponsored/seconded onto IT Advanced Courses by an educational employer, typically a university or polytechnic.
SERC students were much more likely to be working in the electronic information systems industry (eg mainframe or micro-computers, word processors etc) and In software services than were non-SERC students.
While education was the single most significant activity the employers of Advanced Course students engaged in, when it came to job titles and the nature of the jobs the students were or would be doing, educational occupations were not dominant in the same way.
This was because many of the IT skills acquired on the Advanced Courses could be effectively used in a variety of business settings, eg programming or systems work.
Those not engaged in programming, systems or educational work were most frequently design or development engineers in their employer's specific activity.
Non-SERC students were eight times more likely than SERC students to be working as lecturers, mainly because of employer sponsorship.
Programming work has been carried out by one-third of SERC students were/would be doing.
4.8 Students Looking for Work
In view of the much publicised claims of skill shortages for IT staff in 1984, It was rather surprising to find such a high proportion of Advanced Course students still seeking employment at the end of their courses.
Overall, 32 per cent were looking for work.
Of those students funded by SERC, 34 per cent were seeking employment.
The kinds of jobs being looked for were within Information technology or education, the latter almost certainly also within an IT field.
One-third of the 202 students looking for work were hoping/planning to become computer programmers: this was the largest single category.
The rest were spread rather thinly across the categories of employment listed in Table 4.11.
Just two students were hoping to become lecturers.
4.9 Students "Not Seeking" 
Three of the four students not looking for employment and without plans to continue their studies would be travelling overseas for a time before commencing job search.
The fourth was pregnant.
4.10 Further Study
Fifty-five students, 9 per cent, were carrying on their studies on completion of the IT Advanced Course.
All but six of these students would be studying at university.
Two were carrying on at a polytechnic, and one was training to be a teacher at a college of Higher Education.
No further information on institution to be attended was available for the remaining three students.
Forty-seven of the 55 students continuing their studies had been financed by SERC on the IT Advanced Course.
Just two of the SERC students were women.
Seventy per cent of those continuing their studies were staying on In the same institution where they had taken the Advanced Course: the rest were changing institutions.
The 55 students were studying at 26 different higher education institutions.
Almost all these carrying on in full-time education had registered for a PhD: 91 per cent.
Two students were studying for an MSc by research, and the rest were doing other things.
Seven in ten were continuing to work in an IT area, building on the knowledge and skills acquired in the Advanced Course.
4.11 Conclusions
This chapter contains an assessment of the initial destinations of IT Advanced Course students in 1984.
In a single year the number of awards available from SERC for students on such courses increased fivefold to 1000, as part of the IT Initiative.
There is great interest, therefore, in the extent to which these students have been able to obtain jobs on completion of their studies.
The results presented in"this chapter are based on 624 completed student questionnaires returned to IMS by the organisers of 55 Advanced Courses.
Four hundred and forty two SERC-funded students have been Involved In this examination of initial destinations.
Questionnaires were completed as the end of the course approached.
Up to 70 courses will be involved in further analysis.
In view of the widespread discussion (and agreement) about IT skill shortages during 1984, it might have been reasonably expected that very high proportions of Advanced Course students would have jobs to go to at the end of their courses.
While most students not in receipt of a job offer were making applications and attending interviews at the time they completed the Initial  destinations questionnaires, the fact that one third of students would be looking for employment at the end of the courses can only be regarded as a disappointing, and rather unexpected, finding.
High proportions of both specialist and conversion students were looking for work.
And while there was some variation depending on the students' IT subject area, other than in the still numerically small area of IKBS/MMI/AI, in no other subject did the proportion of SERC-funded students seeking employment fall below one quarter.
In 1983, when a much smaller number of students completed IT Advanced Courses, 14 per cent were unemployed at the end of their courses (1), a figure which halved in the following six months (2).
However, the labour market has absorbed far more IT Advanced Courses students in 1984 than were even available to employers in 1983.
This was a positive finding.
And in the coming months it can reasonably be anticipated that many of those currently looking for employment will be successful.
The follow-up survey planned for Spring 1985 will test just how successful they have been in job search.
In spite of these caveats, however, the difference between the supply of those with IT skills acquired on Advanced courses and the apparent early demand for their skills remains.
planning the availability of IT Advanced Course places in future years clearly needs a proper assessment of manpower demand in terms of number of graduates, "quality" , content and balance of course programmes and mode of teaching.
The Institute of Manpower Studies are, concurrent with their work on the supply side, to provide this much required assessment of demand during 1985, supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council.
References
(1) Gordon A and Pearson R (1984).
Manpower for Information Technology.
IMS Report Number 83.
Institute of Manpower Studies.
(2) Gordon A (1984).
The Employment Destinations of 1983 IT postgraduates: Six Months After.
INS Report Number 90.
Institute of Manpower Studies.
THE INITIAL DESTINATIONS OF 1984 INFORMATION ENGINEERING RESEARCH STUDENTS
Summary and Conclusions
5.1 Introduction
Part B of this interim report to the Science and Engineering Research Council is concerned with the initial destinations of research students working in the information engineering area whose SERC studentships were due to end during 1984.
It is based on a questionnaire survey carried out during September and October, 1984.
The survey was closed on 17th October, 1984, and, of necessity, the analysis and discussion in this report covers those areas considered to be of most value to SERC that could be assessed quickly: this interim report was required by the end of November, 1984.
Further analysis of the data is currently being carried out, and the results of this work, together with the analysis of a follow-up survey planned for Spring 1985, will be considered in another interim report scheduled for June 1985.
An assessment of the initial destinations of IT Advanced Course students completing their courses in 1984 was the subject of Part A.
This chapter summarises the main findings of the initial destinations survey of 1984 information engineering research students.
5.2 Survey Respondents
initial destinations questionnaires were sent to 171 SERC-funded students: SERC provided details of the names and departments of students holding information engineering awards that were due to come to an end in 1984;
usable questionnaires were returned to IMS by 139 students, giving an 81 per cent response rate;
13 per cent of respondents were Women, 87 per cent men;
94 per cent were carrying out research in a university department, 6 per cent were polytechnic students;
just over one third of students were in receipt of a CASE award.
5.3 Summary of Results
At the time of the survey 70 per cent of 1984 research students were already in employment or waiting to start work;
19 per cent were looking for work;
a high proportion of students were delaying job search, mainly because they planned to continue writing up their theses.
Twelve per cent of students were not seeking employment at the time of the survey;
CASE students were rather more likely to be in employment than those with ordinary studentships;
just under one in five CASE students in employment were working for the employing organisation associated with their CASE award;
the type of department where the student was registered did not always give a good indication of the research area being covered;
students registered in an electronics, electrical/electronic or other kind of engineering department were slightly less likely to be in employment at the time of the survey than those in other kinds of department;
research students whose work covered physics, computing or optical fibres seemed particularly well-placed on the job market;
the research subject areas where all were in employment were physics, Computing/physics, computing with non-IT subjects, and in optical fibres;
research students at work were being employed by 61 different employing organisations 34 were industrial/commercial organisations and 27 were educational.
(See Appendix);
the number of students recruited by any one employer ranged from one to five; just over one half of the students in employment were working in education, as lecturers/teachers or in research;
of those not employed in education, research students were most numerous working in the design and manufacture of information systems, software services and in telecommunications;
non-CASE students were twice as likely as their CASE peers to be working in education;
the 26 students seeking employment were looking in the same kinds of business areas as those who had been more successful in job search;
of the 16 students not seeking employment at the time of the survey, 14 planned to carry on writing up their theses, and two had arranged extended visits overseas.
Information Engineering Research Students in 1984
6.1 Introduction
This chapter briefly discusses the characteristics of the research students returning questionnaires to IMS as part of the assessment of the initial employment destinations of information engineering research students whose SERC grant support was due to end in 1984.
The destinations themselves and the relationship between IT subject area, personal characteristics and destination are discussed in Chapter 7.
6.2 Sample and Respondents
The Science and Engineering Research Council provided a list of the names and departments of the 171 information engineering research students whose grants were due to end in 1984.
This list included 60 with and 111 without CASE awards.
The research students' grants were ending at different points in the year, but were concentrated In the third quarter of 1984.
A short questionnaire was sent to all 171 students in the sample, addressed to them personally In their university or polytechnic department.
Questionnaires were despatched at the beginning of September.
Departments were requested to forward questionnaires to students not in the department during September, and also to those whose grant entitlement had ended earlier in the year.
One reminder letter and a repeat questionnaire was sent in mid-September.
The survey was closed on 17 October 1984.
When the survey was closed 141 questionnaires had been returned to IMS (82 per cent).
One was returned by the post office and one other had been sent to an inappropriate student.
The analysis and discussion are, therefore, based on the completed questionnaires of 139 research students.
The usable response rate was thus 81 per cent overall.
The response rate of CASE students was 85 per cent.
6.3 Gender and Institution
87 per cent of research students returning questionnaires were men, 13 per cent women.
94 per cent were Carrying out research in a university department.
Six per cent were polytechnic students.
6.4 SERC Grant
While the majority of research students were holding SERC awards that ended in the third quarter of 1984, just over one in ten had other end dates, as Table 6.1 shows.
37 per cent of the students returning questionnaires were in receipt of a CASE award from SERC, while 62 per cent held an ordinary research studentship (two students did not answer).
The CASE students' employment destinations are discussed separately in paragraphs 7.3 and 7.6.
6.5 Research Area
Three ways were attempted to gain useful information on the IT subject area of the students' research.
Information on each student's department discipline was coded, which gave some Inkling of the student's own research area.
This, of course, could only give a very broad idea of the scope of the research.
Students were also asked for the titles of their theses, but in the event these proved so variable, imprecise or (frequently) unknown, it did not prove possible for this interim report to use this information.
Of most value was the students' own assessment of the IT subject area(s) covered by their research.
Opportunities were given for students to write in any subjects not covered by a prepared checklist.
Table 6.2 shows the distribution of research students across the different departments.
Table 6.3 provides rather more useful information on the subject area(s) covered by the students' research, as identified by the students themselves.
It can be seen from Table 6.3 that over one half of the research students involved in the study had a research area embraced by computing on its own or in combination with other subject areas.
It is interesting to note that a lower proportion, one-third, were registered In computing departments (Table 6.2).
Traditional departmental and subject boundaries were clearly being crossed by large numbers of students in their research work.
6.6 Follow-Up
Part of the work being carried out by IMS for the Science and Engineering Research Council involves a short follow-up study in Spring 1985, to check on the short term destinations of research students, their salary levels, and the extent to which those looking for work in September 1984 managed to find it (see 1.3).
Students were asked to provide a contact address if they were willing to take part in this follow-up: 89 per cent of students did so.
The Spring follow-up, then, will involve 123 research students whose SERC grant ended In 1984, out of an initial sample of 171.
The 1985 exercise will thus go to 71 per cent of the information engineering students involved in the survey at the beginning.
Initial Destinations of 1984 Research Students
7.1 Introduction
This chapter discusses the initial employment destinations of information engineering research students supported by SERC, whose grant aid was due to end in 1984.
It relates destination to IT subject area, the type of award held, gender and other characteristics.
There is particular interest in the jobs held by former research students and the nature of the employing organisations they have joined, or are waiting to join.
7.2 Student Activities in September 1984
At the time of the questionnaire survey, 60 per cent of 1984 "finishing" research students were in full-time employment, one was in part-time employment, and a further 9 per cent were waiting to start work, having received an acceptable job offer.
Nineteen per cent were looking for employment.
Sixteen students were not looking for work at the time of the survey.
Two of these planned to travel for some months before commencing job search: the rest planned to continue writing up their theses.
Sometimes this was to be done with the aid of a department or institution studentship or scholarship.
Table 7.1 summarises the information available on the employment status of information engineering research students in September 1984.
Similar proportions of university and polytechnic research students were in employment or waiting to start work.
Two of the 26 students looking for work were polytechnic students.
One student looking for employment had finished his grant entitlement in the first quarter of 1984, and had been job-seeking for six months (Table 7.2).
One student looking still had some time to go before his grant aid ended.
The rest  would have their grants ending by the end of September.
7.3 Student Activities and CASE Awards
Students who had been in receipt of a CASE award from SERC were rather more likely to be in employment or waiting to start work than those with regular studentships.
The difference between the two groups of students were not large, however, and both groups contained relatively small numbers, of course.
As Table 7.3 shows, almost three-quarters of the 51 CASE students were classified as in employment, compared to two-thirds of non-CASE students.
Similar proportions were not seeking work at the time of the survey.
7.4 Employment Status and IT Subject Area
When classified by the department where the student was studying for his/her research degree, those registered in electronics, electrical/electronic engineering and other types of engineering departments were more likely to be seeking employment than other research students (Table 7.4).
As noted above, this was an imperfect indicator of the IT research area of students.
Of more value was an examination of employment status by the students' own assessments of the subject content of their research work.
(Table 7.5.)
The difficulty here is of a different order.
The very diverse nature of the IT theses being covered by students' researches meant that very small numbers of students were frequently found studying particular combinations of the broad church that is information technology.
It has to be remembered that the students whose grants were due to end in 1984 had commenced their research work before the expansionist IT Initiative, and are smaller in number than those  who will be completing their research work (or grant entitlement) from the mid-1980s onwards.
Table 7.5 show the employment status of research students in the IT area in September 1984.
There appeared to be little difference between broad subject areas in the propensity of research students to be in or waiting to enter arranged employment.
However, on the basis of Table 7.5, and recognising some of the very small numbers involved, research students in the following areas were less likely than the average to be seeking employment:
computing
communications
control
microelectronics
physics
computing/control
computing/physics
mathematics
artificial intelligence
computing/other
optical fibres
Students in research areas that involved computing and physics appeared to be particularly well-placed on the job market.
The subject areas (included in the above list) where no-one was looking for employment were in physics, computing/physics, computing with non-IT subjects, and in optical fibres.
It is interesting to note that among those subject areas with lower than average levels of students seeking employment were all the "purer" IT specialisms.
There are two main interpretations that Can be put on this finding.
One appears logical but as yet is hypothetical, pending the outcome of detailed discussions with the employers of IT specialists.
The other is of concern from a research viewpoint.
The first hypothesis is that employers are familiar with single stream research work, and in recruitment decisions, are acting conservatively.
So, research work closely related to developments in a single discipline such as communications or micro-electronics are more easily understandable, and may seem more applied and less esoteric than cross-discipline work.
The second interpretation is of more concern.
In completing the questionnaire, research students may have opted to complete parts of it in the quickest way without much thought.
There may not have been the fullest consideration of the  range of IT subjects utilised in student's research.