

I stood at the bar with the Morning Line, WITCH WHO LIED FOR DR SEX.
ITS ONLY…
PUPPY LOVE.
I BACK IRA — RED KEITH.
MY SECRET LOVE BY TV'S MIDGE: SEE CENTRE PAGES.
Now is this any way to interpret the world?
Seems there's a major rumble brewing in Poland.
Solidarity is giving Moscow the V-signs and fight-intros.
Russia will beat Poland up, I'm sure, if things go on this way.
That's what I'd so.
I mean, give them an inch…
The speculation about Lady Diana's trousseau continues.
I have no strong views on the trousseau, but I wish they'd show that famous snap again, the one where she's holding the kid in her arms and you can see right through her dress.
A barmaid who cudgelled her landlord boyfriend to death with a beer flagon has been sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment (suspended).
How come?
Because she pleased Pre-Menstrual Tension.
I'd have thought that PMT was enough of a male hazard anyway, without that kind of mollycoddling.
Another granny has been mob-raped in her sock by black boys and skinheads.
What is the new craze for grannies?
This one's eighty-two, for Christ's sake.
Getting raped at that age — Jesus, it must be the last thing you need.
Here's another piece about that chick who's dying in her teens because, according to the Line, she's allergic to the twentieth century.
Poor kid…
Well I have my problems too, sister, but I don't have yours, I'm not allergic to the twentieth century.
I am addicted to the twentieth century.
Terminal Three was in terminal chaos, the air and light suffused with last things, planet panic, money Judgement.
We are fleeing Earth for a new world while there is still hope, while there are still changes.
I queued, checked in, climbed the stairs, hit the bar, I got frisked, X-rayed, cleared, I hit the bar, plundered duty-free, walked the chutes, paced the waiting room until we entered the  ship, two by two, all types represented, to make our getaway…
Aboard the travel tube (a new kind of waiting room) we sat in lines, like an audience, to check out the art therapy on offer: toothache muzak, and, adorning the canvas curtain of the home-movie screen, a harbour view from a bracingly talentless brush.
Next, the death-defying act from the stewardesses, those bashful girls and their oxygen mine.
But the stalls gave the bird to this dance of doom.
Unhooked from London, we boiled and shuddered and raced.
Away!
I thought, as we climbed through the air with the greatest of ease.
I looked down at the pretty patterns that streets don't know they make.
Me, I was flying economy, but the plane, churning sideways now, was guzzling gas at seven gallons a mile.
Even the Fiasco is more economical than that.
I was flying economy, but I too needed my fuel.
With cigarette and lighter cocked, I awaited the release of NO SMOKING.
Twisting my neck, I monitored the funereal approach of the drinks trolley.
I wolfed down my lunch, charming a second helping out of the all-smiles stewardess.
I love airline food and further suspect that there's money in it somewhere.
I once tried to interest Terry Linex in the idea of opening an airfood restaurant.
Obviously you'd need proper seats, trays, mayonnaise sachets, and so on.
You could even have video films, semi-darkness, no-smoking sections, paper bags.
Linex liked the way I was thinking, but he said that you'd never get the punters in and out quickly enough.
The food would never be fast enough to make really fast money…
Using the costly head-pincers, I watched the in-flight movie.
The movie was a wreck, of course.
The movie was a flapping, squawking, gobbling turkey.
I hope my movie is better than that: I certainly hope it makes more money.
(An airline sale within three months of release?
This has to be a tragedy for everyone involved.)
You know, the thing I want more than anything else — you could call it my dream in life — is to make lots of money.
I would cheerfully go into the alchemy business, if it existed and made lots of money…
We travelled on through air and time.
Still four hours to kill.
Drinking and smoking, alas, do not claim one's undivided attention.
That's the only fault I have to find with these activities.
Some people, it seems to me are never satisfied.
Not content with her smart new chequebook, Selina now wants a Vantage card.
Oh yeah, and a baby.
A baby…
I looked around the quarter-empty aircraft.
Everyone appeared to be sleeping or reading.
I suppose reading must come in quite handy at times like these.
The tousled girl in front of me, she was reading a buxom magazine: its text was in French, I think, but even I could tell that the article she scanned was about fellatio technique — blowjob knowhow.
The fur coat on the seat beside her was uncontrollably voluminous, like a distending liferaft.
She was flying to her man, or maybe she was flying away from him, to another one.
The intent, bespectacled young lady to my left, in contrast, was reading a book called Rousseau's Philosophy.
This gave me a neat opening.
I fetched another fistful of miniatures and spent the rest of the flight telling her about my philosophy.
It was tough, but we got through the time somehow.
 "I have travelled widely" , said Fielding Goodney,"in the world of pornography.
Always endeavour, Slick, to keep a fix on the addiction industries: you can't lose.
The addicts can't win.
Dope, liquor, gambling, anything video — these have to be the deep-money veins.
Nowadays the responsible businessman keeps a finger on the pulse of dependence.
What next?
All projections are targeting the low-energy, domestic stuff, the schlep factor.
People just can't hack going out any more.
They're all addicted to staying at home Hence the shit-food bonanza.
Swallow your chemicals, swallow them fast, and get back inside.
Or take the junk back with you.
Stay off the streets, Stay inside.
With pornography…"
"…
Yes?"
I said.
I sipped my crimson drink.
I lit another cigarette.
We were in an Italian restaurant, well south of SoHo — Tribeca somewhere.
Fielding said it was a mob joint and I believed him: brocade, matt light, as quiet as a church.
I am a standard, no-frills Earthling, but Goodney, in his white suit, suntan and sliding blond hair, stood out like a pink elephant among the sin-sick funeral directors lurking and cruising against the blood-coloured walls.
These guys, they seemed to talk without moving their legs.
Just then, a  middle-aged, blow-dried villain — the usual opera-star face, woozy with loot and mother-love — urged a neon redhead past our table, our good table, to which Fielding had been instantly and officiously steered.
Fielding looked up, He paused.
 "Antonio Pisello," he said,"Tony Cazzo — from Staten Island.
He was shot in the heart five years ago.
Know what saved him?"he asked, and jabbed his own ribs with a long straight thumb.
"Credit cards — kept in a deck, with a band.
Used to be a bad boy, but now he's pretty well totally legit."
 "And the girl?" 
"Willa Glueck.
Smart lady.
A grand-a-nighter hooker, semi-retired.
For ten years she worked the streets — you know, giving head and hand at a dollar a dick.
Then five years at the top, the very top.
No one knows how she made the switch.
It just doesn't happen.
Look at her, the eyes, the mouth — superb.
No evidence.
I can't figure it.
I hate it when I can't figure things."
Indeed, lamentably under-informed, Fielding Goodney.
He smiled in innocent self-reproach, then swung sternly and made the reverse V-sign at the watchful waiter.
Two more Red Snappers were on their way.
We ordered.
Fielding held the crimson menu (silken, tasselled and beautified, reminding me and my fingers of Selina and her secrets) in slender brown hands, the wrists cuffed in pale blue and the gold links taut on their chains.
Over dinner Fielding explained to me about the lucrative contingencies of pornography, the pandemonium of Forty-Second Street, the Boylesk dealerships on Seventh Avenue with their prodigies of chickens and chains, the Malibu circuit with the crews splashing through the set at dusk for the last degrees of heft and twang and purchase from the beached male lead on the motel floor, the soft proliferations of soft core in worldwide cable and network and its careful codes of airbrush and dick-wipe, the stupendous aberrations of Germany and Japan, the perversion-targeting in video mail-order, the mob snuff-movie operation conceived in Mexico City and dying in the Five Boroughs.
And I asked him, "These movies — they exist?" 
"Sure.
But not many, not for long and not any more."
Fielding (I noticed) cut his veal in the normal way, but then passed his  fork to the right hand to prong the meat.
"Come on, Slick, be realistic.
If there was money there, it had to be tried…
The girls were vagrants."
 "Ever seen one?" 
"You understand what you're asking me?
You're asking me if I'm an accessory after the fact to first-degree murder.
Not me, Slick.
This was organized crime, superorganized.
No other way.
Snuff movies — now this is evidence."
Like everyone else, like you yourself, I had seen Caduta many times up on the big screen, in costume dramas, musicals, Italian sex comedies, Mexican westerns.
I had seen Caduta cringe and prance and pout and sneer.
I used to beat off nights about her when I was a kid — like everyone else.
The more I thought about her, the nearer I got to beating off about her now.
She had been a big brawny vision in her youth, with an encouraging hint of rural gullibility in the breadth of her eyes and lips.
Over the passing years, time had been kind to Caduta Massi.
Over the passing years, time had been cruel to nearly everybody else.
Time had been wanton, virulent and spiteful.
Time had put the boot in.
Now, at forty-odd, she could still play the right kind of romantic lead, given a sufficiently elderly and/or bisexual co-star…
I hadn't been quick to come around to Caduta, as you know.
I would have preferred someone less gorgeous, happy and sane — Sunny Wand, or even Day Lightbowne.
I'm not sure why.
But Fielding argued that Caduta was crucial to the package, and you have to follow the money in a case like this.
Caduta, wife of the erring Lorne Guyland, rival to the busty Butch Beausoleil, mother of the greedy, thieving, addicted Christopher Meadowbrook or Spunk Davis or Nub Forkner or whoever the hell we ended up with.
The role was passive yet quietly central.
It was sad.
I wanted someone more realistic…
You see, the impulse behind my concept, my outline, it was personal, it had to do with my life.
Autobiographical.
Yes, it had to do with this old life of mine.
I rang the Cicero.
where Fielding had installed Caduta and her entourage.
A man answered.
Caduta asked me to come to an address in Little Italy at two o'clock that afternoon.
I then threw in a call to my sock in London.
Engaged.
Engaged…
According to Fielding, Caduta was in need of reassurance.
I was going to give her some, gladly.
I just hope I've got a little to spare.
Yesterday, after that tearful reunion with my suitcase, I tried to get a negro hand-slapping thing going with Felix.
Why?
I thought.
It's for the touch, for the touch.
After all we are only human beings down here and we could do with a lot more praise and comfort then we actually get.
Earthling reassurance — it's in permanently short supply, don't you think?
Be honest, brother.
Lady, now tell the truth.
When was the last time a fellow-Earther  let you rest your head on their heart, caressed your cheek, and said things designed to make you feel deeply okay?
It doesn't happen often enough, does it.
We'd all like it to happen a lot more often than it does.
Can't we do a deal?
Oh boy (I bet you're thinking), that head-on-heart stuff, whew, could I use a little of that.
I yawned and stretched and nearly spilt the coffee.
Reaching to steady the cup, I unbalanced the ashtray.
Reaching to steady the ashtray, I spilt the coffee, and also hooked my elbow in the telephone's lone dreadlock — so that when, with a final heroic convulsion, I burst out of the bed, the swinging casket somehow smashed into my shin and then dropped like a bomb on to the bare mound of my foot Twenty minutes later, by which time the pain had done its worst, I unpeeled my way through the sodden address book.
I sought reassurance that Martina's number wasn't listed there.
This was one call, one lost date, one apology, that I begged to be excused.
Here we are: Theresa's, TV Repair, Trans-American, Trexacarna — Martina Twain.
Now wait just a goddam minute.
That wasn't my handwriting.
It was — Selina's!
Bitch.
Was this a recrimination, or a taunt?
Defiantly I squelched the book shut.
Yes and then I made that call.
And still I surfed on Manhattan static.
YIELD say the traffic signs — but don't you listen!
Not yielding, that's the thing.
To strive, to seek, to butch it out- it's all a question of willpower.
Thus midday discovered me with a second scotch in my hand, a Pakki nightie round my waist, and a half-naked sex-stewardess straddling my thighs.
I was in the Happy Isles, on Third Avenue.
I had read about the place in Scum magazine I felt all right in here: a circular, windowless room, tricked out in some lost pimp's image of a paradisal arbour — tendoned vines, plastic grape-clutches, bamboo ceiling, lagoon lights and canned birdsong.
I even found myself humming one of Fat Vince's favourites.
What was it?— "O Twine Me a Bower" .
You know, there's a certain sort of man who would come to a joint like this in order to fuck the women in it.
But self-improvement isn't nearly as hard as people make out.
Take, for instance, a look at me.
I'm only here for a handjob.
 "Yeah, well what do you do?" 
I was saying.
 "Use the blow-dry after the towels, or what?" 
I was talking to this chick about her hair and the trouble she had with it.
She was asking for trouble, mind you.
Flattened by its own weight, its prisms as lively as oil stains or car blood, her solid black rug coursed down the length of her back.
When she stood and turned to refreshen my drink, the bristly hem almost covered her double-fisted backside.
Man, I wish I had an American rug, instead of this old dishtowel I live my life under
The lady had cordially assured me at the outset that I was free "to party with anybody I liked the look of" (this, except for the half-ounce bikini she wore, being her only hint that what we were sitting in wasn't a beauty parlour or seminar room but actually a brothel.
I didn't let on either).
I wondered then and wondered now whether anybody included her.
She'd sat on my lap in a friendly way, true, but that was just so I could get a better fix on her rug.
Maybe she was simply a bargirl, a cashier, an all-purpose heft-dispenser…and maybe I had already got to know her a little too well.
By my side nestled a water-proof, see-through plastic bag, containing my wallet: the money, the necessary.
[had been obliged to take a blistering shower in a back room jovially serviced by two fat negroes in Hawaii shirts and frazzled straw hats.
So I sat there, deloused, in the Happy Isles.
Spurred by all this travel and transfer, the disease I have called tinnitus tunnelled deep and desperate into the corners of my head.
Both ears were doing their jet imitation, with whistle and whine and the hungry rumble of underfloor fire.
I held my new drink up to my forehead, as if to soothe my pulsing, my needing brow — plastic glass, plastic ice, an aeroplane drink.
Yeah.
I call this living good.
 "The second wash," I persisted,"can be a big mistake.
It expands the follicles and then the cleaning agents dry and harden."
 "Really?" said the girl.
 "Is that a fact." 
 "Yup," I said.
Hair is one of the things I do know something about.
I may not know much about anatomy, but I am rug-smart.
It's all those stylists, wardrobe girls and make-up technicians I've hung out with, plus my own pricey psychodramas on the topic.
I nodded and drank my drink.
I looked around.
Where were the other candidates?
Anyway, I assumed that"this unit here in the  white bikini was relishing the banter and the rug-wisdom.
Chatting with me was presumably a lot more fun than going to bed with me for money — though less profitable, it had to be said.
I too was pretty pleased by the way things were going.
I was pleased to be sitting here with a strong drink, pleased that I wasn't staked out on the basement floor, playing the romantic lead in a snuff movie.
No, it was all very civilized, very civilized indeed.
Now her head dipped as she pried at the fissure of a half-split nail.
With that backdrop of hair the small round shoulders gained in defencelessness and pallor — but come on, the Isles was no place for local contrasts.
The girl, the lean teenager with W-shaped folds in the vent of her shut armpits, she would suit me right down to the ground.
Being the being I am, though, and no other (not yet anyway), I wanted full brothel privileges, the old male deal of dough and careless choice.
 "Where are your friends?" 
I said.
She shrugged, and surveyed the empty bower.
Where were mine?
Then she raised her face to me and said with sad seriousness,
"Hey.
What's your name."
 "I'm Martin," I said at once I hate my name.
I mean, you have a kid, a little baby boy, and the best you can do with it is to name it John?
I'm called John Self.
But who isn't?
 "And what's yours?" 
"They call me Moby.
You married?"
"No.
I guess I'm not the marrying kind."
 "What do you do, Martin?" 
 "I'm a writer, Moby." 
 "But that's really interesting," she said sternly.
"You're a writer?
What do you write?"
"Uh.
Fiction.
Stuff like that."
 "John roar mainstream?" she seemed to say.
 "Pardon" ?"
 "I mean are they mainstream novels and stories or thrillers or sci-fi or something like that?" 
 "What's mainstream?" 
She smiled appraisingly and said,"That's a good question  I'm fucking my way through college?
English Literature, at NYTE?
You write novels?
That's what you do?
What did you say your name was?"
By this time I was more than ready to ask Moby what she did, and how much it cost — but then I felt the full-thighed waft of a new female presence.
I turned.
A big bimbo in cool pants and bra came swaying from the shadows of the rear corridor.
She was built on the Selina model, with several dirty-minded enlargements, the emphasis all on protuberance, convexity.
And I thought: I want.
Me, for me.
She sat with a sigh on a black plastic mushroom by the bar.
A few seconds later a smug, exhausted man in an impeccable business suit went staggering past.
 "Take care now, She-She," he said richly.
 "You too, sir," said She-She, in the brisk commercial tones of hostesses everywhere.
"I'd like to thank you for stopping by.
See you again, sir."
 "Oh yes." 
She-She's trick staggered on.
His slack, slaked face seemed about to drop off with sheer gravity of dissipation.
He obviously hadn't stinted himself with She-She back there.
No.
He had given his senses all kinds of presents and treats with She-She back there.
 "Hey, She-She," said Moby.
 "Martin here's an English writer"  "Yeah?" said She-She.
 "Yeah," I said.
I stood up, in my grey skin, stacked gut and floral wraparound, my hair the colour of London skies — under the bam, under the boo.
 "Aren't you excited?" 
I was asked, ten minutes later.
 "Yes and no." 
"Come on.
Ooh, you must be so excited."
 "Well yeah," I said, "suppose I am quite." 
True, I was now lying naked in a locked and candlelit cabana, alone with the industrious She-She, whose fleshy right hand made smoothing motions on the hair-dotted slope of my inner thigh…
For a while, back there under the bam, I had hesitated before arriving at my selection.
Perhaps little Moby would be  hurt by my preference for her talented colleague — would walk out, burst into tears, commit suicide.
But there doesn't seem to be a self-pity problem in the Happy Isles.
You know, I suspect I'm not cut out for brothels.
I can't help getting engaged on the human scale, minimal though this is, fight it though I do.
I just can't get off the scale Moby and I swapped fond farewells as She-She led me away.
I shadowed her down the tapering passage, all its planes carpet-covered, like four floors.
She-She then parked me in the aromatic cubicle.
Standing at the door with her knuckles on her hips, she bade me recline on the high wall-bed, as if for a medical inspection.
Yeah, that's what it felt like: a much-dreaded, long-overdue and sinisterly ritzy visit to the dick-doctor.
 "Why don't you make yourself more comfortable?" she asked, with a touch of joshing indignation.
Obligingly I leaned back an additional inch or two into the firm and furry pillows.
"No — take off your sarong!
Now I'll be with you in just one minute."
So I lay naked in the rinsed airlessness of the room, waiting for She-She's return, and wishing pretty earnestly that I had taken my chances with Moby.
 "If I was you," resumed She-She, "I'd be very excited." 
 "You would, would you." 
 "I'd be just wild." 
 "Well I'm looking forward to it, certainly." 
 "I'll bet." 
 "Yes, it should be fun." 
 "I'd just be so excited." 
I frowned and said, "About what, exactly?" 
She-She gave an incredulous pout.
 "I mean, you're a great-looking chick and everything," I said, "but" 
"Not me.
God!
Your new Princess!"
 "Oh her." 
So for some time She-She and I talked very seriously about the future Princess of Wales.
The future Princess of Wales is evidently a big hit with the hookers on Third Avenue.
She-She was full of admiration of Lady Diana's hairstyle, dress-sense and poise.
She also had a lot of time for Prince Charles.
She liked Prince Andrew.
She liked Prince Edward.
She even fancied the Duke of  Edinburgh.
After an increasingly eerie half hour of this I clapped my hands together and said, rather abruptly perhaps,"Right then.
So what are you selling."
 "Oh anything you want," she said, with no change in the speed of her voice.
 "What kind of tip you want to give?" 
"Well let's see now.
What's on offer?"
"straight French English Greek Turkish.
Or Half'n'Half."
"…
What's Half'n'Half?"
 "straight with French." 
 "What's English?" 
 "Correction." 
"What's Turkish?— No, don't tell me.
Let me have, just give me a — I think I'll just have a handjob."
 "A handjob.?" 
She-She stiffened.
"Okay.
If you want.
What kind of tip you want to give?"
Naked as I was, I still had my condom-like moneybag on my lap.
I had already coughed up forty bucks at the door.
How much is a handjob?
Come on, what do you reckon?
With a shrug I said, "Fifty dollars?" 
 "Listen," She-She told me.
"Why don't you put your clothes on right now and get down to Seventh Avenue or Forty-Second Street.
You want to spend fifty dollars, maybe they can help you out.
Fifty dollars?
Nobody gives me fifty dollars."
 "Wait a minute — hey, take it easy," I said.
I confess I was a little shaken by my playmate's tone.
For a moment there she had looked and sounded like a rockhard loan-shark reclaiming an ugly debt.
"I'm new to all this, I'm sorry.
Who don't you make a suggestion?"
She-She: "If you give the fifty cash, then seventy-five on the card plus the credit supplement which is 15 per cent else we lose on the rental or we have a spa-cheque policy which works out the same minus the 15 per cent with a ten-dollar supplement.
It makes no difference with a gift this size."
…
A hundred and seventy-five dollars?
For a handjob?"
"Listen, this is Third Avenue, not Seventh.
Who don't you put on your clothes and…"
 "Yeah yeah." 
Oh, they've worked this one out: some male thought has gone  into this all right— more, probably, than went into that bamboo shitbox, the birdsong, the lagoon lights.
There you are, naked, and tagging your needs with the sex inspector.
It's not that she wants to make you feel cheap.
She wants to make you feel the cheapest ever Spryly She-She left the room.
But she soon came back again.
She bore the sliding brace of a credit-card franker.
What was going into that crushing ratchet — my US Approach card, or my Johnson?
Now, sir, I'll just take an impression of your penis here There was some more budget-balancing over the question of She-She's underwear.
The top came off at once.
The pants, she said, had not been part of the deal.
 "You certainly know how to turn a guy on," I said, all passion spent, and flicked another twenty into the pool.
To put it at its highest, I was in no more than so-so shape by the time I reached Caduta's.
I'd had a couple of drinks, lapped up some fast food, and jumped into a cab.
I only had time for fast food.
I'm going to kick fast food too, one day.
The time has come to kick fast food.
Time to fast from it That session with She-She had done me no good at all.
Although I had tarried in the Happy Isles for well over an hour, the actual handjob was the work of a moment — forty-five seconds, I'd say.
I had to rack my brains to remember a worse one.
 "You must have been really excited," said She-She quietly, as she started plucking tissues from the box.
Yes and no.
Between ourselves, it was one of those handjobs where you go straight from limpness to orgasm, skipping the hard-on stage.
I think She-She must have activated some secret glandular gimmick, to wrap it up quickly.
She then attempted a drowsy recap on the Royal Family but I shouldered my way out of there as soon as I could.
The trouble with all this is — it's so unsatisfactory.
Regular handjobs are unsatisfactory too, but they don't cost five bucks a second.
Overheads are generally low.
Say what you like about handjobs, they don't cost eighty-five quid.
The cab journey downtown was an anguish of effort, of clogged and doddering crisis.
When I first came to New York even a traffic  jam was interesting.
Nowadays, though, I can take or leave a traffic jam in New York.
I wish I could work out how to use the subway.
I've tried.
No matter how hard I concentrate I always end up clambering out of a manhole in Duke Ellington Boulevard with a dustbin-lid on my head.
You cannot get around New York and that's the end of it…
I looked at my watch.
I sat sweating and swearing on the sticky back seat.
It's heating up here already, yes it's stoking up here nicely for the scorch-riots of August.
Of the many directives gummed to the glass partition, one took the trouble to thank me for not smoking.
I hate that.
I mean, it's a bit previous, isn't it, don't you think?
I haven't not smoked yet.
As it turned out, I never did not smoke in the end.
I lit a cigarette and kept them coming.
The frizzy-rugged beaner at the wheel shouted something and threw himself around for a while, but I kept on not not smoking quietly in the back, and nothing happened.
Local rumour maintains that Little Italy is one of the cleanest and safest enclaves in Manhattan.
Any junkie or Bowery red-eye comes limping down the street, then five sombre fatboys with baseball bats and axe-handles stride out of the nearest trattoria.
Well, Little Italy just felt like more Village to me.
The zeds of the fire-escapes looked as though they were used in earnest twice a week they were grimed to a cinder.
In these clogged defiles they could never wash off all the truck-belch and car-fart bubbling upwards in vapours of oil and acid and engine coolant.
What is the spangled Caduta doing in a dump like this?
She's got a suite at the Cicero, tabbed by Fielding Goodney, with a hairdresser, a bodyguard, and a 73-year-old boyfriend…
I ran back and forth across the street until I found the dirty door.
 "Now, Mr Self," John ": our movie!" said Caduta Massi.
"I see from the outline that the lady is from Bradford.
I do not find this convincing at all."
"Well the outline you saw, Caduta — that was the English version.
Now we've switched to New York we can…"
"I prefer Florence.
Or Verona."
"Sure.
Okay.
Take your pick."
 "And what is the title of the movie?" 
 "Good Money," I said.
Actually, we weren't sure yet.
Fielding liked Good Money.
I liked Bad Money.
Fielding suggested calling it Good Money in the States and Bad Money in Europe, but I couldn't see the percentage in that.
 "Good," said Caduta.
"Tell me, John.
This Theresa.
How old is she?"
 "Uh…thirtyish?" 
Yeah, thirty-nine.
I gazed at Caduta warily.
 "Excuse me, but I understand she has a son of twenty." 
"That's true.
I suppose she's a little older than that."
 "I myself am forty-one," said Caduta.
 "No kidding," I said.
 "Well, that's perfect." 
"So could you tell me?
Who should a woman of this age be taking her clothes off and demanding sex all the time?"
I sat with a cup of coffee on my lap, still half-asphyxiated by what I took to be Neapolitan warmth.
The place was crawling with kids — bundles, toddlers, nippers, loping adolescents.
There were at least three dad-figures, wearing vests and overalls, in the kitchen next door, hunched over bottles of unlabelled wine and steaming pasta in arterial sauce.
They even had a couple of black-clad bagladies sitting silently on straight chairs by the door.
I couldn't see any mums about the place.
Apart from that, though, the whole crew might have just come in from Ellis Island Caduta herself was clearly the queen bee here.
She kept clapping her hands and unleashing her imperious Italian.
Like a department-store Santa she shuffled the kids on her lap: the kids, they did their shift, then climbed off.
Every now and then a dad would swagger in and talk to her with reverence but also with a certain courtly gaiety.
The one-tooth-apiece bag-ladies murmured and nodded and crossed themselves.
Caduta frequently addressed me in Italian too, which didn't make things any clearer.
I coughed and said, "I'm sorry, Caduta, but what is all this?" 
"Mr Guyland.
He said there were to be several explicit love scenes."
 "With you?" 
She lifted her chin and nodded.
"That's all nonsense, Caduta.
There aren't any love scenes in the outline."
 "Lorne Guyland said that Mr Goodney promised him three long love scenes, with full nudity." 
"Good God, how old is Guyland?
What's he want to be in the nude for?"
"He is a disgusting person.
Listen, Mr Self- John.
I need your reassurance that this will not happen."
 "You got it." 
I glanced round the room.
The bagladies smiled encouragingly.
"Look, Caduta.
There are no sex scenes between you and Lorne.
There'll probably be a scene or two with you in bed together, in the morning sort of thing — but with sheets, okay?"
 "I'll be frank with you, John," said Caduta Massi.
She shooed the children from her lap.
"I am forty-three, as I say.
My tits are not so good any more.
My belly is good, my ass is good, but the tits?"
She waved a hand in the air.
"I have second-degree cellulite on my outside thigh.
What have you got to say to that?"
I had nothing to say to it.
Caduta was wearing a two-piece suit of grey suede.
With a little bounce she drew the skirt up to her hips.
I could see the stocking tops, the tender skin, the billion-lira panties.
She took a fistful of her outside thigh and squeezed, making the flesh frown.
 "See?" she said, and started to unbutton her shirt.
I glanced round the room again.
One of the dads popped his head through the doorway.
The head smiled, then withdrew.
The bagladies stared on, stonily now.
One of the children pawed at my lap, as if returning my attention to the lady on the velvet throne.
Holding my eye, Caduta parted the flounces of her shirt.
She freed the clip that marked the centrepoint of her cleavage in the hefty brassiere "Come, John," she said.
I stood up, I moved forward, I knelt.
She gathered my face to her heart.
I sensed all the voluminous stirrings in there, deep among the mortal heaviness.
 "You never had a mother, did you, John." 
My voice was muted, but what I said was,"No.
I never did."
There are, at the latest count, four distinct voices in my head.
First, of course, is the jabber of money, which might be represented as the blur on the top rung of a typewriter —— sums, subtractions, compound terrors and greeds.
Second is the voice of pornography.
This often sounds like the rap of a demented DJ: the way she moves has got to be good news, can't gel loose till I feel the juice — suck and spread, bitch, yeah bounce for me baby…
And so on.
(One of the subvoices of pornography in my head is the voice of an obsessed black tramp or retard who roams the Times Square beat here in New York.
Incomprehensible yet unmistakably lecherous, his gurgled monologue goes like this: Uh guh geh yuh tih ah fuh yuh uh yuh fuh ah ah yuh guh suh muh fuh cuh.
I do a lot of that kind of talking in my head too.)
Third, the voice of ageing and weather, of time travel through days and days, the ever-weakening voice of stung shame, sad boredom and futile protest…
Number four is the real intruder.
I don't want any of these voices but I especially don't want this one.
It is the most recent.
It has to do with quitting work and needing to think about things I never used to think about.
It has the unwelcome lilt of paranoia, of rage and weepiness made articulate in spasms of vividness: drunk talk played back sober.
And on the TV they keep showing hysterical ads or.
the fucking news…
All the voices come from somewhere else.
I wish I could flush them out of my head.
As with vampires, you have to ask them in.
But once they're there, once you've given them headroom, they seem pretty determined to stick around.
Don't let them in, these crashers.
Don't let them in, whatever you do.
How about that Caduta, though, eh?
Mind you, if you think she behaved strangely, you should have seen me.
I had an incredible crying jag.
So did Caduta.
So did two kids and one baglady.
After a while, the dads trooped in.
Everyone was beaming and weeping at this display, this proof of human richness.
It was all crap too — I knew that.
It was all bad art.
But what can you expect from me?
There are times these days when I feel so starved of warmth that the instructions on a painkiller packet or vitamin tub ( "At the first sign of a cold  developing be sure to…" ) can make me go all husky and brave.
And I certainly appreciated the faceful that Caduta laid on me.
I sniffed and rootled around down there for at least ten minutes, and got in several good licks and kisses.
But it wasn't a sexual thing.
I would never make a pass at Caduta — no, not Caduta and if you made a pass at her, I'd beat you up.
I was still brimming with plangency, chockful of feeling, when I arrived back at the hotel.
Caduta's parting words to me — she delivered them like a war bride or mother, keeping pace with my cab as it pulled away — were as follows: "Protect me, John!
Protect me."
I knew what that meant.
I seized the telephone and called Lorne Guyland, in high indignation.
 "Now, Lorne," I began, after a female flunky had put the great man on.
"I've just had a meeting with Caduta Massi.
Those scenes you suggested to her — she doesn't want to take her clothes off, and I have to say I "" WHAT DO YOU MEAN SHE WON'T TAKE HER CLOTHES OFF!
SHE'S ONLY A FUCKING TV ACTRESS!
I'll RIP HER FUCKING CLOTHES OFF!"
I held the telephone at arm's length, and stared at it.
What impressed me most, I think, was the sheer instantaneousness with which Lorne lost his temper.
Suddenly, immediately: no temper — gone, long gone.
I'm a short-fuse artist myself, but even I need a little longer than that.
It takes at least a couple of seconds before I recognize the last straw.
But to some people, clearly, every straw is the last straw.
To some people, the first straw is the last straw.
 "Lorne, Lorne," I said,"bear with me here.
Look, there aren't any nude scenes in the script, not with Caduta.
With Butch Beausoleil, yes, fine, go ahead, as many as you like.
But with Caduta.
She's —"
"What script?
Nobody showed me no fucking script!"
"Doris Arthur is still working on it, Lorne.
But I think I can say that there aren't going to be any nude scenes between you and Caduta.
Semi-nude, maybe.
But not nude.
And that's final."
While he talked I sank back gratefully with my duty-free.
Lorne's superfury had run its course.
He had a grip on himself.
He was now merely incredibly angry.
He said,
"Final?
Final!
Boy, you're really new at this.
Now you listen to me, you piece of shit.
This is Lorne Guyland man.
Yeah.
Me!
Me!
I got to have some beef in that role.
You don't need me.
Who don't you get some old fart like Cash Jones?"
Lorne laughed.
"I don't know why I say that.
I love Cash.
Cash and I go way, he's one of my oldest, one of my closest friends.
A dear friend, John.
Very dear."
Lorne paused.
"Yeah, but when you got Lorne Guyland in a picture, you got to give him some beef, you got to give him some size, you got to give him some — it's got to be like big, you know?
You saw my work in Pookie, John.
I'm glad you called, "Lorne went on weirdly," because I want to tell you about another new idea I've gotten.
Now I'm not a writer.
I've written scenes, of course, in fact, in fact the idea is this.
The young guy, right?
I don't know who the fuck you cast and I don't care, but him and I have this fight, right?"
"You and your son.
That's right."
 "And in the outline, John, it says that he wins." 
 "That's right." 
 "Now I don't think that's convincing dramatically, John." 
 "Why not?" 
 "Well, it suggests to the audience that he's stronger than I am." 
"That's right.
I mean, he's only twenty and you're — you're a mature man."
"But I know that kid you've been testing.
He's a punk!
I could rip him to fucking pieces with my bare hands!"
"But people won't know you could do that, Lorne.
They'll think he won because he's forty years younger than you are."
"Ah!
I get it.
You think just because I'm not as young as he is, he's stronger than I am.
Crap!"
"I don't think that, Lorne.
But everyone else will."
"Okay, okay.
I'm a reasonable man.
We'll do it this way.
And, yeah, I want this whole scene in the nude, we're all nude, that's definite.
I won't sacrifice that, that idea.
Now.
I'm fucking Caduta, right?
And I mean really fucking her.
The woman's in — Wait.
No.
This is Butch.
I just fucked Caduta, now I'm fucking Butch, right?
And I mean really fucking her.
The woman's in tears, right out of control.
She's hysterical, John.
Then this young actor walks in he's nude too — for the showdown.
And I spring  out of bed, naked as I am, and I just start to tear him to fucking pieces.
I'm damn near killing the guy when Butch, in the nude, starts shouting,"Lorne!
Lorne, baby!
Honey, what are you doing!
Stop, sweetheart, please stop!"
And I realize I been — that the animal in me, because, John, it's a terrible world we're living in, John, it's a really crazy, awful world.
So Butch and Caduta lead me away.
I'm damn near in tears on account of what I've done to the guy.
Then this young punk comes up behind me and hits me on the head with a car-tool.
John?
What do you say.
"Lorne?
We'll see."
"No, No!
You'll see.
Yes you will!"
Crack.
I replaced the receiver and stared at my lap.
On it lay a cellophaned wallet of Guyland press handouts — this was where I'd scribbled his number.
Running my eye down the page I saw that Lorne had, in his time, on stage or screen, interpreted the roles of Genghis Khan, Al Capone, Marco Polo, Huckleberry Finn, Charlemagne, Paul Revere, Erasmus, Wyatt Earp, Voltaire, Ski Masterson, Einstein, Jack Kennedy, Rembrandt, Babe Ruth, Oliver Cromwell, Amerigo Vespucci, Zorro, Darwin, Sitting Bull, Freud, Napoleon, Spiderman, Macbeth, Melville, Machiavelli, Michelangelo, Methuselah, Mozart, Merlin, Marx, Mars, Moses and Jesus Christ.
I didn't have the lowdown on every last one of these guys but presumably they were all bigshots.
Perhaps, then, it wasn't so surprising that Lorne had one or two funny ideas about himself.
Oh, what a long day.
Dah! what a day.
You know what the time is, my time?
Four o'clock in the afternoon.
Hey, if you were here now, sister mother, daughter lover (niece, auntie, granny), maybe we could talk a bit and cuddle down together — nothing dirty.
Only spoons.
Maybe you'd let me rest my great face in the gentle bracket between the wings of your shoulderblades.
That's all I have in mind, believe me.
I know you for a pure creature.
You don't drink or smoke or screw around that much, I'll bet.
Am I wrong?
That is what I love in you…
Now the way I figured it I had six realistic options.
I could sack out right away, with some scotch and a few Serafim.
I could go back to the Happy Isles and  see what little Moby was up to.
I could call Doris Arthur.
I could catch a live sex show around the corner, in bleeding Seventh Avenue.
I could go out and get drunk.
I could stay in and get drunk.
In the end I stayed in and got drunk.
The trouble was, I did all the other things first.
Sometimes I feel that life is passing me by, not slowly either, but with ropes of steam and spark-spattered wheels and a hoarse roar of power or terror.
It's passing, yet I'm the one who is doing all the moving.
I'm not the station, I'm not the stop: I'm the train.
I'm the train.
"Fill me in on the tits, Slick.
Tell me about them in incredible detail."
"No way.
Back off, pal.
This was a very personal thing between Caduta and me.
I'm saying nothing.
My lips are sealed."
"You know, she has a similar set-up in Rome and also in Paris, a little creche where she can go and queen it once a year.
It's a sweet deal for the families.
All they have to do is keep the mothers out of the way whenever she shows up and to psych the kids into thinking Caduta's some kind of superwomb.
Tell me a little about the tits, Slick.
I take it they're bigger than, say, Doris Arthur's?"
Whose aren't?
I thought tenderly.
We strode on.
This was Amsterdam Avenue, with the cross streets moving slowly by.
There goes Eighty-Seventh.
Here comes Eighty-Eighth.
Maintaining a low profile, the Autocrat lurked a steady block behind as we walked north.
I had never been on the Upper West Side before, but it still reminded me of something.
It reminded me how quiet my rocky tooth had been for at least a week or two now…
Over a fanatically carnivorous lunch in an Argentinian joint on Eighty-Second Street my friend Fielding had been very reassuring on the whole Lorne-Caduta question.
All the conflicts he explained, would melt away the minute we had a screenplay in our hands.
Moviestars invariably fucked you around like this until there was a script to defer to.
Then they forgot about characterization and obsessed themselves exclusively with things like line-count, screen-time and close-up allocation.
Doris Arthur  was back in the States, typing away at her rented cottage in long Island.
I fondly imagined little Doris among her busy lizzies and lazy susans, in racoon hat and frontier dungarees, working the pump, fixing the roof, with half-a-dozen nails and a couple of briar pipes in her syrupy mouth.
The first draft, Fielding promised, was only three weeks away.
"Where are we going?
What's with all this walking?"
"It's a sunny Sunday, John.
We're sightseeing.
Tell me.
How did Doris strike you?
Physically, I mean,"he added, with such soft, sweet-tooth hooding of the eyes that my stride faltered and I said,
"You've been there, huh?
Oh boy.
What's she like?"
"Listen.
You tell me about Caduta's tits and I'll tell you everything there is to know about Doris in the sack.
Is it a deal?"
"Well they're big all right and low too but what they mainly are is very deep and heavy.
They rest on the ribcage of course and span out a bit lower down but they're still very solid and they —"
"I get the picture, Slick.
We can't use them.
I thought she might have had them fixed.
You're thinking, We don't want some cantilevered old bimbo.
We want someone real.
But filmstars aren't real, John.
It isn't in them.
You'll see."
"Right.
Doris.
Do it"
"I'm afraid I misled you.
I know all there is to know, which is nothing.
Doris is gay, Slick."
I stumbled to a halt and snapped my fingers through the air.
"so that was it.
Jesus, I knew it was something like that.
That bitch…"
 "You made a play?" 
"Well sure.
Didn't you?"
"No, I knew all along.
It was clear from the stories."
"What stories.?
Tell me them at least."
"The short stories, John.
The Ironic High Style, remember?"
 "Oh them." 
But here I saw the way the streets were going, how they darkened despite the sun, the juicy air, the innocence of the covering blue.
Three blocks back there were canopied doorways, wealth-guards in livery and vistas of brownstone.
Now the lanes were carless, lawless.
We skirted the spreading sponge of split  mattresses and jaw-busted suitcases facedown in the gutter, saw the dark excluded profiles behind windows and chicken wire — this was no-money country, coldwater, walkup.
And so sudden, the breakdown, the feelable absence of all agreement, of all consensus — except for that money-hate or anger you get when cities wedge their rich and poor as close as two faces of a knife…
I marked the poverty and the poverty marked me.
And I also sensed — perversely, unnecessarily, wastefully — how gay Fielding and I must look, him in his sneakers and strontium rompers and flyaway hair, me with my butch suit, thin jekylls and proud-rounded shoes.
Even the hardened faggots of Manhattan (I fancied) were gazing down at us with concern from their lofts and condos and thinking — we're pretty brazen, God knows, but these guys, they'll queer the whole pitch.
 "Hey nigger brother!" 
Ninety-Eighth Street.
I turned my head.
Two black guys with a big dog cocked on its leash.
"Fuck this shit, man.
I think my dog go bite one of them white dudes."
 "Fielding," I said tightly.
"Is this smart?
Let's get the car.
This is fucking pangerland."
"Walk on, Slick, with your head high.
Nothing's happening."
He was wrong.
Fielding was wrong.
Something was happening, for sure.
When you've brawled around for as long as I have your senses get to know the kind of fix that you can't just walk through or away from.
You get to know when you have to give satisfaction.
Less than a block ahead the scatterings of low-caste colours had begun to solidify into a group or gauntlet.
I saw loud T-shirts, biceps, facial hair.
These people, they had nothing to tell us except that we were white and had money.
Perhaps they were also saying — you cannot go slumming, not in New York.
You just cannot go slumming, because slumming pretends that slums aren't real.
They were real.
They would show us that much.
By now I was obeying instinct or habit, checking the chain for strengths and weaknesses.
Avoid the left.
Stay kerbside — yeah, that sick-looking little guy there.
Burst in with blending fists and run like a bastard for the green slope ahead.
I let my eyes flick sideways.
Fielding raised his right arm, an instruction to the  Autocrat, but his gaze and stride were direct, unfaltering.
The car surged up and then idled on snuffling treads.
Fielding slowed.
He made an elaborate gesture, explanatory, supercandid.
And nothing happened.
The path cleared and we walked on through.
"Columbia, Slick…
Chicago, LA, wherever — in America our seats of learning are surrounded by the worst, the biggest, the most desperate ratshit slums in the civilized world.
It seems to be the American way.
What does this mean?
What is its content?
Now over here, John, we get a really superb view of Harlem."
I took a look at Columbia.
I checked it out.
I've seen these pillared, high-chinned buildings, their deep chests thrown out in settled cultural pride.
The place had nothing to tell me that I didn't already know.
With Fielding's wrist on my shoulder I now approached the castle's steep rampart.
We leaned on the railing, and peered down through the littered lattice of cross-angled trees, their backs broken in their last attempt to scramble up the cliff.
Beyond lay the square miles of Harlem — part two, the other, the hidden half of young Manhattan.
 "What happened?" 
I asked, and lit another cigarette, still heavy from the unburnt fight fuel, the awakened glands.
 "It was the car, that's all." 
"Did our guy have a gun on them?
I didn't see."
"Nah.
Well, he had his gun ready, I guess.
But it was no big deal.
The car would do it for a minute or two.
That's all we needed."
I suppose I understood.
The Autocrat, the chauffeur, the bodyguard: this showed them the gulf, the magical distance.
How did Fielding's gesture go?
One palm arched on the heart, the other turned in polite introduction towards the car, saying.
"This is money.
Have you all met?"
Then the hands brought together, face up, an offering of the simple proof.
And they backed off in the stumbling, hurried, slightly reckless way that traffic pulls over for ambulances or royalty.
I said,
 "Why?" 
"Sightseeing.
Local colour.
The car's all yours, Slick.
I'm going to run on back."
I watched him jog off, the head held high for the first twenty  yards, to promote oxygenation, then tucked in low as he measured out the rhythm of his pace.
I turned and looked out over the slanted, foreshortened wedge of streets and stocky tenements, and for once the strain in my ears found the appropriate line, the right score.
With a low hum of premonition my eyes panned Harlem, as if out there among the smokestacks and flarepaths lay my damage, my special damage, waiting for birth or freedom or power.
There is only one Earthling who really cares about me.
At least, this human being loyally follows me around the place, keeps tabs on me and rings me up the whole time.
No one else does.
Selina's never there.
All the others — it's just money.
Money is the only thing we have in common.
Dollar bills, pound notes, they're suicide notes.
Money is a suicide note.
Now this guy, he talks about money too, but his interest is personal.
His interest is very personal indeed.
 "You don't think about them," he'll say.
"You don't think about them.
You go slumming, but you never think about them — the others."
 "Who?" 
I asked him.
 "You poor guys?" 
"Listen.
I've stolen food, out of hunger, just to stay alive.
You can do it for a week.
After a month you get the look.
You look like the sort of guy who has to steal food to stay alive.
And that's it.
All over.
You can't steal food any more.
Why?
Because they can tell, the second you walk in the store.
They can see no money in you.
Not even the memory of money.
Imagine."
"Sounds rough.
Just goes to show that it's a really dumb move, being poor.
Listen, I've seen all that.
This isn't news to me, pal.
I've heard this stuff all my life."
"You're poor.
Still you're so poor.
"You're wrong.
I got stacks of dough and I'm going to make lots more.
Now you, you sound seriously strapped for cash."
Telephone Frank turns out to be not only a money expert, or an expert on not having any.
He also talks about the chicks a good deal.
For example:
"You just take women and use them.
Then you toss them aside like a salad."
"Wrong again.
I keep trying to do that — but none of them will stand for it."
 "Women—for you they're just Pornography." 
"Listen, pal, I've got a date.
Lots of rich pretty people are expecting me downtown."
 "We'll meet one day." 
"I'm really looking forward to it…
Okay, Frank, I'll see you around."
I arrived at Bank Street eight o'clock sharp, in the very last of the light.
Overhead the sky still scintillated, but there was a film of green up there among the pinks and blues, an avocado tinge of beautifying city sickness…
My best suit, me — dark grey with a thin chalk stripe.
I additionally sported a wide silver tie furled in buxom Windsor knot.
The West Village, where the streets have names.
Bank Street looked like a chunk of sentimental London, black railings and pale blossoms girding the bashful brownstones, even a cautious whiff of twig and leaf in the night-scented air.
As I strolled along I watched an elasticated black kid, Felix's age or maybe older, gangle past with his pretty little friend.
Negligently he reached into a front garden and yanked a flower from its tree.
He offered the pink blossom to his chick, who twirled it in front of her briefly lit face before dropping it to the ground.
 "Hey," he said.
"Hey, that was a beautiful thing I did.
That was a beautiful thing I did — with the flower.
What you throw it away for, cunt?"
He walked on, his spring wound tight now, the shoulders stiff and sullen.
She dropped back and crouched to retrieve the shattered thing, gathering dry petals in the dip of her dress.
I had about a half hour to kill, I reckoned.
Taking a couple of rights, I found myself on the ramp of lower Eighth Avenue — a medium-poor people's district, I assumed.
Shoe Hospital, Asia de Cuba Luncheonette, Agony and Ecstasy Club, ESP Reader and Adviser, Mike's Bike World, also LIQ, BEE and BA.
Are the clips on the sidewalk grills meant to look like the soles of giant feet!"
Young men playing chess on the hoods of parked cars.
A pale tattoo on a pale old arm.
Here they come again, young and old, health and distemper mixing like American prodigies of money and no money, beauty and malformation, Manhattan miracles of heat and cold.
Some of the people are in terrible disrepair.
Boy, could they use a little investment, a little gentrification.
But I love the dense variety.
Yes, it stirs me.
After this, London feels watery and sparse…
Now I idled in the yellow light of closed banks, municipality and bad business all done for the day.
Who aren't banks as diverse and improvisational as every other American concern?
Who can't we have Mike's Bank World?
I don't know, but I feel steadier.
I've drunk nothing all day.
I drank nothing at lunch, despite the horrendous Malvinas Surprise I ordered (a triple mixed grill swaddled in steaks).
I want to be at my very best tonight.
I've showered and everything and I don't look too bad.
That hike with Fielding, that uptown safari really did me good.
I need it, I need to be strong.
You think I'm paranoid but I tell you, man, there is something going on.
Are you in on it?
I've had this terrible feeling ever since I came to New York last time, a feeling of—a feeling of ulteriority.
I try to convince myself that it's conditioning, the poor boy and his fears of success.
It's not the film.
The film is fine.
It'll happen.
But something else is not fine, something bigger.
It is bigger than what Frank the Phone is doing to me, whatever that is.
It is bigger than what Selina is doing to me, whatever that is.
It is bigger than what I am doing to me…
Turning from a storefront window-and why must this always be the way?— I was confronted by a six-foot woman with ginger hair, bobble hat and tadpole veil frilling her chin.
Her leaning presence was deliberate, challenging: I think I'd even felt the play of her breath on my neck.
 "Yeah?" 
I said.
But she just stood and stared through her mask…
Now where have I seen that mad bitch before?
Look.
Here she comes again.
Somewhere, I've seen her somewhere.
I doublebacked through the faggot district, Christopher Street.
I skirted the dike district too — or at any rate two big chicks denied me entry to their purple sanctum.
Then I found a place that was clearly headlined as a singles"bar, and no one tried to keep me out Now I'd read about these VD workshops in Scum and Miasma, both of which adopted a markedly  high-handed line.
Word was a year or two ago that the joints were popping with air-hostesses, models and career women: five minutes, a couple of lite beers, and you'd be in a hotel room or service flat with some little darling doing the splits on your face.
Not so! says Scum.
It might have been that way for a while, Scum argued, but after a couple of weeks the Boroughs shitkickers moved in, and the game was up.
The chicks moved out.
Miasma even sent a squad of personable male reporters out on a sweep, and not one of them scored…
Well, this place looked okay to me, the only hitch being that there weren't any women in it They were all in the butch bars and the diesel discos.
So I joined the half-dozen speechless loners and got to work on the Sidecars.
Eight-twenty: no sweat.
Here's to you, Martina, I said to myself, and flattened out a twenty on the moist zinc.
You remember Martina, Martina Twain?
Now don't tell me you've forgotten.
How is the memory, pal?
Sister, what's the recall like?
You remember her, surely.
I know I do.
She and I go way back.
The thing about Martina is — the thing about Marina is that I can't find a voice to summon her with.
The voices of money, weather and pornography (all that uncontrollable stuff), they just aren't up to the job when it comes to Martina.
I think of her and there is speechless upheaval in me — I feel this way when I'm in Zurich, Frankfurt or Paris and the locals can't speak the lingo.
My tongue moves in search of patterns and grids that simply are not there.
Then I shout Consider the people I've been around all my life, stylists, models, actors, producers, seat-warmers, air-sniffers, knee-crookers, cuecard-readers, place-men, moneymen — funny men, not straight men.
Funny women too, juggling sex, time and dough.
Who's straight?
I'm not.
I am bent gouged pinched and tugged at, and squeezed into this funny shape.
Each life is a game of chess that went to hell on the seventh move, and now the flukey play is cramped and slow, a dream of constraint and cross-purpose, with each move forced, all pieces pinned and skewered and zugzwanged…
But here and there we see these figures who appear to run on the true lines, and they are terrible examples.
They're rich, usually.
Her English husband Ossie, now he's rich-for-life but he works in money, in pure money.
His job has nothing to do  with anything except money, the stuff itself.
No fucking around with stocks, shares, commodities, futures.
Just money.
Sitting in his spectral towers on Sixth Avenue and Cheapside, blond Ossie uses money to buy and sell money.
Equipped with only a telephone, he buys money with money, sells money for money.
He works in the cracks and vents of currencies, buying and selling on the margin, riding the daily tides of exchange.
For these services he is rewarded with money.
Lots of it.
It is beautiful, and so is he.
I switched from Sidecars to Old Fashioneds.
I'm always early for these dinner parties anyway.
I leave it late, but never late enough.
Barkeep, let's do it again.
As I feasted on my drink I sensed the hum, the confectionery of a feminine presence.
I turned to find that a girl had joined me at the bar.
Now she asked for white wine in her charged voice.
I diversified with a Manhattan.
New York is full of heart-stopping girls with potent colouring, vanilla teeth, and these big tits they all seem to be issued with as a matter of course.
There must be a catch.
(There is.
Most of them are mad.
It pays you to remember this.)
This chick on the stool — she looked like Cleopatra.
I don't know what it was, but I instantly fingered her for an obvious goer, sack-artist, dick-idolator, and so on.
I can always spot them.
I glanced at my watch: eight thirty — no, nine thirty.
Hey there!
Time to be moving on.
 "Buy you a drink?" 
I said.
Her face slackened.
She gave a tremble of negation.
 "White wine?" 
I said.
 "No thanks." 
"What's with all this no thanks?
Can't you read?
This is a singles "bar." 
 "Excuse me!" she said.
"Bartender!
Sir!
This man is bothering me.
 "Damn right I'm bothering you." 
I tapped her shoulder.
"What d'you expect, kid?
Why d'you come here anyway?
You like the Californian Chablis or these plastic ducks they have on the wall?"
"Hey.
Hey.
You.
Shut up or get out."
This was the bartender.
"What is this?
Am I the only guy in here who can read?
It says  singles' bar out there, in neon.
I'm single.
She's single.
What's the problem?"
 "He's drunk." 
This was one of the loners.
 "Okay, who said that?" 
I slithered lithely from my stool.
This deed somehow necessitated a second manoeuvre, that of picking myself up off the floor.
 "He just had ten cocktails, for Christ's sake." 
"Here he's…
Put him…
Get the…"
I felt several hands on my arms, a knee in my back and a tug on my rug.
Well, time was travelling anyway, and I thought I might as well be moving on.
Fifteen minutes later, or it may have been twenty, I stood staring at a caged lift: the chest-flexing iron lattice, the accordion doors.
I swivelled and strode up to the end of a passage.
I rang the bell.
I was drunk, okay, but I was getting my second wind by now.
That's the thing about drink: some of us can take it, and some of us can't.
Put another few down me and I'll be as right as rain.
I straightened my tie and guided my hair back with my hands.
I rang the bell — a good long ring.
Someone clattered down a wooden staircase.
The door sucked open.
Ossie was standing there in waistcoat and shirtsleeves.
I could see Martina down the end of the passage, aproned, with plates in her hand.
 "Hey my man!" 
I croaked.
 "Was coming down a track!" 
He took one step forward.
 "It's late," said Ossie.
Martina's curious face appeared beyond his shoulder.
Ossie said,"Go home, John.
Just go home."
The door cracked shut.
What's with him?
I wondered.
Some guys…
Okay, so I'm running a bit behind schedule, but…
I looked at my watch.
It said one fifteen.
Then I remembered something.
I wasn't only late to arrive I was late to leave, too.
That's right.
I had already been to the dinner party.
And something told me I hadn't behaved too well.
Today is my birthday.
I am thirty-five years old.
According to the  last good book I read, this means that I am half way through my time travel, my travel through time.
It doesn't feel like that — it doesn't feel like half way.
The prestige number-plate on my Fiasco says OAP 5.
I've got the mind of a kid, but I'm a pretty senior partner over at Rug & Gut & Gum.
It feels as though I have just started out.
It feels as though I am just about to end, just about to end.
That's what it feels like.
Morning came, and I got up…
That doesn't sound particularly interesting or difficult, now does it?
I bet you do it all the time.
Listen, though — I had a problem here.
For instance, I was lying face-down under a hedge or bush or some blighted shrub in a soaked allotment full of nettles, crushed cigarette packs, used condoms and empty beercans.
It was quite an appropriate place for me to be born again, which is what it felt like.
Obviously it hurts, being born: that's why you scream and weep.
Next, I had to frisk myself, to make sure I still had my wallet, limbs, face, dick, being.
Next, I had to run crying through the concrete concourses in dawn rain until my panic slowed and I recognized the city and myself in the matt and muffled streets.
Then I had to find a cab and get back here.
The guy wouldn't take me until I showed him money.
I didn't blame him.
I had dreamed — and who needs dreams with this kind of nightlife?— of torture, laughter, pincer-grips on the frail-tubed spine.
In the bathroom I stripped slowly before the mirror.
Face first: there was a grey swelling over my left eye, and my rug was quite badly singed on the same side.
A fight?
I didn't think so.
If there'd been a fight, then I must have won it.
My body was all there, trembling, whimpering in the graphic light, but all there.
I turned — and gasped.
Dah…
Oh, Christ.
My back, my great white back was scored with thirty or forty sharp red welts, regularly patterned, as if I'd slept on a bed of nails.
Taking a two-fisted grip on my spare tyre, I was able to wrench round some flesh and get a good look at one of these bloodless wounds.
An indentation, a red hole: I could insert my quivering pinkie to half-nail depth.
I stepped back.
No other damage.
No new damage.
My bumf-crammed wallet was intact: credit cards, eighty-odd dollars, thirty-odd pounds.
My hangover was fine.
My hangover had come through okay.
So.
I had spent the night, or part of it, on a patch of earth in alphabet-land — Avenue B, deep down on the East Side.
After an evening of pleasure and profit with my friends in Bank Street, I had clearly gone out for a drink or two.
Bad idea!
Oh very bad!
Someone, at some stage, had worked me over with a tool, a spike or a blunt shiv.
My shirt was punctured in places, but not my jacket — my good, my best jacket.
It was now eight thirty.
I bathed my face with water and felt hot fingers beginning to tickle my back.
For ten minutes I vomited elaborately, with steamhammer convulsions that I had no strength to resist or contain.
Then for twice that long I sat twitching on the shower's deck, the silver snout tuned to full heat and heft but doing nothing much to wash off my rot.
I must be very unhappy.
That's the only way I can explain my behaviour.
Oh man, I must be so depressed.
I must be fucking suicidal.
And I wish I knew why.
Look at my life.
I know what you're thinking.
You're thinking: But it's terrific!
It's great!
You're thinking: Some guys have all the luck!
Well, I suppose it must look quite cool, what with the aeroplane tickets and the restaurants, the cabs, the filmstars, Selina, the Fiasco, the money.
But my life is also my private culture that's what I'm showing you, after all, that's what I'm letting you into, my private culture.
And I mean look at my private culture.
Look at the state of it.
It really isn't very nice in here.
And that is why I long to burst out of the world of money and into — into what?
Into the world of thought and fascination.
How do I get there?
Tell me, please.
I'll never make it by myself.
I just don't know the way.
Nothing much happened for a couple of days, which was fine by me.
Nothing happened.
Well, I say that, but of course me and my sore back got up to all kinds of stuff.
Me and my sore back composed a letter to Martina.
Yes, a letter.
I even went out and bought a dictionary on Sixth Avenue to assist me in the project.
You know those hangovers where you can't spell I'm or you're, let alone sorry or again?
It took me  about a day each to write, seal, stamp and post this letter of mine, but I managed to get the thing off in the end.
I apologized for my behaviour (you know how it is: a few drinks, a few laughs, you step out of line), and asked if I could buy her lunch some time.
After all, I pointed out, lunch was the one date we hadn't yet tried.
Drinks, breakfast, dinner — but not lunch.
I said I would "quite understand" if she wanted to cut her losses and call it a day.
I wouldn't let me buy me lunch, I said, and I meant it.
Jesus, would you?
Me and my sore back had cocktails with Butch Beausoleil.
There was no mention of the debacle at the Berkeley Club, thank Christ.
Butch looked beautiful — a cauldron of youth and health — and she seems docile enough at this stage.
That makes sense.
She's getting $750,000.
Her only proviso is that she won't do any housework.
In the film.
She won't sweep a floor.
She won't even rinse out a coffee-cup.
Chicks' liberation.
Who do you want to play opposite you?
I asked her.
Christopher Meadowbrook, Spunk Davis or Nub Forkner?
Butch said that she would favour a dark-complected co-star.
The big thing about Butch is that she isn't just a dumb blonde, as she herself stressed.
I agreed.
She might look like one.
She might even behave and talk like one on occasion.
But she isn't just a dumb blonde.
That's the big thing about Butch.
Me and my sore back have had several meetings now with Fielding's moneymen.
We had dinner in La Cage d'Or with Steward Cowrie, Bob Cambist and Ricardo Fisc.
We went nightclubbing at Krud's and Parlour 39 with Tab Penman, Bill Levy and Gresham Tanner.
They're an odd crew, these money-men, Miami hotel barons, Nebraskan ranching bosses, Mary-lander oil kings.
Their only topics are moviestars and money.
They talk about money in that sharky American style, as if money were the only gauge of anything, the only measure.
They're pretty relaxing company, I find.
Fielding picks up the checks.
Fielding picks up the cheques, too.
Each meeting ends with the moneymen all saying things like I'm in or I want in on this or You got it or Let's do it.
Fielding is already making plans to cut one or two of the smaller guys out of the action.
Oh yeah and me and my sore back got hold of little Selina late one night.
It was seven in the morning over there in my sock.
Her voice was thin and cold, the way I like it After a while she cooed and cursed me into peace.
I have to tell you that these hot-line, long-distance blowjobs are another of our re-table routines…
This particular perversion, I notice, like every other, has been set up on a professional basis in go-getting New York.
The small-ad columns of Scam magazine are full of remote-control hookers who just sit by a telephone all day for money, like Ossie Twain.
You ring them up, give your credit-card number, and they talk dirty to you for however long you can afford.
They're probably cheaper than Selina, come to think of it, what with the hotel mark-up.
They're here and she's there, after all I was on the point of signing off when Selina started telling me, in accents of alarmingly genuine arousal, about this rich new boyfriend of hers, this transatlantic moneyman, how he took her to hotels and dressed her up and fucked her on the floor like a dog.
This was fairly standard stuff, but I deplored her tone.
Quit it, I said.
Her thin voice teased on.
She said that when she wasn't here she was there — with him, doing that.
Enough, I said.
 "Then marry me," said Selina, but not nicely.
Fielding smoothed his back against the scalloped seat of the limousine, like a cat.
He straightened his cuffs and said firmly
 "I say we go with Spunk." 
 "He's not really called that, is he?" 
 "Sure," said Fielding, and went on to tell me about two Southern actors called Sod MacGonagall and Fart Klaeber.
He gave his laugh, his rich, his million-dollar laugh, reluctant, like all the most lovable laughter.
You long to hear this sound.
You would do almost anything to inspire it.
 "Maybe," he said, "maybe for the British market we can call him Scum." 
 "It's a problem, you've got to admit." 
"I talked with his agent.
He knows Spunk's going to have to have his name fixed sometime.
Thing is, he was christened that way, and he hates the whole moviestar bit.
He's a tough Bronx kid but he acts up a storm.
You want a drink?"
 "No thanks." 
"What's the matter?
It's five o'clock."
 "No thanks." 
I had my reasons.
Do you want to hear the good news first, or the bad news?
The good news is that Martina called this morning and we're having lunch tomorrow.
The bad news is that the good news made me feel so relieved and excited that I ran out to a bar and drank a bunch of big ones.
Yeah? you'll say.
And?
Nothing new in that.
Agreed, but the bad thing about the bad news is that the alcohol had a really bad effect on me.
It didn't make me drunk, which was what I was confidently expecting it to do.
It made me hungover instead.
It did.
I kept incredulously ordering more drinks, in a doomed bid to stave off this conclusion.
That's why I had so many.
All the more ironic, too, because I woke up this morning feeling bloody marvellous after a really late and heavy night with the TV and the B & F. Was the phenomenon a new jet-lag deal, or the terminal mutiny of my whole bodybag?
Oh man, I'd better get to California soon, while the transplant people still have something to work on.
Maybe I'd better wing out there right away and have them fix me up with a temporary.
And the mind was suffering too.
Yes, the mind had its sufferings also.
It was crammed with sin and crime, the thoughts nowhere, all in freefall and turnaround.
I've got to get this stuff out of my system.
No, more than that, much more.
I've got to get my system out of my system.
That's what I've got to do.
 "Concentrate, Slick," said Fielding.
"This is semi-crucial.
The entire package pivots on this.
Moneywise, Meadowbrook's the safe choice.
I think Nub Forkner would play well with Butch.
But Davis is the gamble, the longshot, and that attracts me.
Put your instincts to work on it, Slick.
I say we go with Spunk."
 "You better give me a scotch." 
This would entail some self-inspection, alas, since the character was loosely based on me, on myself Doug, the Son, the greedy berk, the addict, the betrayer.
It now looked like a straight playoff between Christopher Meadowbrook and Spunk Davis, with maybe Nub Forkner as an outside possibility.
Meadowbrook I knew all about, a steady ensemble man but no headliner.
You've seen him He's the guy with the freckly yankee-doodle face and  the hint of comic spindliness in his floppy-limbed frame.
He usually plays older brothers, blushing patsies, jumpy sidekicks, all-smiles Ivy Leaguers.
As Doug, Meadowbrook would be cast violently against type, but that was exactly the sort of doubletake effect I was interested in.
The other guy, this Davis character, I had heard of but never seen in action, a Broadway boy with one film in the can.
Prehistoric was still at the editing stage.
We were going to see the roughcut.
The word was very good.
According to Fielding, Davis was hot.
We alighted at an address on doublebarrelled Park Avenue.
Our greeter, who looked like a presidential bodyguard, led us through the lobby and into the executive screening parlour—a six-seater with an air of luxury interrogations, one-way mirrors, corporation propaganda.
Davis's agent was there, Herrick Shnexnayder, a desperate human being who wore a French smock, a prosciutto cravat and the most complicated double pate-job I have ever come across in ten years of show business.
One yellowy hank was swiped forward from the nape of his neck, while the other originated from his luxuriant left sideburn.
His head looked like a fudge sundae I swear to God, he could have put a spoon in his ear and a maraschino cherry on his crown and looked no worse.
I drank the limitless champagne on offer (most of it soaked without fuss into the parched coral of my tongue) and listened to Herrick's obsequious banter.
Agents, these days, they look like corporation men but Herrick was more show biz than Coco the Clown.
At one point Fielding mentioned money.
The agent smiled like a death-dealing doctor and said, "Oh I think, after Prehistoric, we're looking at five." 
In other words, Spunk's fee was now half a million dollars.
Fielding just nodded and said, "And what does his availability look like?" 
His availability looked good, partly because, after Prehistoric, no one could afford to hire him.
Prehistoric started with a long pan over a series of cave murals: a man, a woman, a fight, a fuck, a tiger — a spaceship.
We backed off.
A gang or tribe of pre-fire apepeople were huddled about the place: there was Spunk, sharpening his spear.
Square-headed, square-lipped, the dark face dense and sinewy.
The next morning — or soon, anyway — Spunk was beamed up on to the bridge of the  low-lying spaceship by the mischievous, conical, beep-voiced aliens, who then travelled through time and beamed Spunk down again into Greenwich Village, 1980.
It was a summer night, so Spunk didn't look at all conspicuous in his bodyhair, warpaint and loinskin.
After staring around and grunting a lot, Spunk reflexively saved a drunken girl from being roughed up in a sidewalk fracas outside a singles' bar.
She takes him home to her swish apartment.
More grunting.
She assumes he is Lithuanian or Albanian or whatever — Christ knows there are some pretty perfunctory Earthlings on the streets of New York.
Spunk accepts a glass or two of firewater and is led to the sack, where he proceeds to give her the pasting of a lifetime.
Come dawn, the chick has checked out, but Spunk is still hanging in there — bad diet, presumably There followed a brilliant scene, as Spunk staggered out to confront the girl's flatmates.
The flatmates are used to the girl's rugged pick-ups, but Spunk (cracking nuts with his teeth, eating unshelled eggs and raw sausages) is a new wrinkle.
With various delicate transitions that left me sighing in assent, the film now turned into a gentle parodic love story, the girl civilizing Spunk — teaching him how to dress, eat, speak — and Spunk decivilizing her: teaching her to kick the booze, the pick-ups, the self-destruction, the money (they go primitive for a while, after Spunk has an urban breakdown.
Even I, in my exalted state, could detect some sentimentality here).
Throughout Spunk wore a silent gaze of uncomplaining bafflement and reserve, comic but dignified, formidable.
He was especially good at the end, when the aliens (who have been monitoring the whole joke, helping Spunk out at awkward moments) beam him back to BC.
He knows what's about to happen, more or less, and tries to explain to the girl with his pitiful resources of gesture and language.
Thus Spunk stands bereft on the stark crag, with old winds whistling.
He frowns, he tenses — he peers into a sloping hollow.
The girl sits there muttering and shivering, with her last cigarette and an electric lighter.
Credits.
I was deeply moved.
Moved?
I had a nervous breakdown.
The tears were still pissing from my eyes when I fled to the can.
No doubt about it, no doubt at all: Davis was going to be a big, big name.
In the Autocrat I turned to Fielding and asked huskily.
"Can he talk?
I mean properly?"
"Spunk?
Sure.
He did Richard the Second off Broadway last fall.
He was kind of nervous about his accent, but the articulation?
Superb.
Okay, Slick.
What do you say?"
 "I say we go with Spunk." 
We drove straight to a panelled restaurant in the dining district between Fifth and Sixth for an exploratory meeting with Christopher Meadowbrook.
It was depressing, after Prehistoric.
One look at Meadowbrook and I knew he was hopeless for us.
The sharp-shouldered chairs in this joint, which reminded me of Selina's torso and its erect triangularity, seemed specifically designed to give clients with sore backs a really rough ride.
In the end I did at least as much squirming as Christopher Meadowbrook, and he squirmed a lot.
The guy was in shocking shape — that was clear.
He didn't look like a goodie.
He didn't look like a baddie either.
He looked like a weakie, unmanned, pure victim.
I once saw this same beseeching looseness of eye and mouth in the face of a ragged little faggot on Sunset Boulevard, scorched and peed-on and limping back for more.
After drinks and introductions and a few minutes of jangled smalltalk, as if the three of us were gods or apes or spacemen, Fielding did the bad thing.
He left for a light supper with Butch and Caduta at the Cicero.
He would later swear that he had cautioned me about this the previous night.
No doubt he had, no doubt he had.
I looked at him helplessly and he vowed to return at ten.
As soon as we were alone Meadowbrook took my hand, hunkered forward and said,"I have to have the part, sir.
Sir, you have to let me have it."
Then he burst into tears.
Now this I didn't need Money, of course.
The actor was out for seventy-five big ones.
Cocaine debts, he said — though he'd kicked it long ago.
A dear friend (oh so very dear) had run out on him.
His mother needed an operation.
He needed an operation.
And on it went.
I suppose, in theory, I've had worse times, but not many, and not much worse.
Jesus, am I ever as bad as this?
Do I ever show such concerted and repetitive frailty?
He sank four cocktails.
He instigated a meaningless rumble with the maitre d' s.
A waiter bounced back by handing him a molten soup-plate.
Meadowbrook  upended the whole fiery mess into his lap and let out a scream of such inhuman power that the restaurant cat (a sleepy, sloth-flattened Persian) kamikazeed through a glass screen into the startled shards of the lobby.
Then he went to the john for twenty minutes and squelched back clicking and ticking like a geiger counter.
At this point I noticed that he had only one nostril.
Abuse has a habit of smacking you in the nose like that, for all to see.
Back home there's a guy who works in my nearest off-licence: he's got a conk like a haemorrhaged strawberry.
I avoid him.
I go to the next off-licence along, where the guy's nose is still okay Now Meadowbrook started making with the Shakespeare.
To be or not to be.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow.
Never never never never never.
In despair, and despite the zags and zigs, the lagjag, the alphabet chowder of my own alcothon, I hit the scotch.
Fielding returned.
Semaphoring his credit card, Meadowbrook made a big thing of catching the tab.
 "And lose that soup!" he warned.
The card was borne back on a silver tray.
It was snipped into four pieces.
 "I'm dying here," said Meadowbrook.
 "No rating," grinned the waiter.
"Jesus, let's go.
That was me.
I stood up.
So did Fielding.
 "You're out, Chris," he said, and drew two fifties from his golden clip.
There is a sense, as you sit in your cab and tunnel through the grooves and traps, there is a sharper sense (there must be) of the smallness of human concerns — in New York, where you always feel the height and weight of the tall agencies.
Control, purpose, meaning, they're all up there.
They're not down here.
God has taken columned New York between the knuckles of his right hand — and tugged.
That must make the ground feel lower.
I am in the cab, going somewhere, directing things with money.
I have more say than the people I look out on, nomads, tide-people.
They have no say.
Twenty-Third Street, and its running dogs.
I now know for certain that Selina Street isn't tucking Alec Llewellyn, or not for the time being anyway.
The more I think  about it, the more I persuade myself that I've misjudged little Selina.
She's faithful to me, that Selina.
True, she behaves like someone who is unfaithful to me all the time.
She behaves like someone who is hyperunfaithful But she behaves like that because she knows I like it.
(Why do I like it?
I do, clearly, don't I. Then why don't I like it?)
Selina, she just does it to please me.
If she were really being unfaithful, she wouldn't behave like that, now would she.
She would behave like someone who wasn't being unfaithful, and nobody could accuse her of behaving like that.
How very cheering.
Hell, it's all good news.
 "Yeah?" 
I'd said warily, expecting Lorne or Meadowbrook or Frank the Phone.
"John?
Ella Llewellyn here.
I've rung you because there's something I think you ought to know.
Bad news, I'm afraid."
Oh, come on Ella, no need to take that tone with me.
I fucked you once — on the stairs, remember?— when Alec blacked out in the kitchen that time.
"Hi, Ella.
Okay, tell me,"I said, and I stiffened myself for the worst.
"Alec's in prison.
Brixton, on remand.
He had it coming.
He just wanted me to tell you."
Bad news?
Bad?
No, these are excellent tidings in their own right.
Well before Selina's sly face had a chance to invade my mind screen, I felt a gulp of innocent, bright-eyed pleasure that my best and oldest pal was in such serious trouble.
Mm, it's so nice when one of your peers goes down.
You know the feeling?
A real buzz, isn't it.
Don't be ashamed, if you can possibly help it.
Now Alec can't get away, he can't escape, translate, burst clear.
He can't go up there, with them.
He must stay down here, with me.
He must stay down here, further down, deeper, much deeper.
The present rendezvous had been riding high on my chart of dreads.
How is that?
How can a quiet lunch with a beautiful and intelligent girl, in a licensed restaurant, be the cause of dread?
Go ask it on the mountain.
(I had dreaded the other meetings with her too, hadn't I. Yes I had.)
But in the end it soothed me.
Only when you are soothed do you realize how much you needed  soothing.
I was going insane.
I was dying.
That was what I was doing, dying.
Before we talked about the phantom dinner party we talked about aesthetics.
Or rather Martina did.
Aesthetics is a topic I have previously discussed only with my cosmetic dentist, Mrs McGilchrist (as in "the aesthetics are going to cost you on this one" ), and with the odd deluded lighting-cameraman who might have his views about the aesthetics of a Bulky Bar dissolve, a Rumpburger close-up, a Zaparama zoom.
Martina talked about aesthetics more generally.
She talked about perception, representation and truth.
She talked about the vulnerability of a figure unknowingly watched — the difference between a portrait and an unposed study.
The analogous distinction in fiction would be that between the conscious and the reluctant narrator — the sad, the unwitting narrator.
Who do we feel protective when we watch the loved one who is unaware of being watched?
Who does the heart hurt when it sees the unattended pair of shoes?
Or the loved one asleep?
Perhaps the dead body of the loved one expresses all the pathos of this absence, the helplessness of being watched, and not knowing Actors are paid to pretend that they are unaware of being watched, but they of course rely on the collusion of the watcher, and nearly always get it.
There are unpaid actors too (I thought): it's them you really have to watch.
I sat cocked on the brink of my seat.
I could follow her drift for seconds at a time, until the half-gratified sense of effort — or my awareness of watching myself — intervened, and scattered my thoughts.
I felt tense.
How tense?
Maybe not that tense We were lunching at an emeried chalet off Bank Street in the West Village — licensed, sure, but with a suspicion of health food, of careful eating, of macrobiotics and longevity.
Waiters of both sexes eerily serviced the wooden nooks.
There went Hansel.
There went Gretel.
They moved in white like doctors and nurses.
The food they brought you was administered as medicine, as elixir.
Their grub was of the very healthiest — not like that shit they make you eat uptown.
I craved liquor but survived on frequent tureens of white wine.
Martina contented herself with a pot of tea, and held her cup with both hands, as girls are bound to do, the fingers spread for all the warmth.
When she ate, she  dipped her head into each mouthful, her eyes on mine: round, dark, clean.
 "Perhaps drunks are like that too," I said.
"I mean, they don't know they're being watched.
They don't know anything.
I don't know anything."
 "They're also not themselves," she said, "which lessens the pathos." 
"Yes, I bet it does.
You'd better tell me about the other night.
The suspense is killing me."
"You really can't remember?
Or do you just pretend you can't."
I thought about this, and said,"I can't bear to remember.
Maybe I could if I tried.
It's the trying part that's unbearable.
Who was there, for instance?"
"Same as last time.
My only friends.
Ossie's friends are all…
The lady from the Tribeca Times.
Fenton Akimbo — he's the Nigerian writer.
And Stanwyck Mills, the Blake and Shakespeare man.
Ossie wanted to ask him about the two gentlemen of Verona.
 "Uh?" 
What a crew, I thought.
"Okay.
Tell me."
Then she told me.
It wasn't that bad.
I was relieved.
Between ourselves, I was even quite impressed.
Apparently I had windmilled in at a quarter to ten, with three bottles of champagne, all of which I dropped in one catastrophic juggle.
The kitchen floor, Martina said, was like a jacuzzi.
Full of beans, I took my seat at the stalled dinner.
Then, for the next twenty-five minutes, I told a joke.
"Oh Jesus.
What sort of joke?
How dirty?"
"I can't remember it.
You couldn't either.
Something about a farmer's wife?
Yes, and a travelling salesman."
"Oh Jesus.
What then?"
Then I went to sleep.
I didn't simply black out at the table, oh no.
I stood up, yawned and stretched, and threw myself on to a nearby sofa.
There I snored and whinnied and gnashed for nearly three hours, awaking refreshed and raring to go at a little after one.
Everyone had gone.
I went too.
Then I came back again.
Then I went away again.
"What did I say to Fenton Akimbo?
Did I say anything?"
 "How do you mean?" 
 "I mean, I didn't call him a black bastard or anything?" 
"Oh no.
You only said your joke, and that was about it."
 "Great." 
"You said something to me though.
As you left, the first time."
 "What?" 
She smiled, rawly, savagely not a grown-up smile.
A tomboy smile.
She had easy access to the girl inside her.
The girl was always available.
 "What?" 
I repeated.
 "You said you loved me." 
And she laughed her laugh, that shocking laugh which turned heads and caused her to blush and put a hand over her naked mouth.
 "And what did you say?" 
"I said let me think.
I said—Don't be an idiot."
 "Well, maybe it's true," I said, emboldened.
 "In vino—you know, when you drink you tell the truth, and all that." 
 "Don't be an idiot," said Martina.
Yes, she sounds sane, doesn't she, among all these other people I'm working around?
But then she has always had money — she has never not had money.
Money is carelessly present in the cut and texture of her clothes, her leathery accoutrements, in rug-brilliance and mouth tone.
The long legs have travelled, and not just through time.
The clean tongue speaks French, Italian, German.
The expectant eyes have seen things, and expect to see more.
Even as a girl her lovers were always hand-picked, an elite, far above the usual rabble of irregulars, mercenaries, pressed men.
Her smile is knowing, roused and playful, but also innocent, because money makes you innocent when it's been there all along.
How else can you hang out on this planet for thirty years while still remaining free?
Martina is not a woman of the world.
She is a woman of somewhere else.
 "Hey," I said.
 "How come you always know when I'm in New York and when I go back?" 
She shrugged.
 "Ossie tells me." 
 "How does he know?" 
"He's back and forth from London all the time.
He must know people you know."
 "I suppose that figures," I said.
 "How's your girlfriend?" 
 "Selina." 
"Yes.
How's all that?
You're with her.
You're together."
I considered.
Then I said, or perhaps one of my voices said it for me,"I don't know.
I mean — you can be with someone and still be alone.
…
She's beautiful."
 "True," I said.
 "How's Ossie?" 
She didn't say anything.
 "He's beautiful," I said.
But she still didn't say anything.
Instead, she asked me why I thought I drank so much, and I told her why I thought I did.
 "I'm an alcoholic," I said.
"No you're not, you're just a greedy kid with nothing better to do.
Aren't you tired of it?"
"Yes, I'm tired.
I've been tired of it for years…
Yes, I'm tired."
Twenty minutes later we stood outside on the spongy pavement.
Before us, across the road, the line of shop windows glistened like a strip of film Manhattan and its little concerns: a Thai laundry, a handbag hospital, a delicatessen ( "Lonnies" — For A Better Sandwich "—" No Nukes "" Sorry.
Closed"), a florist's forest, a Zen nicknackery which welcomed all major credit cards, a diesel bookstore.
Martina and I performed the uncertain dance of people parting, with its limited steps.
She still faced me, but her shoulders had already begun to turn away…
If you're small and the thing you evade is big (have you ever had this dream?), then the only place to hide is a place where the big thing can't fit.
But then you have to stay there, in the small place, or must even shrink to cower deeper.
I'm tired of the small place.
Me, I've tucking had it with the small place.
I'm tired of being watched and not knowing it.
I'm tired of all these absences.
 "Okay, look," I said desperately.
"Help!
Give me books to read.
Point me out a book to read."
I gestured across the road at the blind shopfront.
 "Something educational." 
She folded her arms and thought about this.
I could tell she was pleased.
 "All right?" 
I said.
Together we crossed the lumpy street.
I was told to wait outside.
The bookstore window features fanned stacks of the most recent scrotum-tightener from the feminist front: it was called Not On Our Lives and it was by Karen Krankwinkl.
I scanned the xeroxed blurbs and reviews.
A married woman with three children, Karen believed that all lovemaking was rape, even when it didn't seem that way to either of the participants.
Her brave and beaming face was duplicated on the reversed covers.
Well, Karen, I wouldn't rape you with a ten-foot pole.
But then, perhaps all chicks get to look like that, when they've been raped a few thousand times.
Martina returned.
She had bought me a hardback.
Possibly it was secondhand, but it still looked like five bucks' worth of book, I reckoned.
 "What's the damage?" 
I asked.
"Nothing.
It's on me."
 "When can I call you?" 
 "When you've read it," she said, and turned away.
Mr Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, I read, but was too drunk to remember to shut the popholes.
I stretched, and rubbed my eyes.
Was the whole book going to be like this?
I mean, did I detect some satirical intent here?
Well, that was all right.
I can take a joke.
I clasped my hands behind my neck, and considered.
What the fuck are popholes?
You see?
The bookish, the contemplative life.
Martina, she's even cured my tinnitus.
Not a squeak for over three hours.
The big thing about reading and all that is — you have to be in a fit state for it.
Calm.
Not picked on.
You have to be able to hear your own thoughts, without interference.
On the way back from lunch (I walked it) already the streets felt a little lighter.
I could make a little more sense of the watchers and the watched.
This book from Martina — we split lunch, so it's a present, a proper present, God damn it.
How long has it been since I got a present from a girl?
I'll call her now and thank her for the book.
What could be simpler.
Delicately I reached for the telephone.
I paused with my fingers  on the plunger.
Fatal.
And then the whole bomb went off in my face.
"Fat chance, man.
No chance.
Just you forget it right now.
You and her?
You?
Her?
What kind of book she give you, pal?
Self-help?"
And he laughed, and went on laughing.
His laughter made a terrible sound — nothing to be said about it, really.
But my grip tightened and I quietly urged him,
"Get your laugh fixed, boy.
Or fixed again.
Everyone can tell it's false.
Hey.
Hey.
Who don't you leave me alone?
How about that?"
"And miss out on all this?
Are you kidding?
Answer me something.
You tell her about Sunday night?
You tell her you slept rough?"
 "What?" 
"Sunday night.
Remember?
That was the night that Just walked right over you.
 "So," I said, "you did it." 
This had occurred to me, but I'd hoped that the attack had been random.
In my state, you're always hoping things are random.
You don't want things assuming any shape on you.
"Uh-uh.
I just watched."
 "You did it…you cruel son of a bitch." 
"No!
I didn't do it.
With her heels, with her high heels!
A woman did it."
The line went dead but oh how my head came alive.
A door blew open and the pent sounds burst out fleeing.
For a loathsome instant I felt her awkward quivering weight on my back as she found her feet, and her voice saying…
What?
Dah, no — let us abort this memory here and now.
I made calls.
The airline.
Home, with no reply.
And Martina, but just to say goodbye.
These calls, they gave me no grief.
Only Fielding made demands on me.
Only Fielding had more penance to exact.
 "Spunk I said it's an honour." 
I glanced sideways at Fielding Goodney, who shrugged.
 "We loved Prehistoric," I went on.
"You were terrific.
I mean it.
You were absolutely — you were terrific, Spunk."
I felt Fielding nudge me in the gloom.
"Words fail me.
I tell you, Spunk — I, it really got to me, your interpretation there.
We want you.
We want you for Good Money.
Spunk, that's what we're here today to tell you…
Fuck it, Fielding, "I said," let's go with Meadowbrook or Nub Forkner or whoever.
I don't need this."
"Good.
Very good.
Sit down, please,"said Spunk Davis.
We were on the fortieth floor of the UN Plaza.
Fielding and I had been buzzed in, cased, X-rayed and heavy-petted by two security guards in plum blazers.
 "Davis, Spunk," the man had repeated ruminatively, among the potted plants and intercom banks and closed-circuit TV screens.
 "It's in another name." 
He cleared us and we rode the lift's rush of nausea, slurped up, up.
 "I'm Mrs Davis," said the little old lady who answered the door.
Well, I suppose she wasn't that old, but her shrunk face was laboriously lined, with deep concentrations round the eyes and mouth.
Lined, then lined again, and again.
You get this effect when you gaze through a file of London trees in winter, and the naked branches criss and cross until only motes of light remain, in peeping triangles.
A worked and working face.
But the eyes were bright.
"Oh.
Hi,"I said.
 "Mrs Davis," said Fielding gravely.
Then he kissed her hand and held it close to his chest.
This courtesy, tenderly performed, seemed right out of place to me, but it went down okay with Mrs Davis, who peered up at Fielding for quite a time before she said,
 "Are you saved?" 
While Fielding dealt with that one ( "Oh ma'am, but yes," he began) I turned to face a kitchen or parlour, plain in its shapes but full of manmade coatings and colours.
A dark, low-browed gent sat there in pampered profile, his once-powerful frame encased in a double-breasted needlestripe suit.
Spunk Senior, presumably.
He glanced at the TV on the chintzy sideboard (bobbing basketballers), he glanced at his watch (the movement limp and stoical), he glanced at me.
We briefly exchanged brute stares.
We recognized each other for what we were.
With tongue  and teeth he gave a tight rasp and turned away in boredom or vexation or distaste.
Yeah, one look at him and even I had to say to myself the ladies, the poor ladies.
They get it every time.
I was in no sort of nick for this encounter, I admit, full of fear and afternoon scotch and the homeward tug.
Now I had Mrs Davis's hand on my arm and her pleading face saying,
 "And are you saved, sir?" 
 "Pardon?" 
 "Yes he's saved also, dear," intervened Fielding, and I said,
"Yeah.
Me too."
"I'm glad.
Spunk's at the end of the hall."
She led us past a series of dun-walled anterooms through whose windows the burnished leagues of the East River fired off all their flame.
I saw a pool-table, a polythene-wrapped three-piece suite, various devotional ornaments and gewgaws with their special pale glow.
That glow I didn't need.
We entered a dining-room as dark as a cinema with a glistening figure at the head of the long table.
Mrs Davis slipped back into the light.
It was five o'clock.
 "Two years ago," the actor continued.
 "You auditioned me." 
He laughed disgustedly.
 "For a commercial." 
 "Yeah?" 
I said.
 "I really don't remember." 
His voice — he had a certain valve or muscle working on it.
I recognized that strain.
I talked the same way at his age, fighting my rogue aitches and glottal stops.
Glottal itself I delivered in only one syllable, with a kind of gulp or gag half way through.
Spunk here was trying to tame his bronco word-endings and his slippery vowels.
I speak all right now, though.
But I tell you, it's a tiring ten-year haul.
"I wasn't good enough.
I wasn't good enough.
For your commercial."
 "No kidding," I said.
 "You remember what commercial it was?" 
"No, I don't remember.
Put it out!"
He meant my cigarette.
 "Where?" 
 "Put it out!" 
 "Jesus," I said, and appealed to Fielding.
This is just a dramatized hangover, I thought.
I dragged mightily and in the mauve gleam I could see Davis more clearly, the bunched muscles in their tanktop.
His head had an odd tilt or cock to it, set on the  shoulders as if he were looking up from the bars of a drop-handled bike.
He was smiling.
 "All right," he said.
"Smoke.
Since the word got out on Prehistoric I've seen a whole bunch of scripts.
Road movies, good-ole-boy stuff, get the girl, happy ending."
He shook his head.
"Now I'm interested.
I'm interested in Good Money.
But let's get some things straight.
What's your attitude to this Doug character?"
 "Uh, largely sympathetic." 
"He's a degenerate.
 "He's got problems you wouldn't believe." 
"Listen.
I won't smoke and I won't drink and I won't have sex."
 "In the film." 
 "In the film." 
Well that's that, I thought.
But then I thought on a while and raised my finger.
 "Will you have hangovers?" 
 "Certainly," he said.
"I am an actor.
"Wait a minute.
You had sex in Prehistoric."
"That was a primitive man, Self.
Something else worries me.
The fight.
Tell me something, all right?
Who would I want to fight with an old man?"
I noticed that Fielding was also staring expectantly at me.
This will be over soon.
Like everything else, this is getting nearer to being over.
 "It's kind of the climax," I said.
"You and Lorne, you're fighting over the girl.
Also the money.
It"
"Yeah yeah.
But you don't, fight with old men.
Not like that.
Not with fists."
"How about if you lost the fight?
How about that?
Or what if you hit hint on the head with a car-tool?"
He looked at me pityingly, a full flat mouth on a chunky chin.
 "It wouldn't ever happen," he said.
"I'd take him out some other way.
There are other techniques…hypnosis, mindpower.
Any how this we can fix.
Herrick tells me you have a first draft two weeks away from completion.
You'll come here and we'll talk again.
My mother will see you out.
Half way to the door I swivelled and, as if simply following the script of this particular hangover, strolled back to the table and came to a halt with my hands in my pockets a few feet from  Davis's chair.
He looked up at me.
Yes, even his face was muscular, as though he pumped iron with his ears.
I said,
 "We'll meet one day." 
Uh?"
 "Room 101." 
 "Pardon me?" 
Forget it.
You know, I really liked your film.
It said something to me.
I'll be seeing you, Spunk."
We stood in the hot sandy bucket of the street, watching First Avenue's wall of death.
The road rises sharply here as the tunnel fans out and climbs back into the air.
Now the cars thumped and bucked on the ramp, the uptown stampede from the traps of the underpass.
Fielding had waved away the Autocrat, and we idled, considering, the producer in his dove-grey suit, the director in boxy charcoal and troubled flesh.
You know, the minute we got in there, the studs in my back had started to tickle, to rustle hatefully.
Maybe it would be smart to let a medic in on this-there might be dirt in those wounds.
Or maybe I could guts it out with penicillin, from my personal supply.
In California, how much are backs?
A night spent gummed to the plane's polyester would give me the full story either way.
Home.
Go home.
 "So," I said, another nutter.
Just what we need.
What's all this "saved" stuff?
What does saved mean?"
"Born again.
Fundamentalism, Slick, the most coarse and proletarian of all American creeds Nicodemus, John.
Unless a man is born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God."
 "Uh?" 
"The Bible, Slick.
You ever read it?"
 "Yeah, I read that." 
"Spunk's very religious.
The kid's a saint, you know that?
He works in the hospitals, he goes down to the projects in the Bronx.
All the money his dad doesn't blow on the women and the ponies, Spunk gives to charity."
"Like I said.
Another nutter."
"We need him.
We do need him.
With him the mix is just right.
He's perfect for us.
That kid is going to be very, very big.
Spunk's  hot, Slick.
Hey, "he said, and laughed briefly," you think he has a permit for those muscles?
Now I know what's worrying you and you can relax.
He's controllable.
Doris will account for all that in the script and he'll fall into line the second he sees hard print.
They all will.
Besides, he likes you.
They all do.
Say, it's too bad you have to get back.
Things are moving, John."
I said, to hell with it, I could do the budgeting and storyboarding just as well in London.
If Doris Arthur came through with the script ahead of schedule, he could zip it over in a Poseidon wallet within twenty-four hours.
Meanwhile, Fielding promised, he would hire the loft or the studio and line up the auditioning for the bit parts — the waiters, the dancers, the gangsters.
We'll have some fun with that,"he said.
 "The future looks bright, Slick." 
We embraced, a tight clasp with cheeks touching — but dead butch, naturally.
Man, did I need that living squeeze.
Now the Autocrat was nosing down the kerb.
He had me doublesign some contracts on the hood (the usual: once under "Co-signatory" , once under "Self" ).
Then he waved, and vanished behind the black glass.
I walked the line of midtown under the sun's red stare.
In the Ashbery I was informed by reception that my tab "was all taken care of" by Mr Goodney, who had moreover reserved Room 101 until further notice.
This was a concession of a kind.
Fielding deeply disapproved of the Ashbery, I knew, and was always on at me to take a suite, or a floor, of the Bartleby or the Gustave on Central Park South.
But the Ashbery was more my speed.
And I was settled here now.
So then you pack and do all that.
As I slipped Martina's book between the folds of my best suit, Felix knocked and entered bearing a white package the size of a small coffin, flamboyantly fastened with a blood-pink bow.
Selina has a bra-and-pants set of just that colour.
Selina.
I have big plans for Selina.
Well, another present, eh?
 "Delivery," he said, straightening.
Even in the at-ease position Felix seemed to be jogging on the spot.
"Here, Felix.
You've been a real pal."
He took the note but his face stayed quizzical.
"This is a big bill, man.
You drunk?"he asked pleasantly, and smiled.
There are few things better than the reluctant black smile: worth a hundred dollars.
Worth more.
The slopes of his eyelids were infinitely dark, making the stare louder and the smile more furtive.
This would always give Felix a cheeky look, even when he stopped being a black kid and started being a black man.
Perhaps I had the same look once, though I've lost it now.
At school the masters kept telling me to wipe it off my face.
But I never knew I had it, so how could I wipe it off.?
 "Go on," I said.
"It's not my money really.
Buy a present for your girlfriend.
Or your mother."
 "Now you take it easy now," said Felix.
The black case lay on the bed beside the white box.
I tugged the ribbon and lifted the lid and heard myself give a harsh shout of anger and rejection and probably shame.
I tore it to pieces with my bare hands.
Then I stood in the centre of the room thinking, whoops, hold it, hold on.
But there were a good few tears backed up my tracks and now was as bad a time as any.
Out it all came.
I'll tell you what my present was and I think you'll understand.
There was no message inside, only a plastic lady, veal-pale, moist-looking, with open grin.
You know, I've been told that I don't like women.
I do like women.
I think chicks are cool.
I've been told that men don't like women, period.
Oh yeah?
Who does then?
Because women don't like women.
Sometimes life looks very familiar.
Life often has that familiar look in its eyes.
Life is all vendetta, conspiracy, strong feeling, roused pride, self-belief, belief in the justice of its tides and floods.
Here is a secret that nobody knows: God is a woman.
Look around!
Of course She is.
Above the entrance to the saloon bar there is a picture of Shakespeare on the swinging sign.
It is the same picture of Shakespeare that I remember from schooldays, when I frowned over Timon of Athens and The Merchant of Venice.
Haven't they got a better one?
Did he really look like that all the time?
You'd have thought that by now his publicity people would have come up with something a little more attractive.
The beaked and bum-fluffed upper lip, the oafish swelling of the jawline, the granny's. rockpool eyes.
And that rug?
Isn't it a killer?
I have always derived great comfort from William Shakespeare.
After a depressing visit to the mirror or an unkind word from a girlfriend or an incredulous stare in the street, I say to myself: "Well.
Shakespeare looked like shit."
It works wonders.
 "Here, Fat Vince," I said, what did you have for your breakfast this morning?"
"Me?
I had a soused herring for my breakfast this morning."
 "Lunch?" 
 "Tripe." 
 "And what are you going to have for your dinner?" 
 "Brains." 
 "Fat Vince, you're a sick man." 
Fat Vince is beer-crate operative and freelance bouncer at the Shakespeare.
He's been in and out of this place every day for thirty-five years.
So have I, in my head anyway.
I was born upstairs, after all.
He sipped his beer.
Fat Vince looks like shit too, and so does his son Fat Paul…
I have a feeling for Fat Vince, partly because he's a fellow heart-sufferer.
His heart keeps attacking him, as mine will attack me one day.
Fat Vince has a feeling for me also, I reckon.
Every couple of months he takes me aside and, his breath sweet with trapped drink, asks me how I am.
No one else does this.
No one.
He talks to me about my mother sometimes.
Fat Vince is a widower too.
His wife died from being too lower class.
She wasn't up to it.
My mother, she just entered a mysterious decline.
I used to get into bed with her after school.
I could feel her falling, dividing.
Homesick for America.
Too much Barry Self.
Fat Vince doubles as the popular and permissive assistant-manager of a snooker hall in Victoria.
He has a little scullery down there, where he cooks his mad grub.
Fat Paul bounces and sharks and fills the pie-warmer.
On the number-one table, the cue cleaving his chin, he hunkers down on the cush to draw his bead on the bone balls…
Soon after my mother died Fat Vince took my dad out in a famous fight, by the gents"in the alley when the Shakespeare was young.
 "That's real food, son," said Fat Vince.
"You wouldn't know — spent your whole life in a fucking pub.
Give you a bag of crisps, you think you're in heaven.",
para> "Here, you know Loyonel," said Fat Paul.
 "Yeah," said Fat Vince.
Now Fat Vince isn't royalty but he speaks with a certain slot-mouthed restraint.
Not Fat Paul — Fat Paul, with his full-breasted bulk, his impassive sloped slab of a face, his parched pub rug, and the cruel blond eyebrows which give the eyes themselves the glint of a veteran ferret who has seen it all in the hare-traps and rat-pits.
Fat Paul, I would say, has few anxieties about his accent.
He doesn't fudge or smudge.
Every syllable has the clarity of threat.
You could never do that voice justice, but here goes.
 "I seen him in the street Sunday," said Fat Paul.
"I said — Phwore!
You just had a curry?
He said,"Nah.
Had a curry Froyday."
I said — what you have today then?
 "Free spoyce pizzas and two Choynese soups." 
He's only on antiboyotics as it is, for this zit on his armpit and his impetoygo.
Next day I seen him down the transport club.
You know they got a machine down there, Dad, that sells chips.
Chips."
Fat Paul still seemed to be reeling at this development.
"Fucking great tank full of gunge, once a mumf some bloke comes along and pours more fat down the funnel.
Firty pee a punnet.
Loyonel, he's there, leaning on the machine and stuffing himself sick.
And these chips, I tell you, ah is fucking disgusting.
Undescroybable.
He's half way frew his forf  punnet, he turns to me and says he can't fink why he has all these troubles with his skin!"
 "He's fortunate to be alive," said Fat Vince,"eating what he eats.
 "Seen the gut on him?" 
"His father died at fifty-one.
On a diet for five years, he just got fatter.
Then they found out he was eating his diet and his normal food.
What he put away you wouldn't want to think about.
When Eva came back she hid his teeth, but he splodged it all up and ate it anyway.
He had a bit of money too.
 "Money," said Fat Paul pensively, "is not worf two bob, is it, without your fuckin elf." 
The French, they say, live to eat.
The English, on the other hand, eat to die.
I took my pint to the bar, and scored a bag of crisps — shrimp-and-rollmop flavour — and a sachet of Pork Scrunchies.
I turned, eating these, and watched the people.
No doubt about it, I'm not a badlooking guy when I hang out at the Shakespeare.
I may not rate that high among Fielding and the filmstars, but in here I'm a catch.
These working-class women, they're like a sheep trial.
It obviously takes it out of you, being working class.
There's a lot of wear and tear involved.
And pubs can't help.
I turned again and leaned on the panelled bar, flanked by the heraldic street-signs of the beer-pull logos, the tureen-sized plastic ashtrays, the furry, nippled mats that imitate wetness even when they're dry.
Tacked to the square wooden pillar was the hand-written pub-grub bill of fare, with its obsessive permutations of pie-mash and fry-up, the ands and ors underlined, the "coffee" and "tea" in their exotic inverted commas.
For a while I stared into the clockface of an antique charity-box.
Let the Friends of St Martin's Hospital Tell Your Fortune.
You put in a coin, a wand twirls, and a brief selection of perfunctory destinies is on offer.
I surveyed the options: Don't get Gout, Stick to Stout.
Luck on the Pools.
You'll have Joy, Your next a Boy…
Nothing forbidding there.
And I fear all portents.
If the Friends of St Martin's Hospital had been peddling rug-loss, say, or bonk-famine, then they could fend for themselves.
I slipped ten pee into the slot and the coin dropped with a contented click.
The wand twirled: Money is On the Way.
I slipped in another: Beware  of False Advice.
All right, it's a deal.
I looked up, and the wobbly house-of-horrors mirror slipped its planes: the glass door opened, my father stared out and then gestured encouragingly, as if from a touchline.
So I ducked in under the trap.
 "Hi, dad," I said.
he was wearing a black leather jacket and a white silk scarf.
He's got a good rug, my dad, silvery and plentiful.
I wouldn't mind looking like that when I'm his age.
Actually, I wouldn't mind looking like that now.
I wouldn't have minded looking like that five years ago, come to think of it, or even ten.
It's the clock, the ticker.
My heart's not right.
Don't call me that,"he said with a flinch.
"We're friends.
Call me Barry.
Now, "he said, placing a creaky arm across my shoulders as he led me through to the parlour," I want you to meet Vron."
 "Vron?" 
He's doing it with robots now, I thought.
He halted me with a tug of my hair.
Vron sounded bad enough when i said it.
My father has trouble pronouncing his r's, owing to some palate fuck-up or gob-gimmick.
Vron sounded a good deal worse when he said it.
The parlour had come on a long way since I was a boy.
Now, it was close with money.
The ribbed and pimpled gas fire whose anglepoise heat I used to dress myself for school had been supplanted by a black eggbasket of counterfeit coal.
The granny table where I ate my toast was now a cocktail cabinet, with studded plastic, three high stools, a Manhattan skyline of siphons and shakers.
Vron reclined on a dramatic sofa of white corduroy.
She was a pale brunette of comfortable build, my age.
I had seen her before somewhere.
 "Pleased to meet you," I said.
 "I've heard so much about you, John," said Vron.
 "Vron's a very happy girl today," said my father huskily.
 "Aren't you, my lovely?" 
Vron nodded.
"It's a very special day for my Vron.
Show him, Vron."
Vron sat up, tightening the folds of her kaftan.
She reached under the coffee-table and produced a pornographic magazine called Debonair…
Now I know my pornographic magazines: Debonair belonged to the cheaper range, targeted at the manual worker's handjob, with many a salacious housewife or spotty-bummed Swede twisting herself in and out of chain-store under-wear.
Sit down, John,"she said, and rubbed the seat beside her with her palm.
Wetting her fingertips, Vron plucked at the pages.
With a sigh that was almost a gurgle of gratification, she found the slippery spread.
She laid it on my lap in a soft caress.
My father sat down too.
I felt their arms on my shoulders and their ripe, expectant, human faces very close to mine.
I flattened the mag out in front of me.
From the right-hand page Vron's face stared me in the eye.
Across her bare throat was the legend "VRON" — again the double quotes with their exotic, their impossible promise.
 "Go on, John," I heard Vron whisper.
I turned the page.
There was Vron, in the usual silky bonds and tapes, doing all the things that these chicks are paid to do.
I turned the page.
 "Slowly, John," I heard Vron whisper.
Vron on a steel chair, with a heavy breast in either fist.
Vron lying with back arched and legs raised on a tousled white carpet.
Vron stretched out on the haunches of a drophead Hyena.
Vron crouched over a flat mirror.
I turned the page.
 "There," I heard Vron whisper.
The final double-spread disclosed Vron on her knees, her gartered rump hoisted towards camera, splaying the busy cleft with magenta-bladed fingers.
Now I recognized her: Veronica, the talented stripper, here at the Shakespeare.
Vron started to cry.
My father gazed at me manfully.
I believe there was a tear or two in his eyes also.
 "I'm I'm so proud," said Vron.
My father inhaled richly and rose to his feet.
He slapped a hand on the cocktail console.
He said explanatorily,"Pink champagne.
Well, it's not every day, is it?
Come on Vron!
Who's a silly then?
Here's looking at you, my love."
He flexed his nose indulgently.
 "There you go, John." 
"Vron?
Barry?"
I said.
— Cheers.
I drove home in my Fiasco, which, apart from the faulty cooling system, the recurring malfunction with the brakes and power-steering  and a tendency to list violently to the left, seems to be running fairly reliably at present.
At least it starts more often than not, on the whole.
I don't think Selina exercises the Fiasco much when I'm in the States, and of course Alec Llewellyn has no use for it, now that he's locked up twenty-four hours a day
The ride from Pimlico to Portobello took well over ninety minutes and it was gone midnight when I beached the car on a double yellow line outside my sock.
Why did it take well over ninety minutes?
A rush-hour style traffic jam at 12 p.m.
Something to do with the fucking Royal Wedding.
For the best part of an hour I sat swearing in a blocked tunnel under Westway.
The Fiasco was overheating.
I was overheating.
Each car was crammed with foreigners and grinning drunks.
The tunnel's throat swelled like emphysema with fags and fumes and foul mouths.
Then we edged into the blue nightmap of stars.
Join the dots…
London has jet-lag.
London has culture-shock.
It's doing everything the wrong way round at the wrong time.
Selina was sitting up in bed when I went through with my drink.
 "What's happening?" 
I asked.
 "Reading my book." 
 "Your what?" 
She had a copy of Sugar on her banked thighs.
There was also a TV-guide in there with her.
 "How was Barry?" 
"Oh.
Okay."
"Did you meet his new slag?
He says he's going to marry her.
He made another pass at me the other day."
"He didn't.
What happened?"
 "He stuck his head up my skirt." 
 "What?" 
 "I thought he was kidding until he tried to get my pants off with his teeth." 
 "Jesus." 
 "Doctor?" 
 "Uh?" 
"Doctor?
I think I've bruised my inner thigh.
Can you take a look at it please"?
An oilman offered me fifty petrodollars to blow him in the lift."
 "What did you do?" 
I asked for seventy-five.
But then he wanted everything, and I think he was a little rough with my inner thigh.
Would you look at it for me, doctor?"
I told her to forget this doctor nonsense and talk more reasonably about the oilman and his petrodollars and what he had her do In the dying moments she made a noise I'd never heard her make before, a rhythmical whimpering of abandonment or entreaty, a lost sound.
I'd heard that noise before, but never from Selina.
Hey, "I said accusingly (I was joking, I think)," you're not faking it!"
She looked startled, indignant.
 "Yes I am," she said quickly.
Intriguingly enough, the only way I can make Selina actually want to go to bed with me is by not wanting to go to bed with her.
It never fails.
It really puts her in the mood.
The trouble is, when I don't want to go to bed with her (and it does happen), I don't want to go to bed with her.
When does it happen?
When don't I want to go to bed with her?
When she wants to go to bed with me.
I like going to bed with her when going to bed with me is the last thing she wants.
She nearly always does go to bed with me, if I shout at her a lot or threaten her or give her enough money.
It works well.
It is an excellent system.
Selina and I get on like a house on fire.
The thing about Selina is, she understands.
She knows the twentieth century.
She has hung out in cities When we go to bed together, sometimes the conversation turns to…
While making love, we often talk about money.
I like it.
I like that dirty talk.
No sleep.
No, no chance.
I couldn't sleep but Selina could.
She's good at that too, an accomplished sleeper, with childish face.
I went next door in my shorty dressing-gown.
I poured myself a drink.
I glanced round about myself, on the lookout for clues.
When I got in from the airport — yesterday, give or take a week — the flat felt lightly dishevelled, hurriedly lived-in, as if the cleaning-lady's efforts had been briskly cancelled or mussed.
There were flowers on the table but no pants in the laundry basket.
There was fresh milk in the fridge but old tea in the jar  — and Selina likes her tea.
She is particular about her tea, and often carries a pack round with her in her handbag…
She was expecting me.
I could tell by the quality of her alarm, which was actressy and overdone.
Where have you been?
I asked her.
 "Here!" she insisted, with a chirpy wag of the head.
How did you know I was coming back?
 "I didn't!" she maintained.
And I had told nobody, not Ella Llewellyn, nobody.
Oh who cares, I thought, and tried to bundle her into the bag right away.
I had a strong desire to repossess.
She lets me furl her around for a while, and makes those shammy gasps she knows I like, and gives detailed promise of all that cocked and candid talent — before she calls a halt, slithers off the bed, corrects her clothing, brushes her hair, changes her shoes, powders her nose, slides my Johnson out of her mouth and insists on lunch.
We go to Kreutzer's.
I eat and drink like there's no tomorrow.
We don't have much to say.
Nobody asks sticky questions as they are led on all fours up the stairs.
I'm not about to spook her, not me.
I'm too worried about earthquakes or nuclear warfare or extraterrestrial invasion or Judgement Day coming between me and my reward.
All you'll get from John Self is smalltalk, flattery and squealed demands for more drink.
After toothache liqueurs I thunder home and abandon the Fiasco in the middle of the street.
By now I am a crackling sorcerer of grub and booze, of philtres and sex-spells.
Selina walks into the bedroom with her head held low.
I give a great hot grunt as I untether my belt.
…
I picked up the stack of mail from the coffee-table and dealt myself one off the bottom: the envelope that contains my monthly bank statement, with its familiar brown matt and the wax seal like a blob of blood.
It's not my bank account any more, of course.
It's a joint bank account.
Selina has half of it now — to shore up her dignity and self-respect, remember?
I broke the seal with my blunt thumb.
And the statement, I swear, was three pages long.
Among the usual laconic entries on the debit side — US Approach, Liquor Locker, Dr Martha McGilchrist, Gas Board, Kreutzer's, the Mahatma, Trans-American, Liquor Locker — there now thronged a host of Selina's new playmates from the days of yore.
Christ, what is this crew?
It seems that the chick hangs out in Troy or Carthage when she's got a bit of cash to  bum: Chez Zeus, Goliath's, Amaryllis, Aphrodite, Romeo & Juliet, Romulus & Remus, Eloise & Abelard…
I always suspected that Selina spent all her money on massages, rug-rethinks and underwear — but that was when she hardly had any.
The telltale entry was the lone item on the credit side: £2,000, from deposit account.
I can't complain, I suppose.
Such is our deal.
Such is our gentleman's agreement.
But that's the whole trouble with dignity and self-respect: they cost you so much fucking money.
And now I am one of the unemployed.
What do we do all day?
We sit on stoops and pause in loose knots on the stained pavements.
The pavements are like threadless carpets after some atrocious rout of flash-frazzled food and emetic drink: last night the weather gods all drowned their sorrows, and then threw up from thirty thousand feet.
We sit flummoxed in the parks, among low-caste flowers.
Whew (we think), this life is slow.
I came of age in the Sixties, when there were chances, when it was all there waiting.
Now they seep out of school — to what?
To nothing, to fuck-all.
The young (you can see it in their faces), the stegosaurus rugged no-hopers, the parrot-crested blankies — they've come up with an appropriate response to this, which is: nothing.
Which is nothing, which is fuck-all.
The dole-queue starts at the exit to the playground.
Riots are their rumpus-room, sombre London their jungle-gym.
Life is hoarded elsewhere by others.
Money is so near you can almost touch it, but it is all on the other side — you can only press your face up against the glass.
In my day, if you wanted, you could just drop out.
You can't drop out any more.
Money has seen to that.
There's nowhere to go.
You cannot hide out from money.
You just cannot hide out from money any more.
And so sometimes, when the nights are hot, they smash and grab.
Meanwhile, there are some pretty primitive creatures driving around with money in their Torpedoes and Boomerangs, or sitting down with money at the Mahatma or the Assisi, or just standing there with money, in the shops, in the pubs, in the streets.
They are all shapes and colours, innocent beneficiaries of the global joke which money keeps cracking.
They don't do anything: it's  their currencies that do things.
Last year the pubs were full of incredulously spendthrift Irishmen: they didn't have money in their pockets any longer— they had Euromoney, which is much more powerful stuff.
There's some bundle in the Middle East, and a new squad of fiscal space invaders starts plundering the West.
Every time the quid gets gang-banged on the international exchange, all the Arab chicks get a new fur coat.
There are white moneymen, too, English, native.
They must be criminals, with their wads, the crap they talk, their cruel, roasted faces.
I am one.
I am one of them, white or at least sky-grey, with pub rug, and ashen arm on the Fiasco doorjamb, unsmiling at the traffic light, fat-brained with abuse — but holding money.
I have money but I can't control it: Fielding keeps supplying me with more.
Money, I think, is uncontrollable.
Even those of us who have it, we can't control it Life gets poor-mouthed all the time, yet you seldom hear an unkind word about money.
Money, now this has to be some good shit.
Ever since I gave up my job and started waiting for the film to happen, I too have felt like a gap in between things.
So how can you expect someone like me to deal with the day?
I have no ideas on this one.
Tell me, please.
Money doesn't tell me.
I lie clueless in the cot until — until when?
How is it that the experience will ever end?
Up, get out, do it now — now, now.
Now!
I drift, dither, grope, fumble…and there I am at last, half-dressed in the kitchen with cigarettes and coffee-filters.
Addictions do come in handy sometimes: at least you have to get out of bed for them.
I look through the window — the streets, the sky the colour of wet sugar — and I am simply stumped by this, dumbfounded, non-plussed.
The windows themselves, they make a little more sense.
They are doubleglazed with dirt.
The glass looks like the Fiasco windscreen after a thousand-mile drive, stained with the blackened blood of insects nine hundred miles ago, the dottings of soot, the fingerprints of filthy phantoms.
Even dirt has its patterns and seeks its forms…
When I quit my job it felt like the end of term, it felt like Saturday morning, it felt great, it felt illegal.
But the end of something ought to be the start of something else, and I can't yet feel what's meant to be beginning.
In my head it feels like nothing, like fuck-all.
Selina is an early riser.
Her High Street  instincts (detectable in the sharpness of her face, even in the sharpness of her teeth) propel her into the world of money and exchange.
She has an interest in a boutique run by that useful friend of hers, Helle, down Chelsea way, the World's End.
Selina wants me to put money into it.
I don't want to put money into it, but I probably will.
If I do, I know I'll never get it out again.
So I play patience, and solitaire.
Martina's book lies closed on my bedside table: I haven't got into it yet, and I still don't know what pop-holes are.
I look to the TV, the video recorder.
Once I had a pretty decent collection of films on tape, but I can't handle anything continuous any more.
I've seen all the video nasties, and I don't need pornography, now that Selina's here.
I fill the reels with nightly squirts of random TV"traffic.
Nature shorts, comedy shows.
Football, snooker, bowls, darts.
Darts!
Dah!
Oh man soon I'll look like those fat brutes with the beer mugs and the arrows.
And then with shoulders bunched and my eyes on the messed pavement I shuffle off down the drinker, and sit with tankard and tabloid in the comer by the fire.
Russia is going to beat Poland up.
If I were Russia, that's what I'd do, just to keep up appearances I mean, you can't let the word start to get about.
Seems that Prince Charles had a thing with one of Diana's sisters, way back, before he fingered Lady Di as the true goer of the family.
Another pussy-whipped judge has given some broad a ten-bob fine for murdering the milkman — premenstrual tension, PMT.
The Western Alliance is in poor shape, I'm told.
Well what do you expect?
They've got an actor, and we've got a chick.
More riots in Liverpool, Birmingham, Manchester, the inner cities left to rot or burn.
Sorry, boys, but the PM has PM T. Here is a woman who gave her five-year-old child away to a stranger in a pub for two barley stouts.
She's separated from her common-law husband, who is unemployed.
I do the quick crossword.
I play the space games and the fruit machines.
I feel like a robot, playing a rival robot, for a price.
We are both one-armed bandits.
Hold, nudge, spin, kick, shuffle, double, win, lose.
It's all done for you nowadays — Prizefinder, Holdamatic, Autonudge.
The machines nauseate me whether I win or lose.
But if they had a hole in the wall here I think I'd put money into it.
I go somewhere else and eat junk food and drink  junk wine.
I hit the betting shop and lose dough perched on a stool.
I wander through the newsagents and check out the chicks in the magazines.
I go home and lie down and then it all starts again.
What is there to help me make sense of things?
Time has me dangling on its tenterhooks.
I used to run on energy.
These days, saying energy makes me black out with exhaustion.
I can't do any storyboarding until Doris Arthur shows with the script.
As for budgeting, my first assistant Micky Obbs is on a half-pay retainer until the first day of Principal Photography, along with Des Blackadder and Kevin Skuse.
He can fucking do it.
Take yesterday.
Eleven forty-five, and I strolled into the Jack the Ripper, the roughest and least local of my many locals.
The dump wasn't that crowded: the girl behind the bar just kept disappearing and failing to meet my eye.
Two or three new arrivals were greeted, listened to, obeyed, given drinks and change — without any acknowledgement of my cocked fiver and strident excuse mes.
Well, I'm not one to soldier on with this kind of treatment.
 "How about it?" 
I said loudly.
 "I mean, what are my chances, if I stick around for a couple more months?" 
People turned, but the barmaid did not turn.
She went to the till, which jounced and jingled at her bidding.
She swivelled primly — she wasn't one of nature's barmaids — and held up the change just past my face, which was boiling now, as she saw.
 "We're not serving you," she announced.
Her face wavered.
Then she looked into my eyes.
Her face, its small universe, was all present and correct.
Along the bar people perked up their interest.
As it was, even when I stepped in here, I wanted a drink quite badly.
And that was five minutes ago.
 "You're WHAT?" 
I said.
"Why?
Who says?
Why?"
 "Not after last night." 
"What do you mean, last night?
I wasn't even in here last night."
"You don't even remember, you were that drunk.
Jerome!"she called.
 "Jerome!" 
Jerome, the blue-jeaned bumboy with earring and dyed blonde  "Of course," he said, continuing to cut his food crisply,"you could have argued that the man was being exploited too.
 "What man?" 
 "There was a man in the photograph, wasn't there." 
"No.
The girl just had this dick in her face.
 "Well who do you think the dick belonged to, brilliant?" 
"Yeah but girls don't think that's exploitation.
They think that, they think all men want to do that stuff anyway.
 "Well, they're wrong, aren't they," he said mildly.
"I wouldn't want to do it.
You wouldn't want to do it.
The men do it for money, same as the girls."
"There must be some guys who like doing it.
When I was younger, I always thought it looked like money for jam.
Some girls like doing it too, don't forget.
 "You think?" 
 "Oh sure," I said.
"1 know one who posed in Debonair.
She bursts into tears of pride at the very mention."
"Pride?…
Yes, I suppose it figures."
 "How?" 
 "Yob art," he said, and wiped his mouth.
"Hey look, I've got to run.
 "Come on," I said,"you've got to let your meal digest.
It's not healthy.
Have a drink."
He shook his head.
Before he left, he held out his free hand and I took it.
 "Nice talking to you, Martin." 
 "Be seeing you, John." 
John.
What a name, eh?
It means a can, it means a trick.
I pushed my plate away and settled back with the wine.
I lit a cigarette.
I pondered.
Yob art Yeah.
When Vron had sobbed it all out after showing her prospective stepson photographs of herself having a handjob with no clothes on for money, she explained to me at throaty length and with hot tears still foiling the points of her lashes — that she had always been creative.
 "I was always creative John!" she said again and again, as if I kept impiously insisting that she was creative only sometimes or not until recently.
Vron confirmed that she had been good at art as a schoolgirl, often praised by her art master.
She instanced her  of a long line of lagers, I consumed three Waistwatchers, two Seckburgers, an American Way and a double order of Tuckleberry Pie.
But hang on a minute…
Do you think I might have left anything out?
After lunch I recrossed the road to the newsagents, and took my place at the wailing wall of the pornography section.
As in any library, the material is arranged to suit the specialist: there are magazines featuring chicks with big tits, there are magazines featuring chicks in silk and lace and garter belts, there are magazines featuring chicks getting roughed up.
Boy, are there a lot of magazines featuring chicks getting roughed up.
You'd think the punters could get by with a mere half-dozen of these monthly publications, but no, they need more.
Pornography has a smell, a special odour.
I think it comes from the treated paper the barons use.
The smell of pornography is arid, acrid, the smell of headaches and wax…
I had just taken another look at Debonair — at Vron, my future stepmother.
My future stepmother has a pair on her, no doubt about it.
She could even cut the mustard in one of the magazines specifically featuring chicks with big tits.
I replaced Debonair and picked up Lovedolls.
Take it from me, they don't come much dirtier than Lovedolls, not in England, not legally.
So there I was, muttering in a low grumble and torpidly flipping through the pages, shoulders up, head down — when to the sound of a loud handclap the splayed centre-spread was violently dashed from my grip.
I looked up, in alarm, bewilderment, in terror.
A plump, pretty girl, with a sensible scarf, two badges on the lapel of her corduroy overcoat, her face and stance vibrant, unflinching, exalted…
Browsers paused in their shuffle.
Someone near me stepped sideways, beyond the range of my sight.
 "What are you doing?" she barked — she snapped.
A middle-class mouth, the voice and teeth hard and clean.
I backed off, or veered away.
I even raised an arm protectively.
 "Why aren't you ashamed of yourself?" 
 "But I am," I said.
"Look at that.
Look."
We stared at the fallen magazine.
It rested half-open on a low shelf where the normal, the legal stuff was trimly stacked.
One of  the centrepages was curled over, as if tactfully averting the gaze of the girl spreadeagled there.
A trunkless, limp and warty male member dangled inches from her greedy smile.
 "It's disgusting, isn't it." 
 "Yes." 
 "How can you look at these things?" , para> "I've no idea." 
At this she gave off a pulse of hesitation.
I don't think she had really been hearing me till now.
It must have cost her quite a bit too, taking on a man who looks like I look, his fat shoulders and heavy head tensed over the spectacle of her lost or twisted sisters.
Yes, even with her strong round face and unimpeachable teeth and her rectitude, it must have cost her something.
She had done this before a few times perhaps, but not that many times.
Now the full stare of her eyes individualized my human shape, and her questions became questions.
She raised a gloved finger.
"Why then?
Why?
Without you they wouldn't exist.
Look at it."
We looked down again.
The lovedoll was turned almost inside out.
 "What does that say to you?" 
"I don't know.
Money."
She turned and walked the long clicking walk down the floor (the shop strangely quenched of sound and movement), tugged back hard on the glass door and with a shake of shiny hair had passed into the random straggle of the street.
There was laughter, a low surge of talk.
Amused relief showed briefly on the faces of the two zonked chinks who worked the counter.
I restored Lovedolls to its rack, then flapped defiantly through Plaything International and Jangler.
I crossed the street and climbed on a stool and lost £20 on the 3.45.
I felt awful, ill, all beaten up.
Oh, sugar, Jesus, why couldn't you pick on someone else?
Who couldn't you pick on someone with a little more to lose?
I walked back to my sock in the thin rain.
And the skies.
Christ!
In shades of kitchen mists, with eyes of light showing only murk and seams of film and grease, the air hung above and behind me like an old sink full of old washing-up.
Blasted, totalled, broken-winded, shot-faced London, doing time under sodden skies.
In the ornate portal of a mansion-block department store an old  man with buttoned overcoat and brown burnished shoes stood talking at the rain.
Other old people flanked him expressionlessly and two younger women wearing indeterminate blue uniforms and faces of bleache sincerity underscored or punctuated his address with marching music from pipe and drum.
 "It is never too late" , said the old man diffidently, unassumingly, as one of God's grim janitors, "to change your ways." 
With narrow lips and eyes he faced the strolling irony of the afternoon crowds, the young, the robed incurious foreigners.
 "There is no need" , he said, "for you to feel so ashamed." 
You could hardly hear him anyway, what with the drum and all this rain and milk in the air.
Oh, but pal — you're wrong.
The skies are so ashamed.
The trees in the squares hang their heads, and the awnings of the street are careful to conceal the wet red faces of the shopfronts.
The evening paper in its cage is ashamed.
The clock above the door where the old man speaks is ashamed.
Even the drum is so ashamed.
 "How in Christ's name did you get yourself into this state?" 
 "Right, you bitch, this is it!" 
 "This is what?" 
 "You're never fucking here when I call from the States!" 
 "Can't a girl go to her own flat when she likes?" 
 "You're never there either!" 
 "Can't a girl disconnect the phone sometimes?" 
 "You little actress, you were off somewhere else!" 
 "Are you going to pretend you don't know why things are in this state?" 
 "You're cheating on me, you bitch!" 
"Why are you so upset?
I'm trying to tell you something, don't you understand?"
Selina unbuttoned her coat.
She crossed her arms and stood there bristling with all the counter-strength of the street.
 "Jesus," she said,"aren't you the one.
For God's sake go to bed and try and sleep it off before dinner.
Where are we going anyway?"
No, I'll be okay, I said or whimpered — just get me some tea or  something Selina, she's turned the tables on me somehow, that Selina.
I wish I knew how she managed it.
Sighing, I lay on the couch with my mug.
Selina established herself at the circular steel table: evening paper, teacup, a single, deserved cigarette.
She turned the pages briskly, paused, frowned, cleared her throat, flexed her eyelids, and leaned forward in cold concentration.
I knew what she was reading about.
She was reading about the palimony trial in California.
Selina's been following the story.
So have I. Palimony sounds like bad news for the boys.
As I understand it, the ruling states that if a chick makes tea once a week for the same guy — she gets half his dough.
Every evening now, Selina turns straight to the palimony page, and goes all quiet.
I hope she won't be wanting any palimony from me.
 "Let's be realistic for once, shall we?" she said, later.
"You're too thick to realize it but I'm your last chance.
No, not those.
They cut into me.
Who else is going to put up with you?"
"No, not those.
We had them the other night."
"Look at yourself.
No, they need washing.
I mean you're hardly a catch, are you.
You're thirty-five.
Act it.
"Yeah, that'll do.
With these.
Put them on too."
"If you're waiting around for someone better — hang on.
I've got it then you're whistling Dixie, mate.
Who would take you on anyway?
Martina Twain?"
"Wait.
Take those off and put these on."
 "She gave you that book, didn't she." 
 "What book?" 
I asked, impressed anew by Selina's witch radar.
"The library book on your bedside table.
The one you read the first page of every night."
"That's good.
That's good.
It was sort of a present."
"A present, my arse.
Honestly, the ideas some people have about themselves."
 "Face the facts," she said, later still.
"Grow up, for God's sake.
I'd settle for you.
Settle for me.
I'd look after you.
Look after me.
Give me children.
Marry me.
Make a commitment.
Make me feel I have some kind of base to my life.
At least let me move in here properly."
"All right.
Yeah, okay,"I said.
 "You can move in here properly." 
So the next morning when the crows in the square were still making their sounds of hunger I hired a van at the mews garage and off we chugged down the hill, Earls Court way, to collect Selina's stuff.
Her flatmates Mandy and Debby flitted fanciably about the place, half-dressed, serving me coffee with the reverence due to a moneyman and debt-settler.
I lounged on the couch in the attic sitting-room, pyramidal in shape with deep-set windows.
Through these chutes of slates you could inspect the weather, which was making a comeback of the stalled-career variety, the sun all rusty and out of condition, glowing then failing suddenly like a damp torch.
Selina donned an apron and put her hair up under a baseball cap and prickled with female make-do and knowhow, while Mandy and Debby took it in turns to amuse me downstairs.
Mandy and Debby, they look like nude-magazines too.
They look like Selina.
Modern sack artists aren't languid Creoles who loll around the boudoir eating chocolates all day, licking their lips and purring, their whiskers flecked with come and cream.
No, they're business heads on business shoulders, keen-sensed and foxy, not young-looking either but tough, tanned and weathered.
Selina fulls in and out of love with these two, as she does with Helle.
She once told me, in a voice full of hatred and contempt, that Mandy and Debby have been known to do escort work, the deal being as follows: the punter pays the agency £15 per date, of which the chick gets two.
That's right: two quid.
A scandal, isn't it?
So naturally the girls do a bit of business on their own account.
Nothing went on here, though, in this shacky walk-up: what went on went on in interchangeable intercontinental hotel rooms, in the private suites of corrupt clubs and thriving speakeasies, in glazed Arab flats.
Mandy and Debby looked the part all right, they looked tough enough for this, particularly Debby, who gave me so much eye-contact and hand-on-knee and dressing-gown disclosure that I almost asked for her telephone number.
But of course I realized that this would be a pretty gratuitous move, under the circumstances.
I already had her telephone number.
I wrote out a cheque for £320 to cover various outgoings — Kiss-off money"Mandy called it — and marshalled Selina's worldly possessions in the back of the van.
She owned pitifully little, really.
It would have all gone in the Fiasco, easy, if the Fiasco had been running.
But the Fiasco has not been running.
Three bin-liners full of clothes, a teapot, two photograph frames, a soap-rack, a chair, an iron, a mirror and a lamp.
 "There you go, girl," I said at the other end, when I brought in the final batch.
 "Thank you, darling," said Selina.
She stood in the middle of my hired front room.
"Now this is my home.
Right then."
Selina had three paperbacks to add to the shelves, A to Z, Common Legal Problems and The Guide to Married Loving.
What with Martina's present, my book collection is definitely expanding
 "Don't tell anyone," whispered Alec Llewellyn,"but it's really quite cool in here.
Don't laugh!
They'll see us and think I'm not taking it seriously."
 "Have you got your own cell?" 
He sat back.
"No.
It's a cell meant for one but there are two other guys in it.
We're very overcrowded.
They're all burglars and swindlers and things in here.
We've got our own little kettle.
It's so laid back I can't believe it.
On the first morning I woke up feeling great, like a kid, stretched my arms and thought, Now I'll have a cup of tea and stroll out for a Then it hit me."
 "Wow." 
"Yeah.
But I'm incredibly relieved.
With my accent I thought I'd be smashed to pieces or fucked in half after five minutes in here.
But it's not like that.
It must be the only place in England where the class system still works."
I lit a cigarette, and waited.
"I think it's to do with the clarity of the voice.
Everyone else, including the screws and the pigs, they all talk as if they've just learned how.
They can't understand why I'm in here.
They're all paranoid of me.
The screws are paranoid of me.
The assistant governor is paranoid of me.
Even the governor comes down to hobnob with me in the cells."
 "What's the food like?" 
"Awful.
It's all that soya stuff.
It fills you up okay but runs you  down at the same time.
You know, I always thought they put anti-bonk pills in the coffee.
But they don't need to.
They don't put anything in the coffee.
They don't put coffee in the coffee.
Butch Beausoleil could live here in the nude and no one would give her a second glance.
I suppose they might try and sellotape her to the walls of their cells.
All day you feel as if you've just had about ten handjobs.
It's the food and the air, and the confinement.
We sat in a gothic cafeteria.
If you lifted your head, it felt like school.
Up there among the coach-house windows it was all swimming light, free-style, and tolerance of the noise and warmth of the human commerce below.
Below, the prisoners sat at the far side of a rank of yellow-decked tables, with their little visitors — women, kids, the old — ranged opposite on kitchen chairs.
No booths or metal grilles.
You could hold hands if you wanted to.
You could kiss.
The older jailbirds were a snouty, ferrety contingent.
Some of them looked only half-made.
They sat back easily on their benches, their gestures resigned, explanatory.
Their women were tensed forward on their seats, almost in a crouch of inquiry or solicitude.
The children simply stared and fidgeted, in a high state of nerves — they were on their best behaviour, no question.
 "I got you a sleeve of fags," I said, "plus twelve half-bottles of wine." 
"Thanks.
Did"
"I was amazed when they told me what I could bring.
Half a bottle of wine a day — it's not enough but it's something.
I left it all with the guy."
 "Did you bring any books?" 
 "Uh?" 
"Ah you fucking lout!
Bring me some tomorrow, okay?
Promise.
What do you think I do all day, for Christ's sake?
All they've got in here is a little heap of Westerns and thrillers with half the pages torn out or covered in tea and snot.
I've been reading the fucking Bible for the last few days.
Even that would be okay but everyone's beginning to think I'm bananas.
Bring me some books."
 "I don't even know what kind of books you like." 
"Jesus, anything.
I'll make a list.
Novels, history, travel books, I don't mind.
Poetry, anything."
"Poetry?
In here?"
"I'll take my chances.
Alec wore a navy-blue romper suit — the outfit of a French workman, or indeed that of some little new-wave narcissist at a C. L. & S. screening It was the sight of him in his issued clothing that made me sense just how far he had fallen.
Not too far, don't take him too far down, I thought.
He'll disappear the other way.
Everyone in here, they had all transgressed, they had all sinned against money.
And now money was making them pay.
 "That reminds me," I said.
 "You haven't got six thousand quid on you, have you?" 
Alec scratched his scalp.
His sharp nose twitched.
 "Yes well I'm sorry about that." 
 "What happened?" 
"I gave some of it to Eileen and tried to double the rest at roulette.
Brill, I agree.
It wasn't enough anyway.
You should have seen me in the dock, man.
I was just melting.
When that old moron in the wig, when he read out the sentence — oh, I thought, he mat be talking about someone else.
Who, me?
And this is just remand.
If things go against me on the ninth, then I go somewhere serious."
 "Can I do anything?" 
I said in a quick voice.
"No.
I'd need — with the guarantee I'd need, I couldn't even ask you.
What did Ella say?"
"Nothing much.
Do you hate her?"
"Oh, you know.
When you're fighting and hating each other anyway, it must be nice for the chick when she turns out to have the law batting for her.
A judge, five hundred filth and Brixton on her side.
Instead of throwing an ashtray at you, she throws prison."
"Christ, I'd —
"It wasn't her fault.
It's all legal stuff to do with the kids.
The irony is, "said Alec Llewellyn, describing a figure-eight with his neck," the irony is that Andrew — he's not even mine."
 "How do you know?" 
"Look at him.
Look at his hair.
Look at Mandolina.
A completely different order of human being."
 "Are you sure?" 
"The month she conceived we were getting on so badly — I didn't sleep with her, not that month.
She said I fucked her when I was drunk.
But if I was too drunk to remember I'd have been too drunk to perform.
Anyway.
Ella came here the day after I got in and cried her eyes out.
She tried to stop it, you know."
 "Oh yeah?" 
 "How's Selina?" 
"Fine.
And as true to me as the day is long."
"You dupe.
You gull."
I named his prep school.
I named his public school.
I named his Cambridge college.
 "And now Brixton," I said.
 "Wherever next?" 
 "Pentonville." 
He took another cigarette from my fanned pack.
"Well, it's the university of life.
You learn new things every day.
For instance, there's a contract out on you, pal."
 "Oh that," I said coolly.
 "Yeah, so I've heard." 
"One of the minor villains here told me about it.
It's a pretty minor contract, too.
Fifty quid or something."
 "Who's taken it out?" 
"That he didn't know or couldn't remember.
But he remembers the damage."
 "Fifty quids" worth,"I said, feeling oddly hurt or slighted.
"What is it — a clip round the ear?
A Chinese burn?"
"One blow in the face with a blunt instrument.
Now.
I'll make the list.
And you fucking get me those books."
The piece of paper changed hands softly.
So did a ten-pound note.
It wasn't prudent for him to have more.
There wouldn't be a great deal to buy, but money has its powers, even here…
Soon he was taken away: a uniformed guard simply beckoned to him through the half-open door.
Alec Llewellyn nodded seriously at me as he walked off in his blue overalls, Alec, that snappy dresser.
I left the way I'd come in.
The criminals now embraced and encouraged their women, many of whom were patiently weeping their daily tearfall.
The children had been stilled and quietened by fresh apprehensions.
I walked through the clearing-house, the bench-lined locker-room, past full trashcans and the rods of old  radiators.
The next wave of families were gathered in huddles: the next wave of berks, burglars and bunglers was being dredged up from the cells.
Shirtsleeved guards moved about with forms-cheerful, overworked.
One of the guys at the gate helped me give the Fiasco a push.
At many revolutions per second I came down the green slide into Brixton and beyond.
But only when I reached the washed sky of the Thames did I dare to pull over and negotiate my fear.
I climbed out.
I walked half the slope of Battersea Bridge.
Behind my back the four smokestacks of the power station pointed upwards, the threshold of an unfinished building of inconceivably vast and dreadful size.
Beneath me the Thames lassooed and pulsed like a human brain, sending signals, slipping veil after veil as if a heavier liquid had been sent to slide across its face of water, leaving no doubt that rivers are living things.
They die, too.
I held the bars until the nausea left me, pouring out through the restraining iron and into the open air.
You see, I come from the criminal classes.
Yes I do.
It's in me, all that, in my blood.
Oh, it gets you!
Someone like me, I cannot put real distance between myself and prison.
I can only put money there.
It's in the blood, the blood.
When I fly to California for my final rethink, maybe I'll go the whole hog and get my blood fixed too.
California, land of my dreams and my longing.
You've seen me in New York and you know what I'm like there but in LA, man, I tell you, I'm even more of a high-achiever — all fizz and push, a fixer, a bustler, a real new-dealer.
Last December for a whole week my thirty-minute short Dean Street was being shown daily at the Pantheon of Celestial Arts.
In squeaky-clean restaurants, round smoggy poolsides, in jungly jacuzzis I made my deals.
Business went well and it all looked possible.
It was in the pleasure area, as usual, that I found I had a problem.
In LA, you can't do anything unless you drive.
Now I can't do anything unless I drink.
And the drink-drive combination, it really isn't possible out there.
If you so much as loosen your seatbelt or drop your ash or pick your nose, then it's an Alcatraz  autopsy with the questions asked later.
Any indiscipline, you feel, any variation, and there's a bullhorn, a set of scope sights, and a coptered pig drawing a bead on your rug.
So what can a poor boy do?
You come out of the hotel, the Vraimont.
Over boiling Watts the downtown skyline carries a smear of God's green snot.
You walk left, you walk right, you are a bank rat on a busy river.
This restaurant serves no drink, this one serves no meat, this one serves no heterosexuals.
You can get your chimp shampooed, you can get your dick tattooed, twenty-four hour, but can you get lunch?
And should you see a sign on the fur side of the street flashing BEEF-BOOZE-NO STRINGS, then you can forget it.
The only way to get across the road is to be born there.
All the ped-xing signs say DON'T WALK, all of them, all the time.
That is the message, the content of Los Angeles: don't walk.
Stay inside.
Don't walk.
Drive.
Don't walk.
Run!
I tried the cabs.
No use.
The cabbies are all Saturnians who aren't even sure whether this is a right planet or a left planet.
The first thing you have to do, every trip, is teach them how to drive.
I got drunk and dialled Hire-A-Heap and rented a scarred Boomerang on a budget four-day buy.
I bombed around with a pint between my thighs.
Bel-Air, Malibu, Venice.
Then on the last night I made my big mistake, and hit that bad business I told you about.
I don't like to sound judgemental, but it really was a big mistake.
I was surging down Sunset Boulevard: purely on impulse I hung a left near Scheldt's, where I've seen these sweet little black chicks parading in tiny pastel running-shorts…
Anyhow the upshot is, one way or another I'm lying in the front seat of the Boomerang with my trousers round my knees and copping a twenty-dollar blowjob from a speed-fuelled Zulu called Agnes.
I mean it's incredibly reasonable, don't you think?
What a fine country.
What value.
With sterling in the shape it's in, that's barely nine quid!
But Agnes and I have a problem.
This is why they're called hard-ons,"I remember explaining to her.
"They're not at all easy.
They're very difficult."
Agnes is losing patience and revenue, I've practically got my legs sticking out of the Boomerang window, when there's this heavy handslap on the roof of the car.
I thought: law.
The sex police!
I straightened my neck.
A  glamorous, dressing-gowned housewife was staring in through the open side window, her face framed by my shoes.
 "Hurry it up, pal," she said.
 "You're in my drive!" 
Instantly, as if it were a bad oyster, Agnes spat my dick out of her mouth and started shrieking back at this loathed adversary of hers — Agnes's language, it was unimaginable: even I was grossed out by it.
She swore detailed vengeance on the woman, her dogs, her kids, with intimate reference to various feminine rudiments and effluvia that I for one had never come across.
 "Okay it's the cops," said the lady finally, and strode back towards the house I was thrashing and clawing but with Agnes still slumped on my middle and the whisky bottle and everything I couldn't seem to writhe my way upright.
Then the door behind my head jerked open, the car light came on like a flashbulb, and there was a seven-foot black pimp snarling down at me with a mahogany baseball bat in his fist.
Well, you don't ever feel more naked than that.
No — you never do.
Something about the bat itself, the resined or saddlesoaped grain of its surface, offered unwelcome clarity, reminding me why I had stayed away from Scheldt's and the sweet black chicks and their bargain blowjobs.
This is all very serious and violent and criminal and mean.
You cannot go slumming, not here, because slums bite back.
As Agnes wriggled out of the far door the big pimp raised his hammer.
I clenched my eyes.
No quarter.
I heard a grunt, a hum of air, a bloodstunning crack, then with oddly exact and flowing movements I sat up saying "Money" , took my wallet from its holster, fanned five twenties at the sweating black face, wedged shut the door, made the triple-ring sign, and drove sedately out of Rosalind Court.
Next, the machine squeal of sirens on my tail.
Leaving a continuous, scalding double-tyretrack in my wake, I rocketed on to Sunset Boulevard, jumped three lights and made a spectacular crash-landing in the lot beneath the Vraimont.
I slid out the door and made a dash for the lift.
I got to my feet, pulled up the trousers which shackled my ankles, and tried again.
Lucky lucky lucky, oh lucky, I kept saying, as I washed the blood off my nose in Room 666.
They didn't even notice the smashed front lights and the vicious new welt on the Boomerang doorframe when I slinked back to Hire-A-Heap the following day.
I leaned over in my boxy suit and re-signed the  credit slip, my bitten fingers shimmering over the scorched trunk.
Behind my back, under showboat lights, Sunset Boulevard sailed on down its slope.
An hour later I was fastening my safety-belt at LAX.
First class: the Pantheon of Celestial Arts — their treat.
Toasting John Self with premixed martinis, I too was a cocktail shaker of hilarity and awe.
I had just been reading in the Daily Minute about the string of beatings and manslaughters in Rosalind Court: the night before last a Jap computer expert and a German dentist had been found in a parking lot with their faces stomped off.
I think I was in shock, or undergoing reaction.
 "You're so lucky, you're so lucky," I murmured, staring down at the rocky Rockies or the Smokies or the Ropies through cloud-cover made of snow and contour tracing…
In the next throne along lounged an elegant young man — summer business suit, Cal tan, thick, unlayered rug: I took him for an actor.
He glanced up from his hardback and sipped his champagne.
He raised the glass.
 "Here's to luck," he said.
 "And to money." 
Well, I didn't need much prompting, and soon babbled out all my dreams and dreads.
It transpired that he had been scouting at the Festival.
He'd seen Dean Street, and liked what he saw.
And to follow?
I told him about Bad Money — another short, no big deal.
We talked, we made plans, we exchanged numbers, as you do on aeroplanes: it's the booze, it's the canned air and the rich-quick stories, it's the pornography of travel.
 "I'll call you," he said, when our tunnels parted at Kennedy.
Oh sure, I thought, as I queued for my ticket to London.
Three days later he rang me at my sock.
He said
"We have Lorne Guyland.
We have Butch Beausoleil.
We have eight million dollars, and climbing.
Get your butt on a bird, Slick, and let's make Bad Money.
I can see me now.
I'm in the design department over at Silicone Valley.
The sun shines but no dust stirs.
I move confidently among the technicians, the ideas-men and creative consultants, the engineers and fine-tuners.
Someone shows me the rough of my new ears and nostrils.
I lean over a drawing-board to approve a sample merkin.
The heart boys doublecheck on my detailed  specifications.
I have a preparatory meeting with the rug people.
We move on to the gene pool, the DNA programmers, the plasma bank.
Occasionally I say things like "Looks good, Phil," or "What's the guarantee on this, Steve?" , or "Yes, Dan, but will it take the strain?" 
Eventually I produce my wallet, and silence falls.
"Okay, boys, now I want to make this absolutely clear.
I'm paying top dollar and I expect the best.
I don't care what it costs.
I want it blue, I want it royal, I want the best blood money can buy.
Go on, God damn it, and give me the right stuff this time around."
Now with Selina Street here the texture of my life has already changed or shaded.
With a moan of effort the unloved flat slowly responds to the female presence.
Heavily, and with unpractised movements, it straightens up and tries to look courtly, attentive and willing.
Only rarely does the leer of insincerity glow through the mask.
It smartens its act.
It stows its towels.
It keeps the batch at bay.
Yes, the smell of the place, even to my clotted nostrils, has definitely improved.
For this I thank Selina's duty-free perfumes and bath essences, the laundry-fresh tang of her clothes, the costly oiliness of her flesh and its smooth secretions.
She's back in the tub again even now, the amphibious Selina.
Soon I'll hear her primping herself in the bedroom, cosseting her curves in silk and lace.
We're going out to an expensive restaurant, a very expensive restaurant, the sort of place Selina can dress up for
The flat feels better, better-run.
It's not that she's much of a hausfrau or hoover-wielder.
The cleaning-lady comes once a day now, instead of once a week.
But Selina is efficient, is practical.
She is cost-effective.
And with a chick on the premises you just cannot live the old life.
You just cannot live it.
I know: I checked.
The hungover handjob athwart the unmade bed — you can't do it.
Blowing your nose into a coffee-filter — there isn't the opportunity.
Peeing In the basin — they just won't stand for it.
No woman worth the name would let it happen.
Women have pretty ways.
Without women, life is a pub, a reptile bar at a quarter to three Have you noticed, you guys, the way black or blue or red underpants  stay clean for days on end, whereas white underpants — what is it with white underpants?
They barely last an hour.
What is it with these exploding, these joke-shop, these trick underpants?
Anyway, with Selina here, my life is being lived in white underpants.
They're better, really, I suppose, even though you have to change them all the time.
I went next door with Selina's toy drink.
Mm,"she said.
She stood before the mirror in full brothel gear.
What talent.
What artistry.
She turned.
Her sexual features aren't particularly full or plump.
They're just incredibly prominent.
Bum, box, belly, breasts — just incredibly prominent.
She looked so pornographic in her gimmicks that I wanted her to take them off again, or better, much better, push bits of them aside.
 "Come here," I said.
 "No." 
 "Why not?" 
"You know why not.
I saw Terry Linex today.
He sent his love.
Good news about my golden handshake.
He says it should be half way to six figures."
"What's that?
Fifty grand?"
 "Easy." 
"All the more reason then.
Terry Linex made a pass at me.
"What?
When?"
"I thought he was just messing about.
Then my eyelashes got caught in his zip.
Then he —
"Christ, enough!
Come here."
She hummed.
 "Why not?" 
She jounced her black dress.
 "You know why not." 
Actually I was by no means sure.
We've been fighting about money of late, but then again it might be my face.
Never my best feature, my face is still swollen, up there on the left-hand side.
That tooth caught fire again.
I took my poor mouth to Martha McGilchrist, who exasperatedly drained it for me.
Any chick who fancies herself as a feminist ought to go and see Martha McGilchrist.
Boy is she butch.
She makes me feel like a starlet.
Martha McGilchrist — she's a bloke.
She also said that when my  tooth catches fire again, which it will, I won't be able to save it for love or money.
That tooth will just have to wait for California, along with everything else.
I shouted at Selina for a while and returned to the sofa and my drink.
The television was on.
The television is always on.
This afternoon, as I passed the square, I saw two dogs skewered together, back to back.
Their owners stood around, waiting.
The dogs were waiting too: they looked embarrassed, foolish, but stoical.
They had been through all this before, or at least their genes had.
It is dangerous if you try to separate them…
On television I watched a nature short about two-headed snakes.
Two-headed snakes are rare and don't last very long.
They're forever quarrelling about food and which way to go.
They keep trying to kill and eat each other all the time.
Soon, one head becomes dominant.
The smaller head is obliged to tag along but has no say in things any more.
This arrangement keeps them going for a little while.
But they both die quite quickly.
If there's one thing I think I'm sure of, it's the fact that I must marry Selina.
I'm pretty sure about this, I think.
Yes, it is time I settled down, grew up.
There's no choice really: not settling down and not growing up are killing me.
I've got to quit it, being young; before it's too late.
I must marry Selina and settle down and raise a family.
I must be safe.
Christ, safe sounds frightening.
Settling down — that seems a bit adventurous, a bit precipitate, to me.
Having kids!
That's what takes real balls.
To become a husband and a father: no you can't get much butcher than that.
Yet nearly everyone shapes up to it in the end.
I bet you have or will soon.
I want it too, I think, in a way.
Of course, something is missing.
Ah, you noticed.
You are not blind.
But it is missing in me, in her, it is missing, it will never be there.
Selina and I are very well suited.
We get along like nobody's business.
I must marry Selina.
If I don't, I'll just die.
If I don't, no one else will, and I'll have ruined another life.
If I don't, I think she might sue me for every penny I have.
Today I made a break with habit and tradition, and took my  lunch at the New Born Restaurant.
The New Born is a hot little grotto of plastic panels and formica tabletops, half cheap-bistro, half yobs"—beanery, run by an elite squad of Italians together with some straggly irregulars — local charwomen, reformed bagladies, London sweepers.
You get all sorts in here, from dustmen to middle-management.
The menu is chip-orientated, but the place is licensed.
How else could it seriously expect my custom?
Today I called for the gravy dinner plus two vedge and a carafe of red — which for me, rotting veteran of Pizza Pit and Burger Shack, of Doner Den and Furter Hut, is the equivalent of a handful of brown rice and a glass of effervescent Vitamin C. (There are health-food joints around here, run by aged hippies or unsmiling Danes.
But I won't eat that shit.
I just won't eat it.)
I was sitting there waiting for the grub to show when Martin Amis came through the open door — you know, the writer I was chatting to in the pub the other night.
The place was pretty full, and he hesitated until he saw the empty bench at my table.
I don't think he saw me.
Martin sat down opposite and quickly flattened a book out in front of him.
This kid is going to ruin his eyes…
Me, I had plenty on my mind, including a desperate hangover, and was in no mood for complications.
Last night had been a new one.
Cocktails: £17.
Dinner: £68.
Selina: £2,500.
You heard me, two-and-a-half big ones.
That handjob I scored at the Happy Isles-I tell you, She-She was giving it away.
I'm losing my grip, I'm falling to pieces.
A year ago, Selina's two-hour session of candlelit fund-raising would have gained her nothing more than a clout round the ear (I'd have done it nice, mind you, not in the restaurant or anything like that but in the Fiasco or back at the sock).
I really am cracking up, I really am deteriorating.
I gave her the cheque in the bedroom.
She folded it into the cleft of her black bra.
Then, boy, did I get mine.
An hour later the telephone rang.
It was one o'clock.
 "Don't answer it," whispered Selina.
But I welcomed the interruption, to the precise degree that Selina deplored it.
She and I separated (it was like trying to unpick a mangled shoelace) and I staggered through to take the call.
Fielding Goodney, with all kinds of developments: a "dream script" had come through from Doris Arthur, Caduta Mass and Butch  Beausoleil had put their signatures on the line, Spunk wanted in, Lorne wanted out — Lorne Guyland was going crazy, or was staying that way.
Money was falling from the sky quicker than Fielding could catch it.
Refreshed, exhilarated, I went next door again, the brandy bottle swinging from my hand, and made Selina curse her mother for ever giving her birth.
Two thousand five hundred pounds now that's a lot of money.
But Fielding was talking millions.
If everything went through okay, I'd be able to sleep with Selina every night for the rest of my life.
The wine arrived.
I had the meal to get through anyway, so I leaned forward and said,
"Fate.
He looked up with a flash of panic — but then he calmed and smiled.
He recognized me.
People usually do.
I haven't got that problem, the problem of not being recognized.
It's one of the kick-backs you get for looking like I look.
 "Oh, hi," he said.
 "We can't go on meeting this way." 
"What are you doing in this dump?
Who aren't you having lunch with your, with your publisher or something?"
"Come on.
I have lunch with my publisher every other year.
What do you do?"
 "I'm in films," I said.
 "Right up to here." 
 "Then why aren't you having lunch with Lorne Guyland" ?
See what I mean?
It just doesn't happen that often."
 "What made you say Lorne Guyland?" 
Perhaps he'd recognized me — or recognized me.
After all, I'm tolerably well known in some circles.
 "No reason," he said.
 "John Self." 
I held out my hand and he took it.
 "Martin Amis." 
 "Check." 
 "Hey," he said, "was it — are you the guy who made those commercials, the ones they took off the air?" 
 "That's me." 
 "Ah." 
He nodded.
"I thought those commercials were bloody funny.
We all did."
 "Thanks, Martin," I said.
The waitress showed with my heaped and steaming plate.
She  took Martin's order.
He surprised me again by opting for a standard yob's breakfast — egg, bacon and chips.
No, I don't think they can pay writers very much at all.
Toss?"asked the girl, one of the Italian contingent, though her colouring had been exhaustively naturalized by the kitchen spores.
 "No, no toast, thanks." 
 "Drink?" 
 "Tea, please," said Martin.
I gestured at my litre of fizzy red wine.
 "Want a drop of this?" 
I asked him.
"No thanks.
I try not to drink at lunchtime."
 "so do I. But I never quite make it." 
 "I feel like shit all day if I drink at lunchtime." 
"Me too.
But I feel like shit all lunchtime if I don't."
 "Yes, well it all comes down to choices, doesn't it?" he said.
"It's the same in the evenings.
Do you want to feel good at night or do you want to feel good in the morning?
It's the same with life.
Do you want to feel good young or do you want to feel good old?
One or the other, not both."
 "Isn't it a tragedy?" 
He looked at me with some care.
Sadly I followed his eyes, and I too saw what he saw.
My snowy cheeks and ruddy lids, the coin-slot of my mouth and its tannic teeth — and the rug, a dry rug, a drinker's rug.
 "You still put your money on the evenings, though." 
 "Yup." 
 "And you feel like shit in the morning." 
He glanced with amusement at my wine.
"And you feel like shit in the afternoon.
 "Yeah, well I'm a nightowl," I said uneasily.
His food came — they don't mess about here and he reached for the salt.
Then, as he started to eat, he said quietly,
 "I was in the newsagents" the other day — when you had that set-to with the girl."
 "Yeah?" 
I said, and felt my blood give a sick lurch.
"I thought you handled yourself pretty well, considering.
Nasty business."
 "Yeah, it was fucking embarrassing." 
 "Of course," he said, continuing to cut his food crisply,"you could have argued that the man was being exploited too.
 "What man?" 
 "There was a man in the photograph, wasn't there." 
"No.
The girl just had this dick in her face.
 "Well who do you think the dick belonged to, brilliant?" 
"Yeah but girls don't think that's exploitation.
They think that, they think all men want to do that stuff anyway.
 "Well, they're wrong, aren't they," he said mildly.
"I wouldn't want to do it.
You wouldn't want to do it.
The men do it for money, same as the girls."
"There must be some guys who like doing it.
When I was younger, I always thought it looked like money for jam.
Some girls like doing it too, don't forget.
 "You think?" 
 "Oh sure," I said.
"I know one who posed in Debonair.
She bursts into tears of pride at the very mention."
"Pride?…
Yes, I suppose it figures."
 "How?" 
 "Yob art," he said, and wiped his mouth.
"Hey look, I've got to run.
 "Come on," I said,"you've got to let your meal digest.
It's not healthy.
Have a drink."
He shook his head.
Before he left, he held out his free hand and I took it.
 "Nice talking to you, Martin." 
 "Be seeing you, John." 
John.
What a name, eh?
It means a can, it means a trick.
I pushed my plate away and settled back with the wine.
I lit a cigarette.
I pondered.
Yob art Yeah.
When Vron had sobbed it all out after showing her prospective stepson photographs of herself having a handjob with no clothes on for money, she explained to me at throaty length and with hot tears still foiling the points of her lashes — that she had always been creative.
 "I was always creative John!" she said again and again, as if I kept impiously insisting that she was creative only sometimes or not until recently.
Vron confirmed that she had been good at art as a schoolgirl, often praised by her art master.
She instanced her  darning skills and her flair for interior design.
 "I always knew I'd be in a book one day," she said, reaching once more for Debonair, "and now, John, that dream has been realized." 
She flattened the spread comfortably on her lap: there was Vron, "Vron" , on all fours, at three-quarters rear angle, in stockings, stilettoes and a pair of burgundy pants peeled halfway down her pocked haunches.
 "Beautiful," I heard my father gulp over my shoulder.
 "You see, John," said Vron, "if you have the creative" Gift,"said my father.
"The creative gift, John, then I think you've got to — to give of your gift, John.
John.
Look at this."
She turned the page.
Here Vron reclined on a kittenish white carpet, one leg hooked over an elbow, one hand busy in the central divide, a look of appalled transport on the averted face.
"You see how much I'm giving there, John?
That's what Rod kept saying to me, the photographer, John.
He kept saying: "Give, Vron, give!" 
I left half an hour later.
Vron and Barry were crying again by that time, crying gratefully, consolably, in each other 's arms.
And get this.
I'm only going to say it once.
Three years ago, when I started to make some real money as opposed to all that other stuff I'd been making, my father hit bad trouble on the tables and the track and he…
Do you know what he did, that funker?
He submitted a bill for all the money he had spent on my upbringing.
That's right — he fucking invoiced me.
It wasn't that expensive, either, my childhood, because I spent seven years of it with my mum's sister in the States.
I still have the document somewhere.
It was six sheets of foolscap, thumb-typed.
To 30 pairs of shoes (approx.)
…To 4 caravan holidays in Nailsea To share of petrol to same…
He tabbed me for everything, pocket-money, ice-creams, rug-rethinks, everything.
He enclosed a cover note, explaining in his clerkly style that it was of course only a rough estimate, and that I wasn't beholden to reimburse him penny for penny.
Inflation had been taken into account.
I'd cost him nineteen thousand pounds.
Anyway, we both behaved in character — the same character.
On receipt of my father's letter, I got drunk and sent him a cheque for twenty grand.
On receipt of my cheque, my father got drunk and put the money on a horse running in the Cheltenham Golden Shield called, I don't know, Handjob or Bumboy or  whatever.
The horse was young for a chaser and didn't have much in the way of form — but Barry had a hot tip.
100–8 looked good to him.
He placed the bet by messenger.
One of his villain mates, Morrie Dubedat, set up the deal and vouched for dad's punt…
Ten minutes later Barry panicked and tried to cancel.
But the bookie was already out hiring frighteners and the bet had to stand.
Jackknifed over the whisky bottle, Barry listened to the radio commentary in closing-time light.
Sure enough, Bumboy came lolloping out of its stall, each leg going somewhere different, neighing and dumping in its blinkers and Dobbin hat.
Eventually flogged into submission by the jockey, Bumboy set off after its vanishing playmates.
The horse received the odd joke mention from the commentator, until my father smashed the radio, finished the whisky, and suffered a near-fatal nosebleed.
Barry has since acquired a video recording of the race and still gloats over it even now.
Bumboy not only won: it was more or less the sole survivor.
There was one of those churning, drowning pile-ups at the penultimate jump.
Bumboy tripped snoring through the chaos — and was clear with one fence to beat.
The lone horse pranced flimsily on.
It didn't leap that last hedge: it just munched its way through.
Then, with only flat green ahead, ten yards from the post, Bumboy fell over.
The jockey, who was all whipped out by now, tried to remount.
Some of his grounded colleagues got the same idea.
After about ten minutes — several riderless horses had skipped over the line by now, and another contender had cleared the last jump, and was gaining — Bumboy was finally scourged out of a series of circles and flopped over the line, home by half a length.
Now this bookie was a middleman, not legal, and my dad took Morrie Dubedat, Fat Paul and two shooters when he went to collect his winnings.
Also, I had sobered up by then and caused some complications by trying to stop the cheque — until my father came squealing on to the line.
He got his money, after a month of gang warfare — not the full whack by any means, but enough to pay his debts, buy out the brewery, gut the Shakespeare, install the pool table, the stripper and the strobes…
He says he's going to repay me, one of these days.
Who cares?
It doesn't matter.
I'll  never get over the grief of that wound.
And I don't think he ever meant me to.
I settled the bill — a pretty useful one, what with the line of brandies I had moodily consumed.
I returned to my flat and packed a case and started going back to America.
The Autocrat moved fast and softly through chintzy prefabs and the continuing scenes of black family life, with its leagues of brothers and stand-offs in the basketball courts, and mothers"shapes behind the insect mesh, calling.
Spooked planes buzzed the limo roof at the black spread of water near La Guardia.
Pedxing, No Shoulder, Unlawful To Cross White Line, Traffic Laws Strictly Enforced, Stay In Lane, Upgrade Maintain Speed.
Does My Chauffeur Need To Be Told All This?
Wouldn't DRIVE do the trick?
We came out of the beach-hut belt and slid down on to the barrelling freeway.
Now here it comes again — the gnashed, gap-toothed skyline, the graphics, the artwork of New York.
At the Ashbery I offered the driver a twenty.
 "No sir!" he said.
"That's all taken care of.
Would you call Mr Goodney, sir, when you're settled in?"
I tried the twenty on him again.
He wouldn't take it, so I pressed it on Felix instead.
 "I hate to do this to you, Slick, but you got to go see Lorne Guyland — tonight." 
 "Oh man." 
He told me why.
I was about to ring off when Fielding asked suspiciously,
"Hey, how did you fly?
Coach?"
 "Yeah." 
"Slick, I'm going to have to talk to you very seriously about your expenses.
Shape up, John.
It's an embarrassment.
It looks bad to the moneymen.
Take a floor at the Gustave.
Hire a jet and have a weekend with Butch and Caduta in the Caribbean.
Go buy a case of champagne and pour it all over your dick.
Spend.
Spend.
You're no use to me when you fly coach.
FlA supersonic.
FlA sharp end.
God damn it, Slick, fly right."
I shaved, showered, changed, drank a mug of duty-free and took a hot cab-ride into the East Eighties with Si Wypijewski at the wheel.
Or maybe it was Wypijewski Si.
New Yorkers will tell you that the surname comes first on the cabbie's ID.
But who says?
Even with Smith John and Brown David, how can you really be sure over here?
I once had a cabbie called Supersad Morgan.
Or maybe it was Morgan Supersad.
His eyes, at any rate, were brown and terribly melancholy.
His eyes were super-sad…
My mission?
To go reassure Lorne Guyland.
According to Fielding, Lorne was seriously overdue for reassurance.
He had been wanting reassurance for a long time and he hadn't been getting any.
 "Do it now, John," Fielding had counselled.
 "You'll save us a lot of sweat in mid-career." 
Lorne wanted reassurance about screen supremacy, line ratios and close-up time.
Lorne wanted reassurance about his youthfulness, athleticism and general popularity.
Lorne wanted reassurance about the nature of his role.
Me too, pal.
Lorne, I sympathize.
Lorne's role was that of Gary, the nogoodnik father.
In my treatment I had, I thought, made it pretty clear what Gary was like.
Gary was like Barry, like Barry Self: a lantern-jawed know-nothing, an unreflecting hedonist, a mastermould of brute conceit who none the less exploits a small but tenacious legacy of charm and luck Why do I bother with my father?
Who cares?
What is this big deal about dads and sons?
I don't know — it's not that he's my dad.
It's more that I'm his son.
I am aswirl with him, with his pre-empting, his blackballing genes…
Gary, too, had a lot of my dad in him, just as I resembled Doug, the son.
When the heroin shows up in the flour, Gary wants to return it to the mob.
Doug wants to sell it at its street value, which is two million dollars.
They're both bad and greedy, but old Gary is a funker — yes, a lucky funker.
Fielding had told me to expect trouble from Lorne on several counts.
Lorne wanted Gary upgraded.
Rather than pub landlord or beanery boss, Lorne saw Gary as a celebrity restaurateur.
The age question also vexed him.
Fielding said that Lorne had even  floated the idea that Gary and Doug should be brothers, as opposed to father and son.
In this fashion did Lorne hope to make light of the forty-year age difference between himself and his co-star.
Then, too, there was the sex.
 "I'm Thursday," said the girl at the door of Lorne's penthouse.
 "I'll just buzz up." 
I watched Thursday mince across the hall to her desk.
She wore a kind of schoolkid outfit — blouse and tie, cheerleader's pleated skirt, bobbysox.
She was six feet tall and looked like a gorgeous transvestite, possibly the beneficiary of some dirty-minded sex-change operation, over in California there.
As she bent over the intercom the little skirt went peek-a-boo and you could see white pants cupping her buttocks like a bra.
I wondered…
Fielding maintained that Lorne was all fucked out", having gorged himself to the point of decrepitude during his first decade at the top, a common enough syndrome in the movie business.
According to Fielding, Lorne hadn't had a hard-on for thirty-five years.
Of course one had to remember that Lorne, in his time, had been very big, enormous, colossal.
While making Gargantuan in Spain during the Fifties (Fielding again), Bullion had chartered sex planes from New York, London and Paris just to keep Lorne in chicks for the five-month shoot.
His boast had been that he could tackle a whole consignment with a bottle of brandy and a soft-on.
Lorne had been big then all right.
All my life I had seen him up there on the screen.
"Mr Guyland.
Sir, your director's here!"said Thursday in her singing-telegram voice.
She laughed raunchily.
"Sure, lover.
You got it."
Then she turned.
"I'm sorry if I seem a trifle flushed.
Lorne's been balling me all day.
He's right up there."
I climbed a padded spiral staircase.
I climbed from the stalls to the gods.
Lorne surged across a cloud of carpet, seventh heaven, dressed in a white robe and extending a broad-sleeved arm through the conditioned air.
With silent urgency he swivelled, and gestured towards the bank of window — this was his balcony, his private box, over sweating Manhattan.
He poured me a drink.
I was surprised to taste whisky, rather than ambrosia, in the frosted glass.
Then Lorne gazed at me for a very long time, in ripe candour.
I delivered what was to be my longest speech of the  evening, saying that I gathered he was keen to talk about his role, to talk about Gary.
Lorne gazed at me for a very long time again.
Then he started.
 "I see this Garfield as a man of some considerable culture," said Lorne Guyland.
"Lover, father, husband, athlete, millionaire — but also a man of wide reading, of wide culture, John.
A poet.
A seeker.
He has the world in his hands, women, money, success — but this man probes deeper.
As an Englishman, John, you'll understand what I'm saying.
His Park Avenue home is a treasure-chest of art treasures.
Sculpture.
The old masters.
Tapestries.
Glassware.
Rugs.
Treasures front all over the world.
He's a professor of art someplace.
He writes scholarly articles in the, in, in the scholarly magazines, John.
He's a brilliant part-time archaeologist.
People call him up for art advice from all over the world.
In the opening shot I see Garfield at a lectern reading aloud from a Shakespeare first edition, bound in unborn calf.
Behind him on the wall there's this whole bunch of oils.
The old masters, John.
He lifts his head, and as he looks towards camera the light catches his monocle and he
I stared grimly across the room as Lorne babbled on.
Who, for a start, was Garfield?
The guy's name is Gary.
Barry isn't short for Barfield, is it.
It's just Barry, and that's that.
Still, this would no doubt be among the least of our differences.
Lorne now began mapping out Garfield's reading list.
He talked for some time about a poet called Rimbo.
I assumed that Rimbo was one of our friends from the developing world, like Fenton Akimbo.
Then Lorne said something that made me half-identify Rimbo as French.
You dumb shit, I thought, it's not Rimbo, it's Rambot, or Rambeau.
Rambeau had a pal or contemporary, I seem to remember, with a name like a wine Bordeaux.
Bardolino.
No, that's Italian isn't it?
Oh Christ, the exhaustion of not knowing anything.
It's so tiring and hard on the nerves.
It really takes it out of you, not knowing anything.
You're given comedy and miss all the jokes.
Every hour, you get weaker.
Sometimes, as I sit alone in my flat in London and stare at the window, I think how dismal it is, how hard, how heavy, to watch the rain and not know why it falls.
Yes, all in all, a dreadful little show was being staged for me, up  here on the twenty-first floor.
I knew that at least.
In his gilt sandals Lorne walked with poised uncertainty from one window to the other, his rapt face upturned, the hands both summoning and offering the revelations which the gods now fraternally distributed.
Like all filmstars Lorne was about two foot nine (something to do with the condensed, the concentrated presence), but the old prong was in good nick, you had to admit, with that tan-and-silver sheen of the all-American robot-kings.
Yeah, that was it: this isn't a man, I kept thinking, it's a mad old robot, all zinc and chrome and circuitry coolant.
He's like my car, he's like the fucking Fiasco — way past his best, giving everyone grief, and burning up money and rubber and oil.
Lorne had gone on to explore Garfield's sumptuous lifestyle, the art galleries he superintended in Paris and Rome, his opera-nut vacations in Palma and Beirut, his houses in Tuscany, the Dordogne and Berkeley Square, his Barbadian hideaway, his stud ranches, his Manhattan helicopter pad…
And as this fizzy old dog bayed and barked into the night, I spared a tender thought for my project, my poor little project, which I had nursed in my head for so long now.
Good Money would have made a good short, with a budget of, say, £75,000.
Now that it was going to cost fifteen million dollars, though, I wasn't so sure.
But I must keep a grip on my priorities here.
A good film didn't matter.
Good Money didn't matter.
Money mattered.
Money mattered.
 "Lorne," I said.
"Lorne!
Lorne?
Oh Lorne?"
 "Rubies, diamonds, emeralds, pearls, and an amethyst worth one-and-a-half million dollars." 
"Lorne.
 "Speak your mind, John." 
"Lorne.
If Gary's so rich, who cares if he's got a couple of million dollars "worth of heroin in the kitchen?" 
 "Pardon me?" 
"It cuts down on the drama, no?
Think a minute.
Think a second.
If Gary is rich, then so is Doug.
Of course they give the heroin back.
No problem.
No film."
"Bullshit!
Garfield wants to give the heroin back.
But the other guy, Doug you call him, he wants to keep it.
Why?"
 "Yeah, why." 
"Jealousy, John, jealousy.
He's jealous of Garfield."
For twenty minutes Lorne talked about jealousy, how powerful and widespread it was, and how a man like Garfield (I think he even said Sir Garfield at some point) was especially likely to promote such a feeling in one as low, as weak, as vile as Doug — Garfield, with his connoisseurship, helicopter pad, erudition, Barbadian hideaway, and all the rest.
This took another twenty minutes.
 "Plus," said Lorne, "he's jealous of what I do for Butch." 
"Why?
He can't be that jealous if he's fucking her too."
"I'm glad you raised that.
You know, John, I don't think — and I never have thought — that it's dramatically convincing that he should, that he should fuck her too, John."
I stared heavily at him.
"It makes no sense.
It just doesn't add up."
Lorne laughed.
"If Butch is fucking Garfield, how could she risk that happiness, that fulfilment, John, on a young punk like He shook his head.
"Okay.
Over that we can argue.
But my scenario still holds.
The way I see it, Butch has never had an orgasm before she meets this wonderful guy, who shows her a world she's only dreamed of, a world of Othello jets and Caribbean mansions, a world of
I stared on.
Time passed.
Abruptly Lorne halted in mid-sentence, in mid-spangle, and said, "I think it's time we talked about the death scene, John." 
What death scene?"
 "Why, Lord Garfield's," said Lorne Guyland.
"This is how it happens.
The mob guys, they're torturing me, naked as I am.
I fought like crazy but there were fifteen of the bastards.
They want the heroin — they also want my cultural treasures from all over the world.
But I tell them nothing.
Now.
As these cocksuckers torture me, Butch and Caduta are forced to watch.
Maybe they're nude too.
I'm not sure.
John, you might think about, about that.
And these two women, as they see me, suffering, silent, naked, this guy who's given them everything and who's the greatest fuck they ever had in their goddam lives — these women, these simple, nude women, they forget their rivalry and weep in each other 's arms.
Credits."
 "Lorne," I said,"I've got to run.
In fact it was another hour before Thursday let me out.
The script conference ended with Lorne shrugging his robe to the floor and asking me, with tears in his eyes, "Is this the body of an old man?" 
I said nothing.
The answer to Lorne's question, incidentally, was yes.
I just flourished an arm and clattered down the stairs.
Thursday gave a tight smile as she opened the door.
 "Is he nude?" she asked coldly.
 "Yeah he's nude." 
 "Oh boy," said Thursday.
Why do they happen to me, these numb, flushed, unanswerable, these pornographic things?
Well, I guess if you're a pornographic person, then pornographic things happen to you.
I slanted west through the pretty East Side, with its decorative dustbins, the paunchy awnings of the low-slung stores, the smell of dark hot trash, and dined blind with Fielding Goodney and Doris Arthur in a loud and airless media restaurant just five blocks from bubbling Harlem.
Doris's script was being gimmicked by the typists.
I kissed her hand.
I called for champagne.
I demanded to see the rough.
Teasingly they said I'd have to wait-see.
There was a lot of teasing going on, I suspected.
I was too smudged with booze and travel to be sure.
Lorne had given me lots of nonagenarian whisky.
I'll say that for Lorne.
With additional champagne we drank to Dot's dream script.
The place was full of filmstars, more filmstars.
Why do I hang out with filmstars?
I don't even like filmstars.
Jesus, the transparency of actors.
The professionals, though, are seldom dangerous.
It's the actors of real life you want to watch — yeah, and the actresses.
I developed a bad case of hiccups, more like a series of jabbing uppercuts to the chin.
One of these blows actually ricked my neck and I had to lie on the floor beneath the table until it was okay to come up again.
The angle of the lamp cord on the bar made me think I saw a hearing-aid cable extending from Fielding's ear.
My knee brushed Doris's, once, twice, and I thought how wonderful it was when two young people started falling in love.
I kept banging my way to and from the can, where they had incredible pictures of nude chicks front magazines all over the  wall.
I found a woman talking unhappily into a telephone and tried to cheer her up and went on trying even after her boyfriend or husband appeared from somewhere.
I disliked his tone.
He hurt my feelings.
We had an altercation that soon resolved itself with me lying face-down in a damp bed of cardboard boxes at the loot of a hidden staircase.
This was bad luck on the lady, who was obviously dead keen.
Refreshed, I said hi to a few filmstars, briefly joining them at their tables with a selection of apposite one-liners.
Invited into a back room, I shot the breeze with a married couple who said they ran the place.
She was obviously a madame of some kind, not that this bothered me too much.
She denied it.
As Fielding led me back to our table I made a powerfully worded verbal pass at a salacious waitress, who appeared to be all for it but then came down with some deep sorrow in the kitchen, and when I burst through the double-doors to console her two men in sweat-grey T-shirts assured me there was nothing I could do for the poor child.
I signed an autograph.
Doris looked cute in her sleeping-bag outfit.
Under the mussed hair and mace clothes she was just a big-eyed honey, a sack-addict and dick-follower, same as all the rest.
She denied it too.
You know, I really don't like her.
I hollered for fortified wines and drank quarts of tongue-frazzling black coffee.
Doris cuddled me on the way to the door but she must have let go for an instant (perhaps I goosed her too eagerly) because I went off on a run that would have taken me all the way downtown — further, to the Village, to Martina Twain — if the dessert trolley hadn't been there to check my sprint.
The whole restaurant cheered me on as I fought my way out into the night.
I leaned panting against a lamppost, while Doris tenderly removed the segments of toffee orange and chocolate cake that still clung to my suit.
Fielding lingered to congratulate — or compensate — the proprietress.
What a long bit of New York, I thought.
 "Jesus, are you okay?" she asked.
"I know you're a faggot and everything but I'll tell you what the problem is: you just never met the right guy.
It's that simple.
let's go back to my hotel and fool around.
Come on, darling, you know you love it."
 "You asshole." 
Doris smiled.
Then her face changed and she told me something so terrible, so strange, so annihilating that I can't remember a word she said.
Fielding and the Autocrat made their different entrances.
People's faces swung sideways as I tunnelled backwards into my cab.
And all this without much in the way of stress.
Stress!
How can people stand that stuff?
Waking bright and early the next morning I reached for a copy of Delicacy as the most economical means of establishing whether I was still alive.
Other questions, no less pressing
such as who, how, why and when would just have to wait their turn.
Having come across no obvious Selina lookalike among the ladies, I found myself completing an editorial stress quiz, delete where inapplicable, in which your nicotine and alcohol consumption was set against various stress-donating hardships you might or might not be falling foul of.
So far as Delicacy was concerned, I didn't have a care in the world, and yet I smoked and drank like a quadraplegic bankrupt.
Then it hit me: stress perhaps I need stress!
Perhaps a good dose of stress is just what I'm crying out for.
I need bereavement, blackmail, earthquake, leprosy, injury, penury I think I'll try stress.
Where can you buy some?
You can buy stress, and that's what I've started doing.
It's New York, I reckon, the thrust, the horsepower, the electrodynamics of the Manhattan grid.
It just charges you up.
Give me a problem, out here, and I'll crack it.
With a pleasant sense of maintaining the rhythm of the night before and its various successes and achievements, I went down to Mercutio's and bought four suits, eight shirts, six ties and a stylish lightweight mackintosh.
These garments now await the guile of high-priced tailors before transfer to my hotel.
Even the ties seem to need taking out.
Cost: $3,476.93.
I paid through US Approach.
At LimoRent on Third Avenue I hired a six-door Jefferson with cocktail bar, TV and telephone.
I drove it straight round the  corner and installed it in a costly carpark on Lexington and Forty-Third.
This would come out better than $150 a day.
I had a hundred-dollar lunch at La Cage d'Or on Fifty-Fourth Street and a two-hundred-dollar massage plus assisted shower at Elysium on Fifty-Fifth.
Running low on ideas, and tired of shopping, all shopped out, I bought four drunks and three strippers nine bottles of champagne in a topless bar on Broadway.
I considered cabbing out to Atlantic City and dropping some dough at roulette.
I have the perfect system.
It always fails.
But in the end I simply cashed my travellers"cheques and dodged the fuming puddles of Times Square handing out twenty-dollar bills to selected bums, whores, bagladies and time-cripples.
Two policemen were obliged to quell the minor riot that ensued.
 "You, you're fucking crazy," one of them said to me, with maximum conviction.
But I didn't bother to tell him just how wrong he was.
Back in my room, I sat at the desk and considered.
Money worries aren't like other worries.
If you're $10,000 in debt, it's twice as worrying as being $5,000 in debt but only half as worrying as being $20,000 in debt.
Being $ I 0,000 in debt is three-sevenths as worrying as being $23,333 in debt.
And if you're $10,000 in debt, and $10,000 comes along — why, then all your worries disappear.
Whereas the same can hardly be said of other worries, worries (for instance) about deception and decay.
I sank back on the bed and started worrying about money.
I started to get very worried about money indeed.
I yanked out my wallet and went through the credit slips and travellers"-cheque dockets.
As of now, I don't have any money.
And this is really worrying.
There was a knock on the door and I wriggled to my feet.
An impossibly elegant young black scythed into the room with several polythene bodybags in his arms.
 "On the bed, sir?" he asked.
"Yeah.
No,"I said.
"I don't want them.
I've changed my mind.
Take them back."
He looked at me quizzically, and raised his lordly chin.
 "The terms of purchase are on your receipt, sir." 
"Okay.
Sling them over here.
I was only kidding."
I gave him a ten and he left.
A ten For the next hour I took  delivery of many additional purchases, the vast majority of which I couldn't remember purchasing.
I just lay on the bed there, drinking.
After a while I felt like Lady Diana would no doubt feel on her wedding day, as the presents from the Commonwealth contingent started arriving in their wagon trains.
A squat kit of chunky glassware, an orange rug of Iranian provenance and recent manufacture, a Spanish guitar and a pair of maracas, two oil paintings (the first showing puppies and kittens asnooze, the second a nude, ideally rendered), an elephant's foot, something that looked like a microphone stand but turned out to be a Canadian sculpture, a Bengali chess set, a first edition of Little Women, and various other cultural treasures from all over the world.
When it seemed to be over, I went to the bathroom and was explosively sick.
Stress, it's expensive.
There is great personal cost.
But out it came, the lunch, the champagne, the money, all the green and folding stuff.
When it seemed to be over, I went next door and called Fielding and asked him to give me an incredible amount of money.
He sounded as though he'd been expecting my call.
He sounded pleased.
That evening a large envelope was brought to my room.
It contained a platinum US Approach card, a brick of travellers"cheques, and a cash-facility authorization at a Fifth Avenue bank for a thousand dollars a day, if needed.
I was so relieved I went to bed for two days.
Actually, there wasn't much choice.
Steady, I thought, steady.
Money holds firm but you have no power.
It seems that, whatever I do here in this world I'm in, I just get more and more money
And more stress.
 "Thanks again for the present," I said.
 "Just what I always wanted." 
"I'm trying to teach you something.
Don't you understand?"
 "Like what?" 
"Many things.
Compassion.
Self-control.
Generosity of spirit.
Respect for womankind."
 "Go take a flying Jesus," I said, "I'm beginning to see just how sick you really are." 
He laughed.
 "Don't you love this?" he said.
"Say, that was so  dumb that stunt you pulled.
You can't give money away like that, man.
You do it, you do it right."
"Oh I get it, I've twigged at last.
Okay, sickbag, how much do you want?
What does it cost to keep you off my case?"
"Wrong.
Wrong.
I don't want your money.
 "Then what do you want?" 
 "I want your life." 
 "Thanks again for the present," I said.
 "Much appreciated." 
 "Have you read it yet?" 
"Uh?
Well, not exactly."
I had read nine pages on the trans-atlantic flight, but there was still some way to go.
"I've been ill.
Look, when can we meet?"
 "What do you do all day when you're ill?" 
"Mostly I just lie there.
Being ill."
 "I'm pretty free," she said.
 "Ossie went off to London again." 
"Great.
How about this evening?"
"Will that give you enough time?
To read the book, I mean Hello?"
 "I'm still here." 
"Come on, don't be feeble.
I want a book report.
I'm going to test you on it Hello?"
 "I'm still here." 
"Well then.
You just call me when you've read that book."
Wait.
Watch Yes, here she comes again.
I have to tell you that a woman is following me around New York.
Yes she is.
This woman is fortyish, forty-five, square in the ankles, more than six feet tall on her heels, on her high heels.
She watches me through a black veil that hangs from a black hat.
Her hair is short, gingery and electrical.
Her chin is low and stubborn and insane.
She works at night.
I wheel out of a bar and there she is, arms folded in a doorway across the street.
I walk along and she keeps pace and distance.
I duck from beneath the spastic neon of a porno parlour, spotlit and anonymous, and there she is, eating popcorn or chestnuts from a paper cone.
Sometimes, at the intersections, she comes so close that I can feel her breath on the back of my neck.
But I don't turn.
She reminds me of someone.
I can't think who.
Now where have I seen that mad bitch before?
Wait.
Watch…
Yes, here she comes again.
They make straight for me, these people.
They always have.
Like animals, they sniff me out, like dogs.
When the baglady enters the hushed cafeteria and threads steadily past the skewered tables, when the derelict stands and faces the oncoming crowds and arrives at his soft selection, we all know who they have in mind.
I meet their eyes — I can't help it.
Something in me says something to something in them.
Something in them says something to something in me.
What?
There is spare material, there are loose components in our heads.
We recognize this and move towards it.
I think one or two people or things are moving towards me quite fast now.
 "Hey my man," said Felix in the lobby, running a thumb down my thin lapel.
"You know, I like his style.
With this guy, it's a week on and a month off.
What's happening?"
Auditioning was what was happening.
I came down the steps of the Ashbery that morning and burst out laughing at the heat.
New York can't be serious about this.
I have read, or television has told me, about parts of space where the manmade boomerangs fly.
It's hot out there, several million degrees Fahrenheit.
Psychopathic heat.
In New York, in July, the heat is psychopathic.
On bucking Broadway the cabs all bitched and beefed, ferrying robots, bad dogs, uptown, downtown.
I grabbed my trap and joined the shunt.
New York is a jungle, they tell you.
You could go further, and say that New York is a jungle.
New York is a jungle.
Beneath the columns of the old rain forest, made of melting macadam, the mean Limpopo of swamped Ninth Avenue bears an angry argosy of crocs and dragons, tiger fish, noise machines, sweating rain-makers.
On the corners stand witchdoctors and headhunters, babbling voodoo-men — the natives, the jungle-smart natives.
And at night, under the equatorial overgrowth and heat-holding cloud cover, you hear the ragged parrot-hoot and monkeysqueak of the sirens, and then fires flower to ward off monsters.
Careful: the streets are sprung with pits and nets and traps.
Hire a guide.
Pack your snakebite gook and your blowdart serum.
Take it seriously.
You have to get a bit jungle-wise.
Now I was heading, in my hot cage, down towards meat-market country on the tip of the West Village.
Here the redbrick warehouses double as carcass galleries and rat hives, the Man-hattan fauna seeking its necessary level, living or dead.
Here too you find the heavy faggot hangouts, the Spike, the Water Closet, the Mother Load.
Nobody knows what goes on in these places.
Only the heavy faggots know.
Even Fielding seems somewhat vague on the question.
You get zapped and flogged and dumped on — by almost anybody's standards, you have a really terrible time.
The average patron arrives at the Spike in one taxi but needs to go back to his sock in two.
And then the next night he shows up for more.
They shackle themselves to racks, they bask in urinals.
Their folks have a lot of explaining to do, if you want my opinion, particularly the mums.
Sorry to single you ladies out like this but the story must start somewhere.
A craving for hourly murder — it can't be willed.
In the meantime, Fielding tells me, Mother Nature looks on and taps her foot and clicks her tongue.
Always a champion of monogamy, she is cooking up some fancy new diseases.
She just isn't going to stand for it.
I ungummed myself from the seat, climbed out and paid the driver through his side window — a London habit, and a bad one for New York.
The old cabbie sat there unresponsively in his cage.
 "Can't change the ten," he said.
 "What?" 
 "You read?" 
He pointed to the yellow sign — the one about the driver's helplessness in the face of any bill larger than five.
 "Can't do it." 
"That sign must be ten years old.
You never heard of inflation?"
 "Can't do it." 
"Ah, keep the change.
You guys have got to face up to things.
You're just not being realistic."
The cab moved wearily away.
I looked up, across the street, and saw a series of sloped garage gangways, minded by the hulks of trucks.
On the fendered pot-belly of one of these dead or fossilized machines sprawled the tanned torsos of three young  men.
Two were stripped to the waist, slabby, downy, while the third was just a leaning patchwork of studded leather and jean rag.
The entrance to Fielding's loft, I now noticed, lay directly beyond them, through them, a numbered door between the big black slats…
With a flourish I fastened the middle button of my new suit (off-white with charcoal seaming: I'm not sure about it I wish you were here, I wish you were here to tell me it looked okay), eased my hands into my trouser pockets, and ambled loosely across the street.
Now I've never been given any bother by the gays.
To an almost hurtful degree, I don't seem to be their type.
It just doesn't come up.
It just isn't a problem.
But as I walked across the jarred and cratered road and sensed the usual quickenings of irony and aggression I also sensed something further — I sensed that my weight, my mass, my meat was being appraised, registered, scaled, not with lust, no, but with a carnal speculation I had never felt before.
Christ, is this how you chicks feel?
I stared dead ahead at the doorway, with the stirring men present but unpinpointed in my sight.
I walked past them.
 "Reader," someone seemed to say.
I paused.
I hung my head.
You can walk away but I cannot walk away.
I turned, and asked with real interest, "What did I hear you call me?" 
 "Breeder," said the man.
He held a kind of grappling hook between his legs.
 "Big breeder." 
My head was full of good things to say — but I just snorted, and erased him with the flat of my hand, and walked on.
Even this wasn't smart.
Even this was jungle-dumb…
I came through the door.
Half-blinded by shadow I made out a steep wall of steps and moved towards it.
Then behind me I heard the sounds of footsteps and stiff hinges and the death-rattle of shivering chains.
I tell you, I went up those steps faster than a scalded faggot, propelled by a barbarous diuretic terror on behalf of my exposed rear end The heavy door at the top didn't give until the fifth push, but by then I had turned, and seen the shrugging figures as they retreated into the light, and now I could hear only laughter.
I chested my way through and stood panting and blinking in a  glass-walled theatre of spacious light, the air so dustless and oceanic that it showed you only the dirt in your human eyes.
I steadied.
Among the pine supports in the far corner stood Fielding Goodney, looking ridiculously suave and decisive and somehow air-conditioned — in his jeans and fresh white shirt, in his suit of youth, and his money colour.
He was issuing instructions to three workmen or caterers in tublike blue overalls.
He acknowledged me with a flat palm upraised.
Waiting for my breath to find its heavy keel I took a turn around the hired loft.
I lit a cigarette, whose first jab doubled me up with an unmufflable bark of outrage from my lungs.
A tearful itch tickled my lids as spoked hangovers flashed past.
Whew, this drinking deal, this drinking life-choice, it's very hard on those who choose it.
I wandered on, striving to enjoy the light, passing hospitalic drapes and hoods, loose sections of electromagnetic silverboard, a work-bench, a winded pinball table.
Hung on the back wall were half-a-dozen milky seascapes.
Whoever painted them saw life as clean as toothpaste, or pretended to.
I turned, taking the sun full in the face.
Up here with the high windows, Manhattan was hidden and you saw only the twin shafts of the World Trade Center, two gold lighters against the strong and pressing blue of the outer air.
I shook my head.
The mote in my eye, that dead spot where no light lives, wiggled its black finger at me.
"Hey, John.
That's some suit.
Where you headed?
Alabamy?"
 "Uh?" 
 "Anything the matter, Slick?" 
"No.
I just got razzed by some faggots.
On the way in here."
Fielding laughed, then thickened his brow attentively.
 "And?" 
"They called me a breeder, Fielding.
What the hell is that
supposed to mean?"
 "Isn't it beautiful?" 
"Come on, this is no place to audition.
There are going to be little actresses walking through that breakers "yard down there." 
 "No, John, they'll come up through the front," said Fielding, his arm on my shoulder now as he steered me across the floor.
"There's just a gentle little cookie store down there, and a nice elevator.
I had you come up the back way"
 "What for?" 
"It's educational.
Now relax with a drink, Slick, and get yourself ready for the girls."
This was Fielding's best possible response.
We moved on to the shallow stage, where Fielding had installed a raft of video equipment (with two pistol-grip cameras), a stereo, a coffee-table space game, a fishtank, two sofas facing two low steel desks, and a fat little fridge.
I like new furniture.
I like brand-new furniture.
I had my fill of fucking antiques when I was growing up in Pimlico, and in Trenton, New Jersey.
But it has to be plain, you know?
Fielding knelt and ticked a fingernail against the sedimented glass of the fishtank.
I look into that fishtank, me, and all I see is new furniture of a different kind, studs and beads and zebra flashes, bouncy frills and fruity bobbles, Barry's lounge, Vron's boudoir.
 "All the fish respond to the manoeuvres of the alpha fish," said Fielding, his valved face reflected in the glass.
 "That's the alpha fish — there, with the black tail." 
He looked at his watch, and straightened.
 "Now today we cast the girl, the stripper." 
 "The dancer?" 
I said.
What about Butch?"
"You know Butch is in.
I know Butch is in.
You know she's a dancer.
I know she's a dancer.
These girls, they don't know nothing.
You read me, Slick?
We're going to have some fun."
And we did too.
What with the jug of Red Snappers that Fielding had prepared, I was feeling no pain when the first candidate came flouncing across the floor.
She was a big dark honey with the best…no, hang on.
Maybe we kicked off with that hot blonde who took her…
No.
It was the black chick whose.
Anyway, after a while, during that sun-bleached, snowblind vigil of booze and lies and pornography, the girls tended to mangle and dismember in my mind.
The routine was the same, and Fielding had them in and out of that door like a chainline vaccinator.
It's a time-honoured custom in our industry, the easy-going atmosphere you try to create while auditioning young women for roles of an erotic nature.
Terry Linex of C. L. & S., for example, has a particularly telling line.
He just says,"Right.
This is a sex scene.
I'll be the man"Boy, were they ever eager, these mad, happy, Manhattan girls.
Across the floor they came, edgy as hell but mortally excited, the nerves spiralling to the ends of their hair, each with her special details of shape and shadow, of torque and thrust.
We sat them down and gave them a drink and asked them the usual stuff.
They didn't need prompting: you see, they really did think it was possible, likely, certain that money and fame had fingered them, that exceptionality had singled them out.
They talked about their careers, their crack-ups, their prongs, their shrinks, their dreams.
Fielding would let them drawl or quack away for five minutes, before asking, with a strategic glint: And Shakespeare?"
Well, even I got a few laughs from their replies to that one.
Yeh, I really wanna do Mrs Macbeth.
Or Anthony and Cleopatra.
Or The Comedy of Errs."
One girl, I swear, thought for some reason that Pericles was about a car-manufacturer.
Another evidently believed that The Merchant of Venice was set in greater Los Angeles.
 "That's very interesting, Veroica, or Enid, or Serendipity," Fielding would say.
"Now.
We'd like to have you take your clothes off please."
 "To music?" 
 "Sure," he'd say, and reach for the tape.
 "I'm not really dressed for it." 
"Come on, Maureen, or Euphoria, or Accidia.
You're an actress, right?"
And, revealing their teeth first, the girls would go through their hoops.
I watched through a sheen of shame and fear, of lust and laughter.
I watched through my pornographic sheen.
And the girls submitted to it, to the pornography.
Professional city-dwellers, they were experienced in the twentieth century.
They didn't dance, they didn't tease — they didn't strip, not really.
They took most of their clothes off and gave you a lesson in their personal anatomy.
One of them simply lifted her skirt, lay on the floor, and had a handjob.
She was the best.
We received two apologetic refusals in a busy three days.
Fielding said it was the Shakespeare that got them going, something to do with the exaltation caused by the tendered handclasp of art.
Every now and then I wondered whether Fielding was promoting these girls in the other sense.
But all he ever said was "Here's  her number, Slick" or "John, she goes for you" or "I think you might look good on her." 
 "How do you look on Doris?" 
I asked him, during a lull.
"On Doris?
Doris is gay, John.
You know that."
 "Where's her script, God damn it?" 
"Patience, Slick.
Stay icy calm.
Oh and — you got to meet with Spunk Davis tonight.
You got to ask him something.
I warn you, it'll be a bitch."
 "What?" 
He told me.
 "No way," I said.
"Oh no.
No.
You ask him."
"You're the one he respects, Slick.
He has a hard-on for you a yard long."
 "Oh man," I said.
But by then there was another sexbox cruising down the floor towards us, and I was too fuddled and clogged to argue.
So you see, over these last few days I've had no time for reading.
I've been too busy auditioning.
Mr Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, I read, but was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes I still don't know what pop-holes are.
I've asked around.
Fielding doesn't know.
Felix doesn't know.
The dictionary doesn't know.
Do you?
 "Hi," said a voice behind me.
I turned.
 "Ah fuck off," I said, and turned again.
I quit reading and looked round about me.
This was no kind of place to be caught reading in: a macho gay bar in a five-fathom basement somewhere beneath the charred East Twenties.
We were down so deep here, it felt like an inverted skyscraper.
Maybe Manhattan would get like that one day — crustscrapers, corescrapers, a hundred storeys underground.
Already certain less-than-fashionable New Yorkers have taken up residence in the sewers and subway shafts.
They have.
They've got little socks down there, with beds and chests-of-drawers.
Money has driven them deeper into the planet, money has brought them down in the world…
Round about me there was womanlessness, jawlines, crewcuts, hunks leathered up like frogmen, Adam in full stubble and muscle and sweat.
All you needed in here among the shadows and sawdust was your maleness, your sour testosterone.
 "Hi," said a voice behind me.
I turned.
 "Ah fuck off," I said, and turned again.
Now this wasn't one of the heavy hangouts.
I suppose your standard Manhattan faggot might look in here for a final white wine en route to a dungeon appointment or death-pact rendezvous at the Water Closet or the Mother Load.
But this was a dark place of gropes and whispers, of black silhouettes.
Their shapes gave off no tremor or threat, more a priestly absorption in the radar of the appetites that had brought them there.
 "Hi," said a voice behind me.
 "Ah fuck off," I said, and turned.
"Oh hi!
Sorry about that.
How are you doing?"
"Good.
You like this place?
Look at you, you're terrified.
Okay.
What do you want to talk to me about?"
I took a deep breath — and heard the tiny tide of protest from the enemies in my lungs.
He sat on the stool beside me.
T-shirt, veined, tendoned biceps.
He ordered a glass of water.
Tap water, not designer water.
He wasn't going to tangle with those bubbles, not Spunk.
Now I had to remember that this was a complicated young guy.
He didn't drink.
He didn't smoke.
He didn't sniff.
He didn't eat.
He didn't gamble.
He didn't swear.
He didn't screw.
He didn't even do handjobs.
He did handstands.
He did push-ups.
He did meditation and mind control.
Born again, a true believer, he did charity work: he cared about the poor and the disadvantaged…
Yes, all my man-management skills would be needed here.
I looked into his clenched face and said,
"Spunk?
It's about your name.
"Yeah?
What about it?"
 "You're probably going to hate me for this." 
 "I hate you already." 
 "The thing is, Spunk," I said,"in England —
"I know what you're going to say.
I know what you're going to say.
I waited.
"You want me to put an e in Davis.
Well forget it, Self.
Go get a whole new idea.
I ain't doing it.
No chance.
 "No," I said,"the Davis bit is fine.
Spunk, you can keep Davis exactly as it is.
Davis is fine.
It's the other bit we have the problem with."
 "The other bit?" 
 "Is the problem, yeah." 
 "You mean Spunk?" 
 "That's the bit I mean." 
He looked surprised, wrong-footed.
I ordered another scotch and lit another cigarette.
 "The thing is," I said, "in England, it means something else." 
"Sure.
It means grit, pluck, courage.
"True.
But it also means something else."
"Sure.
It means fight.
Guts.
Balls."
"True.
But it also means something else."
 "What?" 
I told him.
He was devastated.
 "I'm sorry, Spunk, but that's the way it is." 
His young face dipped and trembled, with toothache creasing in the corners of the eyes.
Who hadn't anybody told him this before?
They probably never dared, I thought, and shrugged, and drank my drink.
 "I mean," I went on,"if you were working with an English actor called, I don't know, Jizz Jenkins or something, you'd have to
"To hell with England.
What do I care about England?"
"It's a problem, you admit…
You could just change it a little.
How about Spank?"
"Spank?
Give me a break.
What kind of a name is Spank?"
"There are quite a few American names like that.
Skip.
Flip.
Rip.
Trip.
Hank.
Hunk Davis,"I said experimentally.
"Or Bunk, or Dunk, or Funk, or Junk, or Lunk, or
 "You say one more word and I'll rip my ears off." 
 "Or Punk," I said.
 "Or Unk." 
I considered.
When you come to think about it, it doesn't seem to be a very popular noise, that unk sound.
Suddenly Spunk slid to his feet.
Holding my tie as if for balance, he let me have his actor's stare, right between the eyes.
This went on for a long time.
I think he was trying out his thought-control on me, though I couldn't be sure.
Then with the chunky knuckles of his right hand he sent his full tumbler of water surfing Western-style up the skiddy steel bar.
The glass wobbled to a halt, inches from the edge of the cliff Spunk —?"
I said.
But Spunk just walked away.
Coolly I ordered another drink, and swivelled on my stool.
If Spunk had been hoping to rattle me by picking this place for a venue, then Spunk was out of luck.
I'm used to all that by now.
What with the diesels, bull faggots, strippers, cross-dressers and money-lovers I have to work around, I can't get worked up about abnormality any more.
The world wavers.
Who's straight?
Are you?
Is Martina Twain?…
I looked this way and that — the faces, the shoulders, the hands.
Me, I have no faggot history whatever.
I have no faggot past.
But who knows these days?
Maybe I have a big faggot future.
As a faggot, I might be a roaring success.
Hey, you guys, you gays who made the break.
I mean you out there, not you in here.
So you decided to go it alone.
You decided to butch it out.
What's it like, without them?
Just think: no weather.
No lunar wind or rain, no biology.
A temperate zone.
Full of blokes.
Humanity having been halved like that, is it reassuring, the sameness of it all?
Isn't it strange?
Yeah and tell me something I've always wanted to know.
Are there times when you both can't raise it?
Do you get those me-neither nights?
Well, it's been your century, you guys, I'll give you that.
I heard recently that Australia has come whooping out of the closet.
Australia!
All those pumpkin-faced hicks and tripledecker beach hugies — they're all bumboys now.
What's happening, God damn it.?
Some people blame the women.
I blame the men.
The first sign of bother, after a carefree fifty million years, and we throw up our hands and go gay?
Now is this any way to behave?
I mean, how faggy can you get?
Come on, you guys, don't run out on me like this.
Where's the old cave spirit?
Don't surrender.
Don't desert.
What's the problem.
They're only women after all.
I ordered another drink.
Glancing sideways I saw something strange, something anomalous: a girl, a plump little bobbysoxer, edging tremulously down the bar towards me.