

1.
INTRODUCTION
This report is based upon statistics concerning the losses and waste of reproduction, on figures that reflect great human tragedies.
The anguish experienced by mothers and families in the process of generation replacement defy statistical description; only the extent of the suffering can be roughly outlined.
Reproduction demands its victims; many young and adult women in the childbearing ages are to make the ultimate sacrifice in the process of propagation.
According to a recent WHO estimate, about half a million women die every year as a consequence of pregnancy, birth and other maternal causes, and many more are chronically impaired physically; there are no estimates available as to the number of pregnancy related diseases, illnesses and health impairments.
Numerically, even greater loss is suffered by the new-born generations.
Around the world, more than ten million infants die each year, and an additional four and a half million from the same birth cohort will die as a toddler or young child before reaching the age of five years.
The number of pregnancies that do not produce a viable infant but end in miscarriage, induced abortion or stillbirth or, of those that result in a live born baby with serious health impairment, cannot be reliably assessed but it may be put at a much larger figure.
It would be an even more arduous task to assess how many millions of orphaned children, widowed husbands, parents, relatives and friends are affected by the toll of maternal mortality; how many parents, grandparents and siblings mourn the death of infants and young children; and how many bereaved mothers lament the loss of a fetus.
Reproduction takes a heavy toll on mankind.
The irony of the deplorable situation is that much of the suffering is caused by maleficent reproductive patterns and can be avoided by rectifying childbearing practices.
Many reproduction related diseases, health impairments and deaths are preventable and can be warded off not by costly medical intervention but by following sound norms relevant to conditions of childbearing.
One important norm concerning childspacing intervals has long been recognized and observed by many traditional societies, especially in sub-Sahara Africa.
Others emerged from the observations of medical practice and from the demographic research that, at least from the turn of the century, endeavoured to disclose those conditions of childbearing that are the most and least detrimental to the health of mothers and their offspring.
Family formation and family building patterns are reflections of various socio-economic and cultural institutions, traditions and conditions of development.
It is significant that certain of the institutionalized practices that are commonly found in developing countries and that have evolved as a protection for family well-being actually impair the quality of family life and add to the life hazards that its members experience.
There is, for example, the cultural dictum in many societies that girls should marry at a very early age, often prior to puberty.
But it is known that this custom can have dire consequences both for the woman and her children.
Preferences for large families, which entail childbearing over an extended period and at relatively frequent intervals, is another cultural trait that, when effectuated, burdens the woman, the family and the society with unwanted results.
In many developed countries, the weakening of traditions, particularly the  transition of the family, the extension of female education and gainful employment, and the so called "sexual revolution" , have had as concomitants a rise in adolescent fertility, on the one hand, and in first births at advanced maternal age, on the other.
Both are disadvantageous, in so far as maternal and child health are concerned.
It is posited here that rational childbearing practices, including patterns as to age of mother at birth of child, the amount of time that elapses between births and the total number of births, would have a salutary effect upon the health and well being of the family and its individual members, particularly mothers and young children.
As noted above, the mortality of children early in their life and the bearing of children who remain in poor health take a toll upon society and family.
In recent years, there has become available for developing countries robust new evidence which suggests that, by altering nuptiality and fertility patterns, individuals can reduce the mortality and improve the health of their young children and that childbearing women can enjoy better health from puberty to menopause.
Significantly, such improvements in the quality of family life and in the health and well-being of individual family members generally do not imply large per capita financial outlays.
In many societies, especially those in which healthy childspacing patterns have been traditional, the will to regulate fertility — at least by spacing — exists, and these patterns may be supported through the provision of modern means of family planning, the spread of relevant information, acceptance of its validity and its correct application.
However, religion, mores and institutions, low standards of health and education as well as many imponderables may impinge upon the application of such knowledge as the people possess and, in any case, may be barriers to change.
The basis for the proposition that individual women may improve their own prospects and those of their young children as regards health and mortality is the evidence that age at marriage and at childbearing, the amount of time that elapses between births and the total number of children that a woman has borne at various ages have a pronounced influence upon maternal and child health, and that a child's birth order may be a factor in its survival chances.
These childbearing patterns are amenable to control, given the knowledge and will.
It is rational behaviour with respect to these conditions and their control that to a considerable degree distinguishes reproductive patterns in regions of high and low maternal and child mortality.
It should be noted that the recognition of the effect of childbearing patterns on the health of women and children can be utilized not only by individuals or couples but also by organizations and authorities dealing with health and family welfare or development policies, including its social and population aspects.
The existence of interrelationship between childbearing patterns and fertility on the one hand, and infant and child mortality on the other is obvious.
However, it has long been argued whether, for countries wishing to moderate population growth through fertility reduction, it is more efficient to invest the available meagre resources in primary health care programmes that, through reducing infant and child mortality, may have a secondary effect on fertility or, to promote policies aimed at healthful childbearing patterns that will reduce fertility and also have an  indirect beneficial impact on maternal and child health.
The 1974 United Nations World Population Conference in Bucharest expressed a rather one-sided view on this question.
In the World Population Plan of Action the section dealing with morbidity and mortality recommend "particularly vigorous efforts" to reduce "fetal, infant and early childhood mortality and related maternal morbidity and mortality" .
Strangely, this section does not mention modification of childbearing patterns among the measures that may serve this goal, while expressly stating that: "Sustained reductions in fertility have generally been preceded by reductions in mortality.
Although this relationship is complex, mortality reduction may be a prerequisite to a decline in fertility."
The omission was not due to oversight or ignorance.
The report of the Third Committee that dealt with the topic, Population and the Family, for instance, while noting that "high infant mortality was especially recognized as a deterrent to fertility decline" and, consequently, two recommendations to this effect were adopted by the World Population Plan of Action, also mentioned that "It was widely acknowledged that the ability to determine the number and spacing of children influences family well-being, partly because of the effect upon the health of both mothers and children." 
Finally, in an indirect way, one aspect of the beneficial health effects of healthful childbearing patterns also gained recognition in the Plan of Action, though not in connection with morbidity and mortality but with reduction of birth rates.
(Paragraph 32: "Countries which desire to reduce their birth rates are invited to give particular consideration to the reduction of fertility at the extremes of female reproductive ages because of the salutary effects this may have on infant and maternal welfare." 
The 1974 World Population Plan of Action has not been the final word in the ongoing debate on this particular problem.
The editor of a volume that contained 10 studies on the effects of infant and child mortality on fertility, summarized the findings in the following way: "The picture is not attractive for those who look to mortality reduction as a means of reducing fertility through familial effects, let alone for those who advocate such measures as a means to reduce growth rates." 
And, as far as extra-familial effects are concerned: "Fertility change is only one possible response to a mortality change, and whether it is activated undoubtedly depends upon many conditioning factors in the society." 
While the findings of research collected in the volume quoted above gave little support to the notion about the primacy of health measures, other research findings pointed to the opposite.
As the author of a study concluded,"In our survey of the literature and our examination of detailed maternal age, parity and child survival data, we have found little evidence for a strong casual link between health care and a decline in mortality, fertility and completed family size.
We have found evidence suggesting the strong effect of parity and of parity relative to age on child mortality and on completed family size.
Governments with limited resources seeking to lower mortality and to decrease population growth will be more likely to achieve these objectives by concentrating on family planning programmes than by insisting on the primacy of health care services — and they will not be sacrificing humanitarian goals by doing so."
By the time of the 1984 International Conference on Population in Mexico  City the debate settled.
Although the Conference reaffirmed the validity of the principles and objectives of the World Population Plan of Action, if also adopted a set of 88 recommendations for the further implementation of the Plan in the years ahead.
The Preamble to the new recommendations acknowledged the changes: "Some important gaps in knowledge have been filled and new issues have emerged to challenge the international community.
Therefore, as foreseen at Bucharest, some of the goals and recommendations of the Plan now call for complementing and further refinement."
One obvious and important change was that the emphasis laid on the effect of infant and child mortality on fertility a decade ago in Bucharest shifted to the effect of fertility and childbearing patterns on infant and child mortality.
The new recommendations made no reference to reduction of infant and child mortality as preconditions of fertility reduction.
Recommendation 35 simply stated that: "Governments wishing to decrease fertility levels should adopt development policies that are known to reduce the level of fertility, such as improved health, education, integration of women and social equity." 
On the other hand, repeated reference was made in the debate "to the valuable contribution that assistance for family planning could make to the health of women" .
As a result, a battery of new resolutions concerning childbearing patterns has been adopted, partly in the interest of women, partly of reducing infant, child and maternal morbidity and mortality.
In order to provide women with opportunities for personal fulfilment in familial and non-familial roles, as well as for full participation in economic, social and cultural life, the 1984 International Conference on Population recommended (Recommendation 7) that "in those countries, where child-bearing occurs when the mother is too young, Government policies should encourage delay in the commencement of child-bearing" .
Also, according to Recommendation 8, "Governments concerned should make efforts to raise the age of entry into marriage in countries in which this age at marriage is still quite low." 
With respect to morbidity and mortality, the 1984 Conference adopted recommendations concerning the beneficial effect of healthful childbearing patterns on the health of mothers and their children.
The Conference adopted two recommendations that call attention to the fact that the health sector is not the only one that should be concerned with mortality and that, in addition to primary health care, there are other factors that tend to reduce mortality and enhance health of mothers and children.
These are as follows:
Recommendation 16: "The promotion and preservation of health should be the explicit concern of all levels and branches of government.
It is strongly urged, therefore, that governmental action in the area of mortality and health should go beyond the health sector and involve all relevant sectors of national and community development."
Recommendation 17: "Governments are urged to take immediate steps to identify the underlying causes of morbidity and mortality among infants and young children and develop special programmes to attack these conditions.
Strategies to be considered include emphasis on mother and child care services within primary health care, the introduction and support of a package of specific intervention measures, and massive community-wide education and mobilization to support  them."
Other recommendations of the 1874 International Conference on Population were more specific:
Recommendation 18: "All efforts should be made to reduce maternal morbidity and mortality.
Governments are urged…
(e) To take appropriate steps to help women avoid abortion…
(f) To support family planning as a health measure in maternal and child health programmes as a way of reducing births that occur too early or too late in the mother's life, of increasing the interval between births and of diminishing higher birth orders, and by giving special consideration to the needs of those in the postpartum and/or breast-feeding period;
(g) To encourage community education to change prevailing attitudes which countenance pregnancy and childbearing at young ages, recognizing that pregnancy occurring in adolescent girls, whether married or unmarried, has adverse effects on the morbidity and mortality of both mother and child."
Recommendation 19: "Governments are urged, as a special measure, to take immediate and effective action, within the context of primary health care, to expand the use of…appropriate birth spacing, which have the potential to achieve a virtual revolution in child survival.
All available communication channels should be used to promote these techniques.
The important role of family, especially of mothers, in the area of primary health care should be recognized."
Recommendation 20: "Governments are urged to promote and support breast-feeding." 
Recommendation 21: "Governments are strongly urged to take all necessary measures, including, whenever they consider it useful, utilizing the services of non-governmental organizations, to raise the level of education attained by women as an end in itself and because of its close link to child survival and spacing." 
Though findings of our study may support the recommendations made at the Mexico City Conference, it is not presented to this end.
The primary purpose of this study was to determine from available materials for developing and developed countries the conditions of childbearing that are most favourable to viability of the offspring as well as to infant, childhood and maternal health and well-being as indicated by the minimum mortality and maximum survival chances of children through age five and minimum morbidity and mortality among women as a result of the process of childbearing.
The focus is upon demographic factors of age at marriage and at first birth, maternal age, order of birth and family size, and the amount of time that elapses between births.
These parameters are examined from the perspective of their effect upon the morbidity and mortality first of offspring and then of mothers.
Socioeconomic conditions that affect fetal, infant and child mortality are reviewed in Chapter VI.
The analysis is followed by a statement of implications from the standpoint of each demographic parameter examined in Chapter VII, as well as an overview of the findings and a summary of the optimal demographic conditions for childbearing in Chapter VIII.
Fetal, infant and early childhood mortality and maternity related deaths to  women of reproductive age are the classes of mortality examined.
The data for developed countries are from official vital statistics and special surveys (with the official data having greater credibility than similar registered data for less advanced nations), while the material for developing countries has been taken mainly from results of the World Fertility Survey and the WHO Collaborative Studies on Health and Family Formation.
Morbidity is discussed, too, mainly from a survey of literature and from results of special surveys.
It should be noted that morbidity statistics are generally of less reliable quality than mortality statistics.
In the interest of readers who are not professional demographers, statisticians or physicians or who are not concerned with minutiae of the research, an effort was made in writing the report to avoid too detailed explanations, statistical tabulations, and the extensive use of the lingo of related fields or sciences.
For this reason the report is followed by an Appendix, to which references are often made in the text.
Figures in brackets refer to the Notes.
Tables in the text that are number A.1 to A.13 may be found in the Appendix.
Professional (demographic, sociological, statistical and some medical) terms or terms that are used in everyday conversation but having specific meaning in the context of the report as well as some abbreviations are concisely defined or explained in the Glossary.
Finally, the Appendix contains a short bibliography that includes mostly those works to which references are made in the text.
II.
AGE AT FIRST MARRIAGE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
The age at which the woman first marries or enters into another type of conjugal union circumscribes childbearing.
In developing countries, where family planning is rarely practised prior to birth of the first child, the timing of first union bears directly upon fertility patterns, including the age at which the woman gives birth to her first child, often also the nature and pattern of subsequent reproductive events, as well as completed family size.
And these patterns determine, at least in part, the viability of the offspring, infant and childhood mortality conditions and maternal health.
In the economically more advanced countries, however, there does not exist a close relationship between age at first marriage and birth of first child, owing mainly to postponement of first birth through contraceptive use.
Since age at first marriage or union not only indirectly affects maternal and child health but can be considered as one of the underlying causes or conditions that affect it, this topic will be examined first.
There are wide differences among countries in the average age at which women first marry or form a union.
Among the developing countries that participated in the World Fertility Survey (WFS), the median age at which women aged 25 to 29 years at the time of interview first married or entered a union (i.e., the age at which one half of them entered into conjugal union) ranged from 13.1 years in Bangladesh to 23.0 in Sri Lanka.
Age at entrance into conjugal union was lowest in the Indian Ocean (15.4 years) and Africa (17.0 years) regions, and highest in the East & South East Asia & Oceania (18.8 years) and Western Hemisphere (20.2 years) regions.
Moreover, the proportion of women that had ever been married or in conjugal union by age 16 varied widely, from less than one per cent in the Republic of Korea to 87 per cent in Bangladesh.
In 8 of 39 countries, 43–67 per cent of the 25–29 year old respondents had married by age 16.
Thus, it is evident that, in developing countries, first of all in the Indian Ocean, Africa and Arab World regions, many women are exposed to pregnancy risks while still very young, perhaps even physiologically immature for mating and childbearing.
On the whole, women marry considerably later in the economically more advanced nations.
Among 28 developed countries, the median age of women at first marriage has, in recent years, ranged from 21 to around 28 years.
Trends were mixed throughout the 1970s: in one half of these countries, women tended to marry at increasingly older ages, in others, earlier.
However, in many of the developed countries in which age at entrance into legal marriage has been rising, later marriage has been counterbalanced by a tendency for increasing proportions of women to establish consensual unions, and at increasingly earlier ages.
It is noteworthy that the health and demographic consequences of early marriage or union of females differ in developed and developing countries, mainly because, in the former, contraceptive knowledge and practice are more prevalent and health standards are superior.
The proportion of adolescents among the female population married or in union varies greatly among developing countries and, depending on local traditions, their problems and the perception of these problems also vary from country to country.
Nevertheless, there are some consequences of early marriages that are common in all countries and may cause the same concern everywhere.
Among them, the WFS surveys verified that early marriages or unions are associated with premature childbearing and achievement of large families upon completion of the reproductive period.
It also can be implied from the data that, because of presumed infecundity, the early years of adolescent marriages are often barren and may be followed by later infertility.
Where family planning is not widely practised, as in the overwhelming majority of developing countries, the age at which a woman first marries or enters a conjugal union determines in large measure the age at which she bears her first child.
Thus, in most WFS countries in the Western Hemisphere and East & South-East Asia & Oceania regions, among the women who were aged 25–29 when interviewed, median age at first marriage or union was about 20.2 and 18.8, respectively, and the median age at first birth (i.e. the age at which half of them had already had a birth) was around 21 years (between 19 and 24 years in individual countries).
In several African countries in which marriage or first union takes place comparatively earlier in life, one half of the women bore their first child before reaching age 19; in Bangladesh, 50 per cent of the women had at least one child when they were 16.5 years old.
The fact that timing of the first births is closely related to age at first marriage or union is documented in Fig 1.
Among the 39 developing countries that participated in the WFS, there is a strong correlation between the median age at first marriage or union and the median age at first birth among women aged 25–29 years at the time of the survey.
(It should be noted that this group of women was selected for the analysis because, at these ages, practically all women in developing countries have married or entered into some kind of conjugal union at least once and, also, because their mating and fertility patterns represent more recent behaviour than those of women in the older reproductive age groups).
The value of the correlation coefficient is high, indicating a very strong relationship between age at first marriage and at first birth.
A widely recognized consequence of early marriage or entrance into a conjugal union is the lengthening of the period that women spend as married or sexually active during their childbearing years which, without birth control or infecundity, results in higher completed fertility at age 50.
Except where marriage occurs at a very young age, the earlier a woman marries, the younger she is when she bears her first child, and the more children she has when she reaches the end of her reproductive years, other things being equal.
In all developing countries for which data are available, the number of children born to a woman during her childbearing years was, on average, 70 children if she married at age 17 or earlier, 6.1 if the marriage occurred at age 20–21, and only 4.2 if she was older than 24 years when first married.
Since, as will be seen later, family size (that is parity and birth order from the viewpoint of mothers and children, respectively) affects maternal and child health, age at first marriage should be considered as an important variable from the aspect of optimum parameters of childbearing.
It may be observed that the linear regression line in Fig. 1 represents only the general tendency of the association between women's age at first marriage and at first birth.
A more careful look at Fig 1, reveals that, between the ages of about 15 and 18 years the age at first marriage has little or no effect on the age when the first birth occurs.
Thus, in a group of 15 countries where median age at first marriage was between 15.2 and 18.3 years, the median age at first birth fell in the range of 18.6–19.9 years, irrespective of whether, within that age range women in that country married earlier or later.
On the other hand, from about age seventeen and a half, the higher the median age at first marriage, the higher the median age at first birth, too.
(For 19 countries, where median age at first marriage was 17.4 years or more, the slope of the regression line is steeper; the regression equation is:.
Thus, early marriages tend, as a rule, to be barren for at least a while (adolescent subfecundity).
As Fig. 2 shows, the lower the median age at first marriage in a country, the more time elapses until the first birth occurs.
In other words, there is a negative correlation between median age at first marriage and at first birth.
Instead, girls who marry or begin sexual congress before or around puberty tend to experience a longer interval between marriage or conjugal union and first birth than do their counterparts who marry later.
On average, the interval between the median age at first marriage and at first birth is two years.
However, in such countries at Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan and Yemen, where one half of the girls  are married at around age 13, 15 and 16, respectively (and contraceptives are used by only from one to eight per cent of all married women of reproductive age) the first child is born, on average, from three to five years later, compared to usually less than two years in countries where the median age at marriage is, at least, 17 years.
This suggestion of subfecundity among young girls who marry at too early an age is notable in some other countries as well, and the condition may be temporary or long lasting.
The latter is indicated by an analysis of data from 27 developing countries which showed that there are significant differences among populations as to the proportion of women already infecund in the early childbearing ages of 20–24 years, when fecundity and, usually, fertility too, are at their peak.
The data on the proportion infecund are based on self-reported infecundity (i.e. the female respondent stated that she is infecund) and on behavioural infecundity that was indicated if a woman who was continuously married for five years prior to the survey and did not use contraception had no birth during that interval.
On this basis, the proportion infecund among currently married women aged 20–24 years was 3.1 per cent.
If a shorter interval, say two or three years, during which no birth occurred had been chosen as a  criterium for determining behavioural infecundity, the proportion infecund, of course, would be much higher.
As Fig. 3 shows, the proportion infecund in this age group varied between .0 and 6.8 per cent, and the frequency of infecundity was associated with the frequency of early marriages.
In a given country, the higher the percentage of women ever married at exact age 16.0 years, the greater the proportion infecund among wives 20–24 years old.
The correlation between the proportion of early marriages and later infecundity is positive and significant.
The relationship between early marriage and later infecundity also stands if the proportion of infecund women is regressed on the median age at first marriage.
As Fig. 4 shows, the relationship, of course, is negative: the earlier women marry in a country the more are found infecund at age 20–24 years; a clear suggestion of long lasting infecundity as a consequence of early, premature marriages and conjugal unions.
The correlation between median age at first marriage and infecundity at ages 20–24 years is negative and as strong as in the case of proportion married at exact age 16 years.
Childbearing typically begins much later in the economically more advanced countries than is common in developing regions.
For example, in 16 European countries for which data could be examined, the overall mean age (unweighted) at first birth was 24.9 years.
In nine of the countries, it was above 25 years.
As indicated by data in Table 1, there is a difference of about 4–6 years in average age of women at first birth between the developed and developing regions.
This difference in the age at which women begin childbearing reflects both the later age at union and the greater frequency of deliberate postponement of first births in developed compared to less advanced countries.
III.
CHILDBEARING PATTERNS AFFECTING INFANT AND EARLY CHILDHOOD MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Through current vital statistics or special studies conducted in statistically more developed countries it has long been observed and well demonstrated that childbearing patterns, such as maternal age, parity and the interval between consecutive births have a characteristic effect upon the probability that a child will survive infancy and early childhood.
Almost a century has passed since the VIIth Congress of Hygiene and Demography discussed, among other things, a study that dealt specifically with the influence of the age of parents on the vitality of their children.
A century of observation and analysis of births and deaths by these variables in many developed countries and of studies focusing on the effect of childbearing patterns on the viability of the product of conception, including the survival of infants and children, has accumulated a great body of information, to which an impressive amount of comparative data from developing countries has been recently added.
These materials provide the background for this chapter as well as of Chapter IV that deals with the effects on fetal mortality.
In a modern society, it is — more or less — up to the individuals or couples to choose the age at which they marry or enter into one kind of conjugal union or another, to decide whether they should have a child or children or not, mow many children they want to have and at what intervals, and to opt for an age at which they want to cease childbearing, etc.
In traditional societies, on the other hand, there is little room for individual decision making in these matters; the proper ways are prescribed by cultural norms, customs and relevant behavioural patterns that are sanctioned by tradition.
Although, childbearing patterns thus belong to the behavioural sphere, their effect on the viability of offspring manifests itself through biological and physiological factors.
The effect of biological and physiological factors is predominant during fetal life and in the perinatal period.
From the neonatal period, however, the effect of socio-economic factors increases and gains preponderance during the post-neonatal period of infancy.
Socio-economic factors also play dominant role in later — toddler and child — mortality.
Though childbearing patterns undoubtedly exert a particularly strong effect on the viability of the fetus, our investigation of the complex of effects begins with an overview of the impact on the mortality of infants and young children.
This is because of the great importance of infant mortality, the weightiest component of life expectancy and general mortality in developing countries, and also because a large body of observations concerning the effects are available not only from developed but also from developing countries and which are much more reliable than data on fetal mortality.
The influence of childbearing patterns on fetal mortality is discussed in the next chapter, after certain basic rules  on the effects on viability and mortality of infants and children are established.
In this chapter, less emphasis is given to child than to infant mortality and, also, to morbidity, partly because the influence of biological factors becomes considerably weaker during childhood and, partly because the number of observed deaths decreases by age so rapidly that inferences drawn from survey statistics become less significant and the mortality figures more erratic due to increasing sampling errors.
It also should be noted that there are socio-biological and environmental factors that affect the survival of children, for instance, breastfeeding or seasonality of births and climatic conditions which are not considered in the frame of our investigation.
1.
Effect of Maternal Age on Child Survival
The observations invariably show that the risk of dying before reaching the end of the first year of life is higher for infants born to mothers who were closer to the lower and upper limits of the reproductive period than to those who were in the prime of their childbearing ages.
Thus, when graphically presented, infant mortality by age of mother can be described by "U" , "J" or reverse "J" shaped curves.
The outcome of childbearing by both teenagers and older women can be egregious.
One study of United States data disclosed mortality rates for infants born to teenagers and to women aged 40–44 years that were, respectively, 28 and 38 per cent higher than rates for babies born to women aged 20–34 (Nortman, 1974).
Similar patterns were noted, among other countries, for England and Wales, and British Columbia (Canada).
But data for Denmark show mortality to be lowest among infants born to women under age 20 and to rise consistently with maternal age.
However, the under 20 age group includes 18–19-year-old mothers whose children, under conditions of relatively low levels of overall infant mortality, have about the same low, or even lower, risk of dying during the first year of life as those born to women in the age group 25–29 years and face a much lower risk than those born to mothers below 18 years of age.
If only a few births occur to teenagers who are under 18 years old, then the infant mortality of the "under 20" maternal age group may be dominated by the lower mortality at maternal ages 18–19, which may explain the apparent "anomaly" of the Danish data.
The relationship between maternal age and infant mortality stands not only across countries and populations but also with passing time.
As the data from a statistically more developed country in Table 2 demonstrate, though there were drastic changes in the level of infant mortality which decreased by two thirds during the last three decades, the relationship between maternal age and infant mortality, as shown by the quadrennial data, remained basically the same.
However, depending on the mothers' age at birth of the infant, the rate of decrease was not uniform and, as a consequence, the shape of the curves representing the relationship between infant mortality and maternal age has been somewhat modified.
In 1954, mortality was highest among the infants born to the oldest mothers — 45 years old or older (122.8 infant deaths per 1,000 live births in the same maternal age group): the rate was almost one and a half times higher than the  mortality in the second highest risk group (85.9) on the other end of the reproductive period (i.e. infants born to women under 17 years of age).
Infant mortality decreased from the youngest maternal age group and reached its nadir (51.3) among births to women aged 25–29 years.
From this age group, the level began to increase first slowly (infant mortality at the maternal age group 30–34 was lower than in the age group 20–24) and from age 35 more rapidly, although the mortality of infants born to women in the 35–39 years old group was not much higher than in the age group 20–24 which is often considered as the prime time for reproduction.
As mentioned above, the rate of reduction in the level of infant mortality was not uniform in each maternal age group.
In the three youngest maternal age groups, it dropped by about two thirds while, in the three oldest categories, by only less than one half.
As a consequence of the differential rate of decline (although the basic, mainly biologically determined relationship between maternal age and infant mortality remained unchanged) important modifications of its characteristics developed.
The two most consequential changes were as follows:
i.
At a higher general infant mortality level, infant mortality was lowest among babies born to women in the 25–29 year age group, but as the mortality level declined, the minimum risk shifted toward younger ages, to the 20–24 years age group.
ii.
With the reduction of the general level of infant mortality, the difference between the two under 20 and over 40 years maternal age groups increased, so that, recently the risk of dying as an infant became for those born to the oldest maternal age group higher relative to that for infants of mothers in the youngest maternal age groups.
These findings from the three-decade time series of reliable vital statistics show that the relationship between maternal age and infant mortality may change  with the reduction of the general level of infant mortality.
Based on these observations, it can be hypothesized that, during the transition from high to low levels of infant mortality, the optimum age for childbearing tends to shift to younger ages (perhaps from 30–34 to 20–24), and the curve depicting infant mortality by maternal age tends to change from a "U" or reverse "J" shaped type associated with high mortality to a "J" shaped type associated with lower levels.
It should be noted that these findings run contrary to the belief according to which: "In countries with reliable vital statistics, neonatal and infant mortality are known to vary according to the mother's age, regardless of the overall level of infant mortality." 
Such views may be due to the sporadic publication of relevant data, particularly that of time series, for statistically more developed countries.
Indeed, if the reduction of infant mortality is differentiated by maternal age, as in the case of Hungary (which is probable considering that socio-economic factors such as, for example , educational achievement or economic activity, are also associated with maternal age), the differential rate of reduction should necessarily cause some modifications in the relationship between infant mortality and maternal age in other countries, too.
The knowledge of the likelihood of such modifications and of the probable direction of the changes as suggested by the Hungarian data may be helpful in the explanation of variance found in the relationship among developed and, recently, also among developing countries.
The World Health Organization (WHO) collaborative studies in the early 1970s and, later, the World Fertility Survey (WFS) also widely documented that, in developing countries, too, maternal age has a considerable effect upon the probability that a child will survive infancy and the age of five years.
As the regional data computed from individual WFS surveys in Table 3 show, though infant mortality is much higher in the developing regions than in the developed countries (where the rate of infant mortality in 1982 was generally around 10–20 per 1,000 live births) and, although it varies widely among the developing regions, the nature of the relationship of maternal age to the chances of child survival is basically the same.
The source of the higher hazards at the youngest and oldest maternal ages are held to be, in the case of infants born to teenagers, the physiological immaturity that often characterizes very young women at the birth of their first child; the mother's social immaturity and inexperience with child care; and impoverishment in respect to formal schooling and overall living conditions.
The syndrome of imperfections that make up "maternal depletion" coupled usually with lower educational level and larger family size evidently account for the lower survival chances of infants and young children whose mothers were beyond age 39 at the birth.
Thus, findings of the World Fertility Survey support the view that, while the overall level of infant mortality is governed in good measure by socio-economic factors (including public health and medicine), the relationship between maternal age and infant mortality is mainly biologically determined.
Undoubtedly, the WFS data are affected by both sampling and response errors, and in many cases infant mortality rates for maternal ages under 20 and over 40 are based on too few cases (less than 500 births).
In spite of this, in the  individual developing countries, with the exception of a few (probably due to the small sample size for the extreme age categories), and in all developing regions, levels of mortality are much higher for infants born to women who have not reached age 20 and those aged 40 and over than to babies whose mothers were in the middle of their childbearing ages (i.e. in the 20–39 years age group) at their birth.
The impact of maternal age upon the viability of children up to age 5 years is illustrated by WFS statistics for 39 developing countries, which show that the mortality of those under age one year is about 42 per cent higher if the mother was less than 20 years old at their birth than for infants born to women in the 20–29 year age group.
The regional variations are as follows: Africa — 40 per cent higher; Arab World — 38; East & South East Asia & Oceania — 42; Indian Ocean region — 50; and the Western Hemisphere — 27 per cent higher.
It is also reported that in 10 WFS countries of Sub-Sahara Africa, the proportion overall of babies dying within the first month of life is 50 per cent higher and that post neonatal mortality is 25 per cent higher where the mother was under age 20 than where she was 20–29 at the time of the birth.
On the other end of the childbearing period, infant mortality in the maternal age group 40 years and over is also very high; in the 39 WFS countries about 24 per cent higher than in the 30–39 and about 30 per cent higher than in the 20–29 maternal age groups.
The results of the WHO collaborative studies also show that, in accordance with the findings in developed countries, infant mortality in most communities investigated tends to rise steeply from maternal age 35, and is already very high at maternal age group 35–39.
Thus, the relationship between maternal age and infant mortality in the  developing countries, in general, can also be described by "U" , reverse "J" or "J" shaped curves.
However, the optimum childbearing age differs among the WFS countries; in many of them, it falls to the 20–29 years age group, in some others to the 30–39.
As expected on the basis of the hypothesis proposed above, that the relationship between maternal age and chances of child survival may depend upon the status of the mortality transition, it was found that, in those regions where overall infant mortality is relatively low (under 100 per 1,000 live births), the likelihood that an infant will survive until its first birthday is greatest if the child's mother was 20 to 29 years old when it was born.
On the other hand, in the Indian Ocean and Arab World regions where infant mortality is higher, the optimum age is 30–39 years.
Also, the more moderate negative impact of teenage childbearing upon infant mortality in several countries, first of all in the Western Hemisphere region, where infant mortality in the maternal age group under 20 is lower than in the age group over 40, may reflect, among other things (such as later age at marriage and at first birth, higher educational and living standards, etc.) the lower overall level of infant mortality.
Indeed, the WFS data not only support the hypothesis about the changing effect of maternal age on infant mortality during the mortality transition but, by presenting a wider scale of infant mortality levels, provide further evidence that extends its validity.
If the sequence of countries or regions ordered by the overall level of infant mortality is assumed to represent the time sequence of the infant mortality transition then, as Fig. 5 (as well as Table 3 for regions or Table A.3 for individual countries) shows, the curve depicting infant mortality by maternal age takes probably a reverse "J" shape at very high levels which, with decreasing levels of infant mortality, changes first to a "U" shape and assumes, finally, the "J" shape at a relatively low level.
This finding argues for alternative programmes and measures for application among countries and within countries over time.
While the "U" or "J" shaped relationship of maternal age to child mortality generally prevails, since the survival rate of children up to age five years is determined mostly by the high mortality of infants, it is of less impressive strength in the mortality of children aged 1–4 years than in the incidence of infant deaths.
The WHO collaborative studies yielded similar findings.
Obviously, as noted earlier, the older the children the more the socio-economic conditions influence their chances of survival.
On the other hand, the younger the children (including gestational age) the more obvious the effect of the biological factors.
The evidence that, in developing countries, advanced age at childbearing adversely affects infant and child health and well-being, is robust indeed, although the extent of influence varies markedly.
In the developing countries of highest infant mortality, children born to teenage mothers are least likely to survive, but in the countries with lower mortality, it is the children born to women aged 40 and over that are at greatest risk of dying in infancy and early childhood.
Some researchers have disputed the contention by others that maternal age itself is responsible through its biologic effects for differential conditions of child health and mortality.
In connection with young maternal ages, one report concluded that wilful neglect and inexperience among teenagers contributed to adverse health conditions among their infants and very young children.
And after analysing statistics for five developed countries and reviewing results of similar studies, one researcher concluded that, "The most recent evidence indicates that the bulk of the adverse consequences of teenage childbearing (for the health of children) may be of social and economic origin, rather than attributable to the effects of young age per se" .
But the study also reported for one of the five countries that babies of teenagers were at higher risks of birth defects, sudden death and other problems of birth and early infancy than were infants born to women in their early 20s.
There is some question whether these conditions would result from economic and social factors, except in so far as the latter might have a bearing upon the extent and quality of prenatal care.
The information obtained from the WFS enabled some researchers to conclude that maternal age does have an impact upon child survival on its own, though maternal age is obviously associated with socio-economic factors that influence infant (particularly post-neonatal) and — to increasing extent — child mortality.
From an analysis of results of WFS statistics for 29 developing countries, one analyst found that the differential effects of maternal age upon the viability of infants and young children were attributable to physical, mental and social immaturity, in the case of teenagers, and to the physical condition of older women.
Results of other research on 10 WFS countries of Sub-Sahara Africa also showed that, "It (the effect of maternal age of infant mortality) is associated with selectivity in respect to social and economic factors, though it is principally and directly an effect of physiological determinants" .
By one calculation, infant and early childhood mortality, in developing countries at least, would decrease considerably if the only adjustment were restriction of childbearing to ages 20–34.
Whatever the cause and by whatever path the impact is felt, there is no gainsaying the fact that there is a clear differential in levels of infant and early childhood mortality by age of mother at birth of child and that this differential tends, on balance, to favour the children whose mothers were about 20 to 35 years of age at their birth.
In both developed and developing countries, maternal age is associated with the frequency of late fetal deaths, birth defects and abnormal birth weight.
Association was found, for instance, between increasing maternal age and the frequency of Down's syndrome.
And births to very young and to older women are more susceptible than others to these maladies.
Learning disability and mental disorder, among other adverse conditions, have also been associated with mother's age of birth of child, the affected more often having mothers who were under age 20 or over age 39 at their birth.
In summary, such data as are at hand suggest that the optimal ages at childbearing may not be consistent among developed and developing countries or for that matter, among countries at different stages of mortality transition.
However, there can be little doubt that, in most countries, conditions of early childhood morbidity and mortality would be improved if childbearing were deferred until after age 20 and terminated by age 35.
An additional, useful perspective on the relationship between maternal age  and viability and survival chances of children can be had by observing the combined effects of maternal age and birth order on late fetal mortality, as noted below.
2.
A Note on the Effect of Paternal Age
Since maternal age obviously affects the viability of offspring and their chances of survival through infancy and early childhood, the question may be rightly raised, whether the age of the other parent has any influence on these characteristics.
Unfortunately, though earlier research has given indications to such an effect, very little attention has been devoted recently to the effect of paternal age on child health.
However, reliable national data on the impact of the age of father show that, for instance, in Hungary, infant mortality is also associated with paternal age.
The relationship, at a low level of overall infant mortality, can be represented by a "J" shaped curve which, in 1982, descended from the young paternal ages and reached its nadir at ages 25–29.
From this paternal age group, infant mortality ascended; the mortality of infants was highest if the father was 50-years-old or older, especially if the mother was 40-years-old or older.
Considering that those infants who were born to 20–24 years old mothers had, recently, the best survival chances in Hungary, and that the husbands, on the average, were three or four years older than the mothers, the association of paternal age with infant mortality is not surprising, and may even be though to reflect only the maternal age effect.
Indeed, at maternal age group 20–24 the age of father seems to be almost indifferent from the viewpoint of the infant's survival.
However, the effect of paternal age is clear when the age of mother is controlled.
Even the teenage mothers' infants had good chances of surviving the first year of life, if their fathers were 25–29 years old.
Similarly, mortality of infants born to 30–39 year old mothers was lowest if their fathers were in the 25–29 years age group.
At maternal ages 25–29, infants with the best survival prospects were those whose fathers belonged to the same age group as the mothers.
Even infants whose mothers were 40 years old or older had a better chance to survive infancy if their fathers were 25–39 years old than if they were 40 years or over.
In summary, from the viewpoint of producing a healthy generation of descendants, men reach the peak, at least under the 1982 conditions in Hungary, somewhat later than women, in the paternal age group 25–29 years.
This paternal age groups seems to be the optimal for procreation, especially, if the mother is not more than 39 years old.
Whether the mother or the father is younger or if they are of the same age, has little effect on the infants' survival chances, in so far as both parents are in the age most favourable to procreate healthy infants.
3.
Order of Birth and Family Size
The demographic parameters — age at birth and birth order — are related, confounding our understanding of their separate effects upon infant and early childhood mortality.
For instance, most first births ordinarily occur to young women, many of those of second and third order to women in the maternal ages of highest reproductive efficiency, and births of high order to older women.
Additionally, the higher the order of the birth, usually the larger the size of the family into which the baby is born.
Thus, the effect of birth order on child survival also resembles the probable effect of family size.
Consequently, in developed countries, infant mortality has been found to be associated with both birth order and family size.
Time series of vital statistics from a statistically developed country, indeed, show a consistent association between the order of birth and infant mortality, though the nature of the relationship may change during a mortality transition.
In the 1950s and early 1960s infant mortality of the first born babies were higher than those of the second.
Infant mortality of second birth order children was the lowest, and it rose with each successive birth order thereafter, with the exception of random fluctuation due to small numbers of high order live births.
Thus, in 1954, the relationship with birth order could be described by an almost "U" shaped curve.
However, along with the switch that could also be observed in connection with maternal age (see Table 2), the relationship assumed a more expressed "J" shape during the second half of the 1950s and, slowly, gave way around 1980 to an almost monotonously increasing linear form, disturbed only by random fluctuations after the fourth or fifth order.
Women in developing countries typically have their first child when they are  very young and, except where circumstances of custom proscribe it or where family planning is not widely practised, continue childbearing until they are nearing the end of the reproductive years.
Consequently the shape of the relationship between birth order and child mortality tends to parallel that of maternal age to the mortality of children under age five.
Birth order, nevertheless, has an impact upon child mortality that is independent of the mother's age.
The WHO collaborative studies carried out in the 1970s, indeed, support the suggestions made above.
Apart from random fluctuations, due mostly to sampling and response errors (the latter are very common in retrospective surveys), the relationship between infant mortality and birth order took reversed "J" , "U" or "J" shaped forms in most of the sampled communities.
Also, for most communities infant mortality was reported to be lowest not at the second but at the third — in some communities even at the fourth — order.
Thus, it is reasonable to suppose that these data also reflect the same transitional changes in the relationship between infant mortality and birth order as was hypothesized in connection with maternal age.
Other observations from infant as well as child mortality.
Data yielded by the World Fertility Survey for a wide range of developing countries (though, unfortunately, unavailable by each single birth order) support the hypothesis that, during the demographic transition, the relationship between infant mortality and birth order goes through characteristic transitory changes.
As the summary data for IPPF regions in Table 6 show, the relationship in the Indian Ocean region, where the overall level of infant mortality is very high, can be  described by a reverse "J" shaped curve with the minimum at the 4th-6th birth orders.
In decreasing order of magnitude of infant mortality, the curve shifts through a nearly "U" shape (Arab World) to a "J" shape (Africa and the East & South-East Asia & Oceania regions), and the minimum drops from the 4th-6th order to the 2nd-3rd order births, as in Africa.
In the Arab World and East & South East Asia & Oceania regions, infant mortality at the two birth order groups is about the same, so that the minimum falls probably at the third or fourth birth order.
Finally, in the Western Hemisphere region where, among developing regions, infant mortality is lowest, the pattern resembles that observed lately in low infant mortality, developed countries, i.e., the chances of surviving infancy are greatest for the first births and the relationship tends to be linear.
As the individual WFS country data show, in some populations, mainly on the Indian sub-continent, where women marry and have their first child at an early age, the first born is the child least likely to survive infancy and early childhood.
Except in most Western Hemisphere and in some other countries, the mortality of first born infants uniformly exceeds that of births up to the 4–6 orders, and in the majority of countries, the pattern is one of declining infant mortality from first through second and third order births.
There is, however, a turning point between fourth and sixth parities, after which the chances of survival decrease as birth order rises.
But in other countries, such as those in Latin America and the Caribbean, where age at first marriage or union occurs somewhat later and where, consequently, childbearing also begins later infant mortality increases with each parity class.
In all countries, children of high birth order have comparatively poor survival chances.
Some studies of WFS data have suggested that maternal age may be the more important of the two factors.
Results of one investigation suggested that first order births to very young women are disadvantaged by the women's physiological immaturity and its effect upon the fetus.
On the other hand, the maternal depletion syndrome that often characterizes the condition of older women with large families has been offered as partial explanation for the high child mortality risks to births of high order.
Another hypothesis is that in the competition between high parity infants and their siblings for maternal care, food and other resources, the toll is heavier upon the younger than the older children.
However, when a pregnancy occurs before normal termination of breastfeeding, the older sibling also suffers a disadvantage.
Though supporting evidence is scarce, there are reasons to argue that birth order has an independent effect on the chances of survival.
Where marriage or union takes place when the woman is very young, she is likely to be not only physiologically immature but, also, to lack the experience and attitude requisite to proper child care, with an adverse effect upon the first born.
When women have had many children, and are older, births of higher order may suffer not only the effects of the mother's physical debilitation from excessive childbearing but, as noted above, in certain circumstances, they may also compete for sustenance unsuccessfully with older siblings.
Thus family size, i.e., total number of children born and surviving, may influence child mortality through the pressure exerted upon the family's means and upon the mother for child care.
A study of all births that occurred in England and Wales in the course of 1949–1950 investigated, among other things, the association between parity and infant mortality controlled for maternal age and social class.
The study demonstrated not only the independent effect of maternal age on mortality (in the form of reverse "J" or "U" shaped curves) at all parity levels, but also that mortality increased almost linearly in the neonatal, post-neonatal and toddler ages with parity in each maternal age group (Heady and Morris, 1959).
Mortality, of course, decreased with rising social status but, in each social class, the independent effect of both maternal age and parity remained significant.
The independent effect of parity, which increased almost linearly in all social classes and in all maternal age groups, was strongest in the youngest age group of mothers under 25 years (Heady et al, 1955).
Similar findings emerged from the investigations of births that occurred during 1950–1952 in New York State, which was controlled for maternal age and prematurity (Chase, 1961 and 1962), and from another study conducted in 1953 in Hawaii (Yerushalmy, et al, 1956).
The WHO collaborative studies also yielded some evidence of the independent effect of birth order on the chance of child survival.
When maternal age is controlled, as in Table A.7 in the Appendix, the deleterious effect of the high birth order is still noticeable.
Notwithstanding random fluctuations due to statistical causes mentioned above (insufficient number of cases observed, sampling and response errors), in most communities, all — reverse "J" , "U" , "J" and linear — forms of the relationship are recognizable, especially for infants born to mothers in their twenties, where a sizeable number of events was reported.
The infant mortality of first born children seems to be very high in most communities, if they were born to mothers less than 20 years old.
This finding suggests, that high infant mortality of first order births in populations characterized by early marriage    may be attributable mostly to the very young age of mothers at first birth.
The effect of parity on infant mortality may be partly due to the association of parity with birth weight and to the association of the latter with mortality (see the next section).
Rising parity and family size obviously have other channels, too, for affecting the health of children.
A Cleveland (Ohio) longitudinal study of a group of families of all social classes (Dingle et al, 1964), for instance showed that frequency in infectious gastroenteritis more than doubled with a rise from family size three to eight (from .97 to 2.11 per person per year).
Post-neonatal mortality due to infectious diseases also rose in all social class categories with increasing parity, according to the 1949–1950 British study (Morris et al, 1955).
Further, in a Colombian rural town, malnutrition was found to increase among children under age 6 years with family size (Wray and Aguirre, 1969).
A similar study in Thailand (quoted by Wray, 1971) identified the same relationship between family size and malnutrition of pre-school children of a semi-rural community.
Taking into account the influence of a number of factors that affect levels of child mortality, including maternal age, one study demonstrated with results of data from developing countries that participated in the WFS, that elimination of fourth and higher order births (i.e., termination of childbearing at third parity) would reduce infant and early childhood mortality by approximately eight per cent(Trussell and Pebley, 1984, p.29).
4.
Conditions Affecting Birth Weight and Prematurity
The high mortality of infants born to young mothers and, consequently, that of the first born babies may be explained, at least partly, by their birth weight.
As observed in statistically developed countries (Acsadi, 1959), birth weight is lowest for babies whose mothers were 16 years old or younger at birth.
The average birth weight according to maternal age, based on all births in Hungary during the years 1956–1957, can be described by a convex second degree curve (Y = 2791.9 + 187.2X — 16.5x).
The birth weight of newborn infants, either male or female, first increases steeply with maternal age up to about age 25 years (on the average by 300 grammes), then slower to about age 35, when it reaches the zenith and, from this age, begins to decrease, continuing to the end of the childbearing ages.
Corresponding patterns can be observed by birth order (Loeb, 1965).
The variations in average birth weight by maternal age and parity correspond to changes in the proportion of underweight, premature babies, whose chances of survival are less favourable than others.
Though the proportion of low birth weight infants decreases from very young maternal ages and from first birth order towards the prime childbearing ages and higher order births, it increases again considerably at later ages and from third and fourth birth orders (Hungary, 1970; Selvin and Garfinkel, 1972; Chakraborty et al, 1975).
Thus, the relationship between birth weight, maternal age and birth order can be considered as one underlying the relationship between maternal age, birth order and child survival.
Low birth weight usually indicates premature births that are also often immature births.
Thus, low birth weight fruits of pregnancies are less viable than infants born with normal weight (i.e. with about 3,000–3,500 grammes).
As the example of Table 7 shows, both late fetal and early neonatal mortality rise steadily with decreasing birth weight.
Low birth weight is not only associated with high perinatal mortality but also with a much higher risk of dying during infancy, especially for a male child.
Low birth weight children who survive infancy may also be subject to more health problems during childhood than those born with normal weight (WHO, 1979).
The increasing birth weight and viability by maternal age may also explain the strange phenomenon reported for some communities surveyed in the WHO collaborative studies.
Contrary to expectations, in the sampled Syrian, Colombian and Pakistani communities, mortality of infants born to mothers under age 20 years decreased with birth order (Table A.7).
Since birth weight (and viability) in the teens increases dramatically with rising age and, inasmuch as higher parity among women under age 20 also meant higher maternal age in that age class, decreasing infant mortality in this age group by birth order may be more than chance variation.
Several studies revealed conditions that affect prematurity and birth weight.
In addition to maternal age and birth order (Douglas, 1950; Acsadi, 1959; Loeb, 1965; Puffer and Serrano, 1975; Fortney and Higgins, 1983), inter-birth or inter-pregnancy intervals (Hungary, 1970; Spiers and Wang, 1976) and the numbers of previous obstetric events (Hungary, 1970) have also been identified.
In Hungary, for example, during 1967–1968, the proportion "premature" (i.e. under 2,500 grammes birth weight) was higher among births that occurred within two years after the previous one.
The proportion of premature births was almost three times as high if the interval was less than a year.
The very high proportion premature  (over 28 per cent) among short spaced births may offer an explanation of the ways through which birth intervals affect the viability of fetuses and the survival chances of infants (see next section).
As noted above, the incidence of prematurity is also associated with the number of previous obstetric events.
According to Hungarian national vital statistics, the proportion of premature, low weight births increases not only with parity but also, and even steeper, by the number of previous obstetric events other than live births (fetal deaths and induced abortions).
It may be noted that socio-economic conditions of parents (as assessed by the father's or the breadwinner's occupation) also play a role in the incidence of low birth weight; it is the highest among the offspring of non-agricultural manual workers, lower among those whose father works in agriculture and lowest in the non-manual workers' stratum.
However, this association may be due not so much to the parents' socio-economic situation but, since most women in the childbearing ages were economically active at that time in Hungary, as to the occupational conditions of the mothers.
As the statistics in Table 8 indicate, heavy physical work during pregnancy (see for instance the categories of unskilled labourers and unskilled construction workers) more often lead to premature birth than conditions of other occupations.
Exposure to vibration (e.g. transport workers, conductors), certain chemical and  other adverse work conditions (sanitation service workers, unskilled chemical workers, for instance) may also be harmful during pregnancy.
On the other hand, the lowest incidence of prematurity was found among managerial, professional and clerical workers' children, among whom the mothers could probably provide a higher quality of prenatal care.
Particularly good prenatal services and care may account also for the low incidence of prematurity among children of women working in the mining industry.
Incidence of low birthweight was also relatively rare among those working in the open air (e.g. self employed in agriculture or gardener).
5.
Effect of Childspacing: The Length of Birth Intervals
Not only is maternal age interrelated with parity or birth order and, through parity, with family size but the latter also with another demographic variable, i.e. the intervals between successive births (or between pregnancies or between termination of a pregnancy and the next conception).
The basis of this association is that very high parity, birth order or family size can only be achieved, if the intervals between births are short.
Recognition of the importance of spacing for maternal and child health followed relatively soon the realization of the effects of maternal age and birth order.
Indeed, from the 1920s, several studies showed an association between spacing and survival of the offspring.
Early studies in the USA (Hughes, 1923; Woodbury, 1925) reported higher infant mortality rates for those born after an interval of less than two years than for those born after a longer interval.
Further studies found that short birth intervals were also associated with higher rates of prematurity and hypertensive toxaemia (e.g. Eastman, 1944) and with higher fetal and child mortality (Yerushalmy, 1956).
Surveys conducted in developing countries reported similar findings (e.g. the Khanna study of Punjab villages; Wyon and Gordon, 1962).
Importantly, one study of births in the USA (Yerushalmy, 1945) showed that still birth ratios are higher not only after short spacing but also after excessively long birth intervals.
Findings of a study of births in England (Douglas, 1950) also pointed to a "U" shaped relationship of the association of risks with inter-birth intervals.
It should be noted that medical opponents of family planning raised doubts about the deleterious impact of short child spacing on mortality or, rather, about the reasoning that high mortality caused by short spacing can be prevented by contraception (Eastman, 1944).
The objection was based on the fact that among children born within a year of the previous delivery, a high proportion is premature since, as a minimum, about at least a year is needed to produce a mature baby.
Not considering the probability that short spacing itself may be a cause of prematurity, and in light of the high mortality of low birthweight children, it was suggested that prematurity is the cause of the high mortality at the less than one year birth interval.
For this reason, Yerushalmy (1945) described the effect of prematurity on the relationship of birth interval with mortality.
Also, in their Kauai (Hawaii) study, the analysis was based on pregnancy intervals instead of birth intervals, with relative mortality rates calculated for several gestational and childhood age groups showing clearly the disadvantages of the shorter intervals in each age group (Yerushalmy et al, 1956).
From that time, a long series of rigorous studies were developed in cognizance of the methodological problems, many of the recent ones using the  WFS surveys and computerized data processing and analytical techniques (see for example, Wray, 1971; Fedrick and Adelstein, 1973; Wolfers and Scrimshaw, 1975; Spiers and Wang, 1976; Gray, 1981; Baldion, 1981; Swenson, 1981; Carlaw and Vaidya, 1983; Fortney and Higgins, 1983; Hobcraft, et al , 1983; Martin et al , 1983; Cleland and Sathar, 1984; De Sweemer, 1984; Palloni and Tienda, 1986).
The studies invariably confirmed the validity of earlier findings.
It has also been long known that a child who is shortly followed by another sibling also suffers the consequences of short spacing.
In the region of sub-Sahara Africa, the once general custom of observing a long post-partum abstinence (often as long as three or four years) was based on recognition of the chain linking the sickness or death of an infant or young child to the new pregnancy that disturbed or interrupted the breastfeeding of the suckling child.
Indeed, the name of an associated, serious nutritional disease, Kwashiorkor, originates from Ghana, where it meant the sickness of a suckling child when the next one is conceived (Williams, 1963).
The programme of the WHO collaborative studies in the 1970s also intended to illuminate the relationship between infant mortality and the interval preceding the birth of the infant.
The findings of these studies are presented in Table 9.
According to these data, in most communities studied, those babies had the best chances to survive infancy who were born after a three or four year interval.
The highest infant mortality was reported in those cases where the preceding birth interval was less than two years and, in many communities, especially high, if the inter-birth period was shorter than a full year.
While these studies clearly show the deleterious effect of short spacing on child mortality, they also indicate that the relationship takes a "U" or reversed "J" shape.
If the preceding birth interval is five (in some cases even four) years or longer, the chances of surviving infancy become poorer again, though considerably better than in the case of short spaced infants (less than two years).
These findings, though derived from sporadic and statistically less reliable surveys, should be kept in mind when studying the newest and most widespread data basis, the World Fertility Survey; since the WFS publications used only three categories for classifying deaths according to birth intervals (less than 2, 2–3 and 4 or more years), thereby precluding the possibility of analysing the impact of the shortest and longest intervals on child survival.
Among the most valuable new information pertaining to the effect of fertility patterns upon early childhood mortality is that which the WFS produced relevant to the spacing of births.
Because the international standards of vital statistics give priority only to age and parity (United Nations, 1964, pp. 11–12), death certificates ordinarily do not include questions on birth interval; the importance of spacing can be determined mostly from special studies in which birth and death records are matched, and there is a conspicuous lack of these studies even for the more advanced countries.
Analysis of statistics obtained for 39 developing countries that participated in the WFS has confirmed that the amount of time that elapses between birth is, indeed, a critical factor in child mortality.
The occurrence of births at too close intervals results in a significant impairment of the vitality of infants (Table A.6).
The WFS data confirm earlier findings for developed countries that an infant is least likely to survive one year if its birth followed or preceded one that  occurred within 24 months of its own (Maine and McNamara, 1985; Acsadi and Johnson-Acsadi, 1985a, 1985b; Maine, et al, 1985; Rutstein, 1983, 1984).
And if a short interval (i.e., under 24 months) both precedes and follows its birth, a child's risks of mortality before attaining age five are twice that of well spaced babies, other things being equal (Hobcraft, et al, 1983; Maine and McNamara, 1985).
Furthermore, although the effect of a short preceding interval is greatest upon   infants (as well as upon fetal life, as discussed later) and is reduced progressively as the child ages, poor spacing does have adverse health and mortality consequences for children in the 1–4 year age range, too.
On the other hand, a multivariate analysis of data from 39 WFS countries (Hobcraft, et al, 1985, pp. 371–373) showed that the deleterious effect of short spacing is substantial during the second year of life and, when the later child survives, the survival chances of the previous child decrease during childhood.
In a pool of 30 WFS countries (see Table 10), the mortality of infants born less than 24 months after the preceding birth was found to be 80 per cent higher than that of infants fortunate enough to have been born after an interval of 24 to 47 months.
According to one study based on data for 29 WFS countries (Rutstein, 1983, p.32), among toddlers aged one year, this difference in spacing is associated with a 46 per cent higher mortality of those born less than 24 months after the earlier sibling.
A short interval also has maleffects upon the survival chances of the living child, and the effect is great where breastfeeding is abruptly terminated by a premature pregnancy.
Whereas intervals of three to four years between births have the greatest health benefits, as noted earlier, there is some evidence that longer intervals of, say, five or more years do not carry these benefits and, in fact, may have a deleterious effect (see Table 9).
The effect of birth interval upon child mortality appears to vary somewhat with level of mortality, although no pattern is clearly evident.
Conditions of development, including general health standards, may play a role, but data that would aptly verify or refute this are not available.
The effect of short spacing on infant mortality seems to be loosely associated  with the overall level of infant mortality.
Mortality in infancy of short spaced babies is not only very high in the regions of high infant mortality (the Indian Ocean and Arab World regions) but also higher relative to those born after two or three year intervals in comparison to regions where infant mortality is lower (e.g. the Western Hemisphere).
On the other hand, infant mortality considerably decreases if spacing is four years or longer in the regions where overall levels of infant mortality are high, but the beneficial impact of four-year or longer spacing seems to weaken with the reduction of general infant mortality; it is almost negligible in the Western Hemisphere (see Fig. 7).
While short spacing plays a causal role in child mortality, it also ensues from a child death, as when breastfeeding and abstinence — the traditional spacing mechanisms — are abruptly halted owing to the death of a nursing infant, and conception occurs.
When contraception is not used, long pregnancy intervals may be due to breastfeeding and abstinence.
Variations among countries in these conditions may account, at least in part, for the unevenness of the findings with respect to spacing and child mortality (Rutstein, 1983, pp.30–34; Acsadi and Johnson-Acsadi, 1985a, p.27).
In some countries, length of inter-birth interval has an enormous effect upon infant mortality, in others, much less.
Some researchers have calculated the effect that a minimum interval of two years between births would have upon child mortality, at the levels then prevailing.
Accordingly, among 25 countries, the reduction of infant deaths alone would range from 5 to 40 per cent(Maine and McNamara, 1985, p.17) and for the same 25 countries, the average reduction in infant mortality would be about 10 per cent and in death rates of children aged 1–4 years, 21 per cent (Trussell and Pebley, 1984, p.21).
On the whole, the impact of spacing upon child mortality outweighs that of any other factor discussed above.
Authors of a multivariate analysis of the demographic determinants of early child mortality based on WFS data (Hobcraft et al, 1985) even suggested that child-spacing and, with increasing age of the child, socio-economic attributes, such as education are the dominant sources of variation in the survival of an offspring.
Though they do not dispute the independent effects of maternal age and birth order, especially that of young age and parity, they assert that the apparent maleffect of old maternal age and high birth order is probably due to poor child-spacing.
In connection with this finding, however, it should be noted that, as stated earlier, maternal age and birth order effects change with decreasing overall infant mortality (and, thus, with socio-economic development), a fact that was not taken into account in that analysis; also, the authors used a rough classification that, for instance, lumped maternal ages 10–19, and those 35 and over, which blurred the probably stronger maleffects of very young and very old maternal ages.
It is important to note that the syndrome of factors which, in high fertility regions motivate women to have few children also enhance the probability that the children they bear will survive early childhood.
Thus, level of the mother's and father's education, mother's place of residence as to urban or rural area and other, related factors have a bearing upon child mortality and also influence reproductive behaviour.
Among these, the mother's education may perhaps be the most influential.
Indeed, it has been postulated that the potential effect upon child mortality of raising levels of maternal education may be even greater than the effect of changes in fertility patterns.
This assertion was grounded on results of several    studies, including one based upon the 25 WFS countries mentioned above and which reported that if all mothers had seven or more years of schooling, other things being equal (that is, all mothers' offspring would have the same conditions concerning survival as those observed for the educated mothers' newborn babies), infant mortality would fall by 41 per cent and death rates of children aged 1–4 by 60 per cent (Trussell and Pebley, 1984, p.21).
6.
Effects of Childbearing Patterns Upon Infant and Early Childhood Morbidity
The use by many researchers of mortality data to indicate conditions of health among children and others reflects the paucity and general unreliability of statistics on illness.
Among other things, many illnesses are unreported and, unless individuals are examined by competent medical practitioners — which is comparatively rare in developing countries, mis-diagnosis is common.
And when morbidity statistics are available, they are not ordinarily classified by the demographic factors of present interest.
Consequently, useful information on the relationship of reproductive patterns to child morbidity in both developed and developing countries is available mainly from special studies.
Since it was possible to examine only a sample of such studies, what follows is aimed to reflect the fact of risk related fertility patterns rather than to give an accounting of the extent and paths of influence.
Maternal age, as noted earlier, is closely associated with birth weight, which is a factor in infant morbidity as well as mortality.
In both developed and developing countries, percentages of babies weighing less than 2,500 grams at birth are highest when maternal age is under 20 and over 35 years (Makinson, 1984; Omran, 1981).
This "U" shapes relationship was found in data for Canada (1980), England and Wales (1970), France (1963–69), Sweden (1973) and the United States (1978).
In these countries, the incidence of low birth weight tended to be lowest among babies born to women aged 25–29 years and highest where maternal age was under 20 or over 39 years (Makinson, 1985, p.134).
Low birth weight appears to be comparatively most widespread among the babies of young teenagers; for example, 31 per cent of babies born to United States girls who had a second birth before reaching age 15 and 20 per cent of those born to 15–19 year old women having a fourth or higher order birth (Omran, 1981).
Pregnancy order tended to mediate the effect of maternal age, so that weight and height of infants tends to be lower where pregnancy order is high in relation to age (see e.g. Omran, 1976, p. 524).
The risk of malformations seems to increase with maternal age (Nortman, 1974).
Analysis of United States (1973–74) data, for example, showed an increase in congenital malformations per 100,000 live births of from about 775 at maternal ages 25–29 to 1,160 at ages 35 and over; below maternal age 20, the rate was 800 (Maine, 1981).
On the whole, however, the literature does not reflect as strong a research interest in the maternal age parameters of child morbidity as in the relationship of birth spacing, family size and birth order to child health.
There is some evidence that length of birth interval has a bearing upon child morbidity.
It is reported that in a number of countries that are regionally, culturally and socio-economically heterogeneous, malnutrition has been found to be more common among children born after short than after long intervals (Rinehart, 1984, p. 686).
The premature termination of breastfeeding that typically occurs when  conception follows a birth in too short a time contributes to inadequate nutrition of the weaned child and explains, at least in part, the morbidity (and mortality) levels among children in the second year of life.
Substitute nourishment may be inadequate both as to quantity and quality (including sanitation) and may be a source of intestinal disorders (Gordon, et al.1964).
It has also been proposed that breastfeeding may be less satisfactory for infants born after short than after long intervals, owing to the mother's diminished ability to provide adequate milk, as deduced from the comparatively poor nutritional status of young children in El Salvador whose birth was preceded by a short interval (Rinehart, 1984, p. 686).
It is appropriate to reiterate that where economic and social conditions are favourable and medical care available and sufficiently advanced, child health is less likely to be impaired by improper spacing.
Unfortunately, this combination of mediating factors is not common in many developing countries.
Birth order has implications for child morbidity as well as mortality, and the adverse effect has been observed in both developed and developing countries.
One study demonstrated for various developed countries at differing dates that, after taking into account the effect of maternal age, the higher the order of birth, the greater the incidence of handicapped children per 1,000 live births and the frequency of mentally defective children.
Down's syndrome, which is associated with advanced maternal age, was also comparatively more frequent among high order births (Nortman, 1974, pp. 40–44).
Results of the WHO collaborative studies (Omran and Standley, 1976, 1981) also contain information on factors affecting child morbidity in several communities in developing countries.
It was noted above that unfavourable combinations of maternal age and pregnancy order appear adversely to affect the height and weight of infants.
The WHO collaborative studies found this relationship and also that the combined age/pregnancy order variable has a bearing upon haemoglobin levels in children.
Also reported in the WHO collaborative studies were results of paediatric examinations which revealed that, among children below age five years, infections rose with family size.
Further, though mothers in some areas reported the contrary, clinical findings were that the incidence of fever and diarrhoea also increased with family size.
Parasitic infections were high regardless of family size and appeared unrelated to birth order.
Information in the WHO reports also suggests that higher percentages of children under age five suffer malnutrition in large families than in small ones and that the problem is greater among high parity children than among those of low birth order (Omran and Standley, 1976, 1981).
It should be borne in mind that family size and birth order are aspects of the same demographic phenomenon, i.e., the level of fertility or, in other words, the frequency and pattern of childbearing.
It is also relevant that the ability of families to deal with risks of early childhood morbidity is in good measure a matter of social and economic conditions (see e.g. Wray, 1971).
Large families are to a greater extent than others associated with low levels of female education, low family income, poor housing, inadequate prenatal and other medical care, insanitary environmental conditions and other, related factors.
Such comparative differences prevail in most developed and developing countries and in both rural and urban areas.
In the circumstances, programmes to alter reproductive patterns might incorporate special provisions for reaching individuals of lower socio-economic status.
IV.
CHILDBEARING PATTERNS AFFECTING FETAL MORTALITY
The high risk of death in infancy has its antecedent risk in the fetal stage.
Fetal death is a collective term for all pregnancy wastages, at times accounted for as miscarriages, abortions and/or still births.
Since late fetal death is the death of a fetus whose gestational age is 28 or more completed weeks, it may practically be taken as equivalent to a still birth.
Examination of factors that are associated with still birth or late fetal mortality is particularly relevant from the viewpoint of optimum conditions of childbearing.
Infant mortality, though obviously affected by "endogenous" factors (many of them, as previously shown, consequences of specific reproductive patterns), is also sensitive to other — socio-economic, cultural and environmental — conditions.
The influence of these latter, "exogenous" factors is so important that, for this reason, the level of infant mortality is often used as an index of development.
The role of exogenous factors, however, increases with age of the infants and becomes dominant only in the post-neonatal period, that is, after the first month of life while, during the first month, i.e. the neonatal period, the endogenous factors are the more influential (see United Nations, 1982, pp. 60–64).
Indeed, the nearer to the date of the birth, the higher the risk of death and the more dominant the influence of the endogenous factors.
(This tendency is also recognizable in the WFS surveys; see the results of a multivariate analysis by Hobcraft, et al., 1985, pp. 378–385).
In the perinatal mortality (mortality in the first week and the late fetal period), and particularly in late fetal mortality, effects of the endogenous factors and, along with them, the relevant reproductive patterns predominate.
1.
Maternal Age and Fetal Mortality
Though data on late fetal deaths are not available from the WFS, time series — by maternal age — derived from current vital statistics, were recently published for many developed and developing countries by the United Nations Statistical Office.
Though the registration of late fetal deaths is not considered complete in several reporting developed and in most developing countries, the data uniformly show the influence of maternal age on the viability of fetuses.
Late fetal death ratios vary with maternal age even more markedly but in the same matter as infant and, particularly, neonatal mortality (Table 11).
In general, mothers who are in their 20s have the best chance of giving birth to a live child while, in many countries, the chances that young teenagers and women in their late 40s will deliver a live child are extremely poor.
The relationship between maternal age and the viability of offspring, as measured by the late fetal death ratio, can be described by concave — "U" , "J" , or reverse "J" shaped — curves.
The shape of the curves representing the late fetal (or still birth) ratios, however, does not seem to change systematically with the overall level of late fetal mortality.
This may be partly due to the fact that, births to young teenagers being exceptional in many populations, not all countries reported separate data for the under 15 maternal age group.
Where data for the youngest maternal age group are reported, late fetal mortality is often so high even in economically more developed countries (for instance, every third, fifth and ninth  birth to young teenagers in Japan, the German Democratic Republic and Scotland, respectively, produces a dead baby) that the relationship takes a reverse "J" shape.
On the other hand, in countries where fetal deaths for the maternal age group under 15 are not reported separately but are included in the under 20 age group, the relationship takes a "J" shape, since the chances for giving birth a viable child are poorer at the oldest childbearing ages than at the late teens.
It can be observed, however, that minimum late fetal mortality falls more frequently in the 20–24 years age group in the European countries than in countries of other continents where the nadir more often occurs at ages 25–29.
It should be noted that the WHO collaborative studies also collected data on fetal deaths in select communities.
Though the studies did not include women aged 45 years and over, and the reports did not distinguish the youngest maternal age group from the 15–19 years age group, the findings are in accordance with the official national data (see Appendix, Table A.9).
The percentage of still births among all births was found generally high when the mother was less than 20 years.
The minimum fell somewhere between maternal ages 20 and 35 years and, from the minimum, the proportion of still births increased again towards older maternal age where, in most samples, it became higher than at the younger end of the maternal age scale.
In the WHO collaborative studies the investigation was also extended to early and intermediate fetal deaths.
However, the information obtained on all abortions does not exclusively reflect the biological effect of maternal age on the viability of the fetus, since no distinction was made between induced and spontaneous abortions.
Thus the data relate to spontaneous miscarriages as well as to induced abortions.
In addition, there was suggestive evidence in some areas that the number of voluntary abortions was not negligible, though many induced abortions were not reported.
In spite of these problems which suggest that the data should be interpreted with more caution than other information that originated in the WHO collaborative studies, the effect of maternal age on early and intermediate fetal mortality is unmistakable.
As Appendix Table A. 10 shows, in the communities studies, rising maternal age has an increasingly deleterious effect on viability.
Even though information was not collected from women who were 45 years old or over, the pregnancy wastage in the older childbearing ages for which data were obtained seems to be of devastating proportions.
In many communities, if the women were 40–44 years old, 30 per cent or more (in one community about 60 per cent) of their pregnancies ended with abortions.
In the WHO collaborative studies, the effect of maternal age on the risk of abortion is similar to that on still births or late fetal mortality.
In most samples, the relationship can be described by a marked "J" shaped curve, which implies unsuitability of the very young maternal ages and, particularly the late period of childbearing ages for healthy reproduction.
It should be noted, however, that the sharp rise of the "J" shaped curve at the older childbearing ages is probably due also to the fact that socio-economic considerations and the large family size already achieved by the mid-thirties may influence women in the older reproductive ages to resort to induced abortions.
Thus, the effect of socio-economic factors may coalesce with the effect of biological factors.
The impressions gained from the WHO collaborative studies on the relationship between maternal age and the capability of fetus to survive the early and intermediately period of gestation are supported by more reliable national data from a European country.
The data in Table 12, which contains the relevant early and intermediate fetal death ratios in Hungary by residence of mother, relate only to spontaneous abortions.
Obviously, even in a statistically developed country it is an almost insurmountable task to achieve completeness in reporting spontaneous abortions, since an early miscarriage, particularly in the first weeks of pregnancy, can be easily mistaken as a late menses and some spontaneous abortions may not seem sufficient cause to some women for them to seek medical attention.
(Indeed, underreporting of cases may be a reason for the relatively low rural miscarriage ratio in Table 12, which is lower than the ratio of the "other urban" places, while the still birth ratio that is based on complete registration of late fetal deaths was on the same level — 7.5 per 1,000 live births — in both rural and "other urban" areas.).
On the other hand, it is also possible that some abortions that were originally induced by primitive or illegal means will be finally treated by medical personnel and reported as spontaneous abortion.
All pitfalls considered, the data in Table 12 have a high degree of completeness and validity.
In addition, they also contain national information on the miscarriages of the youngest and oldest age groups (data by residence did not display these categories).
2.
Birth Order and Fetal Mortality
Available national statistics on late fetal deaths attest robustly to the relative futility of bearing high order births.
Ratios of still births to live births tend to be larger at high orders than at second order but, in developed countries, particularly, the ratios at sixth, but mainly seventh and higher birth orders were two to three times that among first order births.
In two developing countries, the lowest frequency of fetal mortality is at births above second but below sixth or seventh order.
As seen from statistics provided in Table 13, the pattern of this relationship assumes a "J" shape (i.e., lower at second that at first order and inclining progressively thereafter) in the developed countries, and tends towards a "J" or "U" form in some developing countries for which data are shown.
Thus, in the developed countries, the minimum risk of a late fetal death occurs among second order births, followed by an increase with rising birth order.
The deviant pattern shown for Norway may be attributable, among other things, to the exclusion of out-of-wedlock events.
The variant patterns seen in the developing countries, except Mauritius, may reflect poor data quality, or it may be that, in these countries, apart from births of first and very high order, number of previous births is not a strong determinant of the viability of a fetus of 28 or more weeks.
Results of a secondary analysis of statistic presented in the WHO collaborative studies (Omran and Standley, 1976; 1981) for communities in nine developing countries suggest that the minimum risk of late fetal mortality may occur at higher birth orders in developing than in developed countries (see Appendix, Table A.11).
This may be due in part to the fact that women in developing countries tend to achieve second or third parity at much younger ages than is the case in developed regions.
However, relatively small size of the samples may account in some measure for inconsistencies in the findings.
In any case, the overall pattern tends toward a "U" or "J" shape, with pregnancies of intermediate (from second to fifth, in general) order having, on the whole, the greatest probability of being delivered as a live birth.
The probability that a fetus will be aborted appears to increase in a linear or nearly geometric fashion with pregnancy order (Table A. 12).
Among the 22 religious, cultural and residence groups represented in the nine countries that participated in the WHO studies, this pattern is lacking in only six and, in them, the frequency of abortions is just slightly higher at first than at second pregnancies.
In some cases, abortion rates are very high at sixth and higher order pregnancies, ranging from one quarter to one half of all pregnancies.
However, these data combine spontaneous and induced abortions and thus reflect different causal phenomena.
Nonetheless, both types of abortion are pregnancy wastage, and their frequency in these data is further confirmation of the need for measures to enable young, zero-parity women and older ones with many children to avoid undesirable pregnancy outcomes, among other unwanted effects, and they should be targets for assistance in postponing or terminating childbearing, as appropriate.
3.
Birth Spacing and Late Fetal Mortality
The relatedness of fetal mortality to birth intervals is widely discussed in the relevant literature but, due perhaps to lack of reliable data even from developed countries, without resolution.
Still birth ratios by preceding birth interval were computed for one developed country (Hungary, 1967) based on reliable national vital statistics (see Tables 16 and 17).
The findings of this computation suggest that child spacing, as expected, has an effect on the viability of fetuses similar to that on the survival of infants.
The relationship between birth interval and frequency of still births seems to resemble "U" or "J" shaped curves, inasmuch as the still birth ratio is very high if the preceding birth interval is short (less than a year) and decreases after one completed year up to a five year interval but, if the next birth follows only after a longer interval, the chance that it will result in a stillborn baby increases again.
Though it produced data that permits analysis of the impact of child-spacing upon neonatal mortality, unfortunately the WFS did not provide information on fetal mortality.
On the other hand, in the WHO collaborative studies the investigation provided for the study of the effect of spacing on both still births and  abortions.
The data in Table 14, which classify percentages of pregnancies that ended in still births by length of preceding pregnancy interval pooled according to country of study, seem to confirm the validity of the Hungarian findings for developing countries.
In most cases, short spacing (less than one or one completed year) results more frequently in still births than two-three years (in many samples four years) of spacing.
In the Egyptian samples, for instance, the proportion of still births decreased with each additional year of preceding interval.
From our or five year intervals, the percentages of still births increase again with the length of birth intervals, although they usually do not equal the high percentages reported at short intervals.
It is noteworthy, that the optimum length of birth interval appears, in this context and within the constraints of these birth interval classes, to be 2–4 years.
Lack of robustness of the findings may be due to the relatively few numbers of still births in the interval classes and to other data problems, though the intervention of determinants that mediate the effect of birth interval, or some other factor cannot be excluded either.
However, as the second part of Table 14 shows, there tends to be a more marked, reverse "J" shaped relationship between the frequency of abortions and length of inter-birth interval, with by far the greatest risks occurring at intervals of less than one year, a finding that lends some credibility to the data.
While these results do not argue strongly for the maternal depletion theory, the findings give it moderate support, attesting to a probable   differential in fetal viability with the elapse of varying periods between pregnancies or births.
4.
Effect of Combined Demographic Factors Upon Late Fetal Mortality
Both maternal age and order of birth bear independently upon the probability of alate fetal death (Table 15).
The national data computed for Japan (1979–1980) and that combined for the German Democratic Republic (GDR) and Hungary (1976–80) show minimum risks of a still birth at the second birth order for women aged 25–44 years.
But when, at the time of the event, mothers are under age 25 in Japan or age 20 in the GDR and Hungary, the risk is smaller at first birth.
These maternal ages are also associated with rising risks at successively higher birth orders, i.e., the higher the order, the greater the risk.
The statistics in these countries contained too few births to women aged 45 and over to permit a useful assessment of the interacting effect of older age and birth order upon late fetal mortality.
In Japan, the relationship between maternal age and late fetal death ratios is "J" shaped at most birth orders, but the pattern is more variable in the two central European countries, where the ratios are either increasing with successive age   classes (beginning with the youngest) as the first, third (except at age group 25–29 years) and sixth and higher orders, or the relation is "J" shaped (somewhat lower at ages 20–24 than at ages under 20 and increasing thereafter, with the highest risks at the oldest ages) as at the second and fourth orders of reverse "J" shaped as at the fifth birth order.
Of the two determinants, maternal age appears to have the stronger influence, although the deleterious effect of fourth and higher birth order seems to be very strong at young maternal ages.
Indeed, it is worth remembering that the effect of birth order may vary with maternal age.
Though maternal age and birth order have an independent effect on the viability of the fetus, that act together.
According to these data, for instance, from the aspect of the viability of the fetus, it is better to have a second child at ages 30–34 than a first child at this age or even at age 24–29 years.
But, in support of the maternal depletion syndrome, perhaps   contrary to popular belief, it appears from these data that a baby has better chances of being born alive to a woman in the 40–44 years age group if it is the first than the sixth or a higher order.
If the pattern in Hungary (for which country data based on vital statistics in 1967 are available) is a common one, it would appear that, in the more developed countries, at least, maternal age and birth spacing also influence fetal viability independently of each other (Table 16).
In general, still birth ratios are lowest at four or five years spacing in most maternal age groups and increase towards both shorter and longer length of birth intervals.
At the same time, the independent influence of maternal age on still birth ratios can also be observed at each birth interval, at least in so far as the random fluctuations caused by the small number of cases permit observation.
As for the two factors together, the risks appear greatest where very low and very high (35 and over) maternal age combines with short birth intervals and where women over age 34 have children after intervals of 6 and more years.
Significantly, with the statistics classified as they are in these data sets, the lowest level of risk occurs when younger women keep at least two-three year intervals between consecutive births and four or five years elapse in the later reproductive ages.
The Hungarian vital statistics also give some insight at a national level into the effect of birth interval on the viability of different order offspring (Table 17).
Apart from random fluctuations, the deleterious effect of too short and too long spacing is seen for each order birth.
Still birth ratios also increase with birth order in each birth interval category.
At lower birth orders, however, the risk of a still birth seems to be greater if less than a year elapsed since the previous birth, although there are two few cases in most birth order groups to make this finding statistically significant.
But at fourth and, particularly, fifth and higher orders, very long intervals have the more adverse effects.
Both observations about the joint effects of birth order and birth interval run parallel with those found in connection with the joint effect of maternal age and birth interval, corresponding with the association of maternal age with birth order.
V. EFFECTS OF CHILDBEARING PATTERNS UPON MATERNAL MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Statistics that relate maternal health and mortality to reproductive patterns are sparse for developing and developed countries.
And for both, morbidity statistics are less accessible and less reliable than mortality data.
Reliable cause of death statistics are woefully lacking for developing countries and of less than desirable quality for many developed ones.
In addition, because health problems associated with childbearing are not of great importance in the vast majority of developed countries, such data on material morbidity as are available are both unsystematic and infrequent, and must be culled from relatively obscure sources.
1.
Maternal Mortality
According to a WHO estimate, about half a million women die annually of illnesses associated with the process of childbearing (WHO, 1985, p. 5).
It is estimated, moreover, that in those countries that reported maternal deaths by age, for every 100,000 live births, 56 women die from related causes (Table 18).
But, considering that the majority of reports originated from developed countries, and in view of the incompleteness of registration of deaths in developing countries and the quality of reporting on causes of death, this must necessarily be a low estimate.
The real frequency of worldwide maternal mortality may be as much as three to five times higher than this ratio.
Rates of maternal mortality are much higher in the developing than in the developed regions, averaging 10.1 and 9.3, respectively, for nine Northern European countries and for Canada and the United States combined compared to about 80 deaths per 100,000 live births for the Arab World and around 70 for Asia and Oceania.
However, WHO reported that, in countries where the problem is more acute, maternal mortality rates are, perhaps, as much as 200 times higher than the lowest rates in developed countries.
In every country that published relevant national statistics, maternal age has a strong effect on maternal mortality, showing a much higher risk of dying of maternity related causes for those nearer the limits of the childbearing period than for those in their prime childbearing ages.
The statistics in Table 18 also point to the markedly greater risks of childbearing at ages 45 and over than at ages 15–44.
Also, in many Asian and Western Hemisphere region countries, maternal mortality is distressingly higher among young teenage mothers than among mothers of all other ages.
Where a comparison can be made, the data show that, in the more developed countries, the risk of material mortality is greater at ages 45 and over than below age 15 but, as mentioned above, in the region of Asia and Oceania and in Mexico, mothers below age 15 incur by far the greater risks.
(Comparable, reliable statistics are not available for Africa).
In all regions for which data could be obtained, the "J" or "U" shaped relationship is found.
Inequities between developing and developed regions in maternal mortality risks at ages below 15 and above 44 are phenomenal, reflecting clearly the power of exogenous factors to modify the impact of maternal age upon maternal mortality.
This is most evident in the data on mortality due to obstetric causes, which reflects among other things the quality and accessibility of prenatal care and the conditions surrounding care attending delivery.
With the exception of Romania (where the extremely high maternal mortality caused by abortions may be due to illegal interruption of pregnancies as a consequence of abrupt termination of a previously free induced abortion system), maternal mortality due to obstetric causes is much higher than those caused by abortion.
Illegal abortions may also be suspected as one of the causes of the relatively high abortion mortality in some Latin American countries.
Indeed, according to a WHO estimate, in some Latin American countries, about one half of maternal deaths are due to illegal abortions.
In other developing countries where maternal mortality is high, the main causes are haemorrhage, often with anaemia as an underlying cause and sepsis (WHO, 1985, p.5).
The obstetric related problems, as defined in Table 15, are far more frequently the cause of maternal deaths at maternal ages 45 and over than at ages below 15 years.
The general pattern of maternal mortality from these causes assumes the familiar "J" shape, reflecting that these data provide evidence that, in this context at least, optimal conditions for childbearing are somewhere in the age group 15–24.
(If mortality rates for the age group 20–24 could have been calculated, the nadir would probably have been in that age class).
With the outstanding exception of some Asian countries, among the 56 countries represented in Table 18, the risks of maternal mortality due to abortion are more similar for girls under age 15 and women over 44 than the chances of succumbing to obstetric related causes.
As regards abortion, this may reflect inclusion of induced pregnancy terminations in the data and the close relationship of this to non-biological factors compared to spontaneous abortions.
Even so, the mortality rates for abortion tend generally to rise with age beginning with the 15–24 class, showing among other things, a probable increase in unwanted births with age and, therefore, with rising parity.
It should be noted that, jointly with maternal age, parity is also associated with maternal mortality.
The association takes the form usually of a "J" shaped curve; i.e. the risk of maternal death decreases from zero parity one, then steadily increases towards higher parities.
There are many channels through which childbearing affects the mother's health.
Parity was studied, for instance, in connection with the incidence of diabetes.
Among other things, frequent births and short birth intervals may obviously also induce some physical hazards for mothers, however, the effect is not well documented.
2.
Maternal Morbidity
The reproductive role of women exposes them to many health problems, including diseases associated with malnutrition, infections and diseases brought on by inadequate prenatal care.
But there are also maternal ailments attributable to the number of births, the ages at which women bear children and possibly also to the amount of time that elapses between births, presumably, among other things, because the reproductive pattern influences ability to meet demands that pregnancy and breastfeeding make upon the body.
Analyses of data for several developed countries confirm that maternal age and parity appear profoundly to affect mothers' health before and after confinement.
Results of studies carried out in Great Britain and the United States serve as illustrations.
Maternal complications occurring in reputable hospitals in the United States during the 1960s revealed a strong association of childbearing patterns with complications of pregnancy and delivery.
The portion of women with complications of  toxaemia rose sharply with age; rates were two to three times higher for older women (40–44) than for younger ones, depending upon parity.
The highest frequency was recorded for women who bore their first child (nulliparous) at ages 35–39 (14 per cent).
The risk of anaemia was much greater for young mothers, particularly those under age 20 and more so for teenagers having the second child than for those having their first.
Other complications of pregnancy were found to decrease almost linearly with age of women.
Older women experienced higher rates of complication at delivery overall, regardless of parity.
However, rates of placenta previa increased markedly with age and with parity when age was controlled.
Rates of 1.9 and 1.7 per 100 births were reported for primiparous women in the age groups 15–24 and 35 and over, respectively.
But for multiparous women in the same age groups, the levels were 2.7 and 10.4 (quoted in Nortman, 1984, p.18).
In the study conducted in Great Britain during the late 1950s, an important finding was that 28 per cent of multiparous women aged 35 and over had elevated diastolic blood pressure compared to 17 per cent of those under age 25.
(It is noteworthy that women known to have had hypertension in the first half of pregnancy were excluded from the analysis).
The hazards of childbearing at older ages were also indicated by results of a study of hospital statistics on first-time pregnant women in the United States.
It revealed frequencies of abnormal fetal presentation by older women (40–44) and younger ones (25–29) to be 31 and 18 per cent, respectively, and postpartum haemorrhage due to uterine inertia of 6.2 and 2.7 for the same two age groups.
The analyst noted that, since these were first time pregnancies, the increase in complications with age could not be attributed to parity.
The literature does not show consensus as to the association between age and maternal health, but the state of knowledge may represent the inability of researchers, with the limited data available to them, to examine representative international conditions with comparable data.
Where statistics on socio-economic factors were accessible and the effect of these could be controlled, age was shown to be somewhat less powerful as a determinant of health among adolescents during pregnancy and confinement.
Studies of this phenomena in Canada and Great Britain during the 1970s and some in the United States found little difference among older and younger teenagers in complications of pregnancy and delivery, and some of the observed difference, as for example, in prenatal complications, were explained by socio-economic factors, not by biological ones.
And in a study of births to girls aged 12–16 in hospitals of Liverpool, England, variations in the incidence of anaemia were found to be attributable to social class, not age.
The analyst contended that "studies that find age differences (among teenagers) tend to find them in measures that are sensitive to socio-economic factors such as the prenatal complications of  toxaemia and anaemia, rather than in biologically constrained outcomes of labour and delivery" .
Furthermore, an analysis of data for Denmark and Sweden showed that, with first quality prenatal care, young maternal age (even 14 and earlier) need not carry excessive health risks.
In Sweden, percentages of deliveries without complications, classified by maternal age, were as follows: age 20 and over — 67 per cent; ages 18- 19 — 70; age 17 and under — 80 (Baldwin and Caine, 1980).
While first quality health care may mitigate the maleffects of youthful maternal age upon the women, such favourable conditions are not ordinarily found in developing countries nor in some of the more industrialized ones.
A WHO study, in which health centres in nine developing countries collaborated in an effort to determine the effects of family formation patterns upon health, analysed the health risks associated with the number and spacing of pregnancies, maternal age, birth order and family size of samples of eligible women under age 45.
Of the various symptoms for which women in selected communities of four countries (Iran, Lebanon, Philippines and Turkey) were tested, prolapse varied most consistently and importantly with parity.
Other reported and/or diagnosed gynaecological ailments varied little with parity, as did the mean diastolic blood pressure.
A companion analysis of findings from samples of eligible women in Colombia also revealed prolapse to be the gynaecological malady most closely associated with parity.
Further, as parity and age increased, there was also a significant rise in the prevalence of infectious and other diseases of the cervix and of the female genital organs.
But neither the mean systolic nor the mean diastolic blood pressure varied with parity.
It is also reported from a study on Moslem women in Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka and Sudan that, as parity rose, so did the incidence of anaemia, toxaemia , haemorrhage, fetus malpresentation and blood disorders.
Women at fifth and higher parity required blood transfusions twice to three times more frequently than did women of low parity.
It has also been noted, on the basis of the same data, that haemorrhage near the end of pregnancy was least common among young nulliparous women and most frequent among those who were older and of high parity, and that studies of multiparas, in both developed and developing countries, have found postpartum haemorrhage to be more common among women of high parity.
Other research has also confirmed that women risk serious health hazards by repeated childbearing.
A cross national analysis of data on women in Maternity Care Monitoring Programmes determined that anaemia was twice as prevalent among women of fourth and higher order as among those with three or fewer children.
In Europe, incidence of anaemia among women amounted to one per cent of those at zero parity and two per cent of those having their fourth or higher order child.
Comparable percentages for Central America were 6 and 11, while the sharply higher levels in India were posted at 21 and 40 per cent, respectively.
The studies examined did not seek to determine the relative importance of age and parity to development of maternity related ailments.
Achievement of very high parity (six children or more) occurs much more frequently in developing than in developed countries and, from the information at hand, at least, it appears that the effect of maternal age and parity upon maternal health may be more profound in the developing regions; certainly, related illnesses affect more women and with more devastating results.
There is growing interest in the effect of the length of inter-birth interval upon health of mothers, but data that would permit fruitful analysis are scarce.
Some researchers have sought information about this from findings about the health of offspring.
For example, one study carried out in El Salvador concluded that children born after short intervals were of poor nutritional status owing to the effect of the short interval on breastfeeding.
However, evidence of maternal depletion is generally inconclusive.
The effects of inter-birth intervals on mothers are difficult to isolate.
Without systematic data comparably defined, it will be difficult indeed to advance the level of knowledge as to relationships between mothers' health and well-being and their fertility patterns.
Although the reasons for observed variations in pregnancy and delivery complications by maternal age and parity are not full understood, the fact of these differentials remains, and when women are in the very early or late childbearing ages, of zero or high parity, they are at risk and are therefore in need of care and of health and family planning information and service.
More research is needed to improve the amount and quality of information on the relationship between reproductive patterns and maternal health; to assess whether and how women in developing and developed countries are differentially affected; and to separate effects that are social and economic, from those relating to medical care and technology and from those due to the biological factors of age, parity and inter-birth interval.
VI.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONDITIONS OF CHILDBEARING AFFECTING FETAL, INFANT AND CHILDHOOD MORTALITY
The bearing of children within favourable age limits and at optimum intervals and the restriction of their numbers promotes by no means ensures child health and well-being.
Certain socio-economic conditions and environmental factors appear directly to influence the viability of infants and the prospects of their survival through early childhood.
A considerable amount of statistical data in support of this thesis has accrued for developing countries from results of the World Fertility Survey, but published statistics for the more developed countries remain sparse.
It is noteworthy that, whereas the demographic conditions of optimum childbearing can be largely, though not entirely, controlled, parents and individuals are unable to regulate at will the socio-economic and environmental circumstances that affect infant and child health and mortality and, by inference, optimum conditions of childbearing.
Declines in levels of infant and early childhood mortality tend to take place in tandem with improvements in education, particularly of women, urbanization, improved sanitation and housing and the growth of income and wealth, factors that are, not accidentally, associated with the rationalization of reproductive behaviour.
But since the changes do not occur simultaneously throughout the population there are likely to be found, at any given time, differences among population sub-groups in exogenous conditions that influence the health and mortality of very young children.
Some of these factors and their relevance to effective childbearing are discussed below.
1.
Rural-Urban Residence
The impact of the mother's residence, as to rural or urban place, upon her child's health and its prospects of surviving early childhood is found in most studies and from most relevant statistics to be very important.
Indeed, this influence may precede the child's birth.
This is because, along with rural-urban differences in health, sanitation, nutrition standards and other relevant measurable factors that can affect the mother's health before and during pregnancy, there are also rural-urban differences in folk customs, traditions and beliefs and other intangibles that bear upon reproduction and reproductive behaviour.
However, intensive prenatal health care, higher education of women, good economic opportunities in rural areas as well as the disappearance of rural-urban socio-economic differences, while maintaining healthy environmental and work conditions, may reverse the situation, as it is shown by the data in Table 12.
In the least advanced countries, such differences may be only moderate, but in developing countries that have experienced an important degree of modernization, there may be considerable variation.
Thus, overall level of national development of degree of urbanization may influence the relationship of mother's residence to levels of health and mortality among infants and children below the age of five years and may account, in part, for some differences in patterns among countries that are noted below.
Among the 40 developing countries that participated in the WFS, there were two in which the level of infant mortality was higher in the metropolitan area than in rural places, eight in which the level was highest in other urban places than in either rural areas or the major urban areas and 29 countries for which data indicated infant mortality to be highest in rural places.
In Benin, for example, infant mortality was more than three times higher in rural areas than in the major city, whereas in Sudan, levels in the two types of places were similar.
But in Haiti, the metropolitan level exceeded the rural by 53 per cent and levels in both areas were above that in "other urban" places.
This lack of consistency in the pattern of infant childhood mortality levels by residence of mother was also seen in the data for toddlers (i.e. children aged one year) and children aged 2 to 3 years.
On the whole, however, where metropolitan and urban health conditions are not detrimental, children born to rural mothers have poorer chances of surviving infancy and early childhood than do those born to mothers residing in urban, particularly metropolitan, areas.
The advantage to child health and survival of mother's urban residence is amplified by the relationship of the factors to mother' migration history.
In all but seven of 38 WFS countries located in three major developing regions and having the requisite statistics, the mortality of infants whose mothers had migrated from a rural to an urban place was higher than of those whose mothers continued to reside in rural areas of that country, while statistics for 26 out of 36 WFS developing countries suggest that movement of a woman from an urban to a rural place increases the health hazards and reduces the survival chances of infants.
Death rates of toddlers and children aged 2–3 years whose mothers had moved from urban to rural areas were lower than of children born to non-migrant urban mothers in all but eight and four countries, respectively.
It has been noted elsewhere that there are many community level variables (schools, adequacy of water supply, transportation, medical personnel and facilities, etc) that affect child health and the parents' ability to overcome health problems and hazards.
These factors differ among communities and between rural and urban areas within a country.
To them may be added differences in fertility levels and patterns, in prevalence of contraceptive use and in organized activities to regulate fertility.
As a rule, large cities, especially the principal metropolises, have the largest per capita supply of trained medical personnel, the more modern health facilities, a more adequate supply of medicines, and better communication and transportation facilities, all of which support higher health standards.
However, they do not always offer better sanitation and water supply than can be found in the smaller towns and rural areas.
Thus, while major cities in most developing countries offer better chances of child survival overall, some do not, as in Guyana and, as noted above, also in Haiti, where infant mortality levels in the largest cities are 21 and 53 per cent higher, respectively, than in the rural areas.
It is of relevance in this context that, as will be emphasized later, urban parents tend to be better educated than their rural counterparts.
Significantly, one multivariate analysis revealed that the urban advantage as regards child mortality is reduced, once the influence of education is taken into account.
Thus, factors and conditions that mediate the influence of biological and health  factors upon probabilities of infant and early childhood morbidity and mortality tend to be more characteristic or urban dwellers and of major urban centres than of rural and small town places and the people who inhabit them.
It is suggested that this accounts, at least in part, for the fact that in most developing and some developed countries infants and young children of rural mothers generally face a lower probability of defeating life hazards than do those born to urban mothers.
As noted earlier, though urban places generally afford better survival prospects, the relative importance of the mother's residence for infant and child mortality is determined mostly by her level of education.
In some countries, urban residence appears to have health and mortality benefits only for the children of the better educated mothers.
Further, the inequality in child survival probabilities (by level of mother's education) has been found to be greater in urban than in rural places and small towns, indicating that the former offers better educated, knowledgeable mothers means of compensating for child health hazards that are unavailable to uneducated, poorly informed women.
It follows, as some studies have revealed, that improvements in the environmental conditions that represent life hazards have a more favourable impact on survival chances of infants and children of the uneducated than of educated mothers, who are better able to neutralize the effects of adverse circumstances.
2.
Education
Major urban and rural areas tend to differ greatly in life styles and in their inhabitants' perceptions.
A primary reason for this may be the differences in average educational status, which tends to be lower among rural people, though it has been shown that rural residence (from birth) can influence child mortality levels over and beyond the effect caused by differences between the two areas in educational standards.
The latter fact notwithstanding, the literature is replete with confirmation of the powerful influence that mother's education has upon levels of infant and, particularly, early childhood mortality in developing and developed countries alike.
According to one study that utilized multivariate analysis, its effect is large and significant even after many other factors have been taken into account.
One analysis of WFS statistics for 10 developing countries led to the conclusion that, although the mother's attainment of primary schooling has a significant impact upon child survival, the step from primary to secondary school was more critical.
However, among 40 WFS countries, there were 26 in which infant mortality declined monotonically with rising level of mother's education.
And in the remaining 14, levels were in all cases lower if the mother had seven years or more of schooling than if she had none, though the death rates were higher if the women had 1–3 or 4–6 years of formal education than if she had none.
The latter finding may be a matter of sampling error, since a number of the 14 surveys reported relatively few women in those categories.
On the other hand, infant mortality may in fact be higher in those countries when the mother has 1–3 or 4–6 years of schooling than if she has none.
One theory holds that under-achievers, such as women who drop out of school before completing a given level, may also have some demographic characteristics conducive to adverse infant and child mortality conditions, such as undesirable fertility patterns, for example.
Mother's education has a more marked influence upon the survival of children aged 1–4 years than upon infants since, at these older ages, the biological and physiological factors are less influential and social and economic conditions become the more important determinants of health and mortality.
Findings for Peru serve as an example: levels of mortality among children whose mothers had no schooling were 3.0, 12.3 and 12.1 times higher, respectively, for infants, children aged 1 years and those 2–3 years old than those whose mothers had 7 or more years of schooling.
But while such differences are common, they do not appear to be universal.
Fiji reported a reverse pattern for all but infants and, in Guyana, better education was associated with lower mortality among children aged 2–3 years, but not among younger children.
The husband's educational level also influences early childhood mortality.
Studies based on WFS statistics indicate that the pattern of relationships mirrors that noted above in respect to mother's education, and that the effect is distinct from that of father's occupation.
However, father's education exerts a less powerful influence than does mother's schooling.
But where relatively very few women are educated, as in Africa and the Indian sub-continent, for example, the impact of husband's education is strong.
According to some scholars, parents education in general has a greater effect on survival than do income and access to health facilities combined.
Literacy alone carries advantages in so far as child mortality is concerned.
There is evidence in the WFS statistics that the probability of an infant surviving early childhood is greater if both parents are literate than if one or both is illiterate.
Significantly, in the 36 developing countries for which the data were obtained, if only one of the couple was literate, the child's chances of surviving to age 5 were greatest if it was the mother rather than the father who could read and write.
However, in families where only the father had achieved literacy, child mortality is lower than in others where neither parent had done so.
Moreover, in most of the countries, the impact of literacy upon child survival was much more pronounced at ages 1–4 than in infancy.
3.
Other Factors
Disparities in infant and early childhood mortality rates have been found among ethnic groups within developing countries that participated in the WFS, which suggests a role of cultural practices in differentiating levels of child mortality.
The effect of certain household characteristics upon child survival has also been reported.
These characteristics include quality of water supply, toilet facilities and electricity.
As an example, it was found for one Latin American country that the mother's individual characteristics were the most important determinants of neonatal mortality, but such housing conditions as type of water supply and sewage disposal were almost equally important.
This pattern was not found in two other countries of the same region, due among other things, perhaps, to differences in levels of mothers' education.
Economic activity of the mother may also have an effect on child survival.
A  multivariate analysis of WFS and other statistics confirmed that mortality of children under age five is higher if the mother is employed than if she is not in the labour force.
This relationship persisted after other factors (residence, maternal education, marital status and father's occupation) were taken into account.
But in 24 of 40 WFS countries, among women who worked, levels of infant mortality were lower when the mother was employed away from home in anon-farm occupation (some education and skills) than when she had not worked at all since marriage.
However, it is questionable whether this relationship would persist, if a control for mother's education were introduced.
No strong pattern emerged in the effect of mothers' place of occupation upon the mortality of toddlers and of children aged 2–3 years.
Infants and young children of mothers whose husbands are professional and white collar were found in the WFS inquiries to enjoy a survival advantage over those counterparts whose fathers have lower status occupations.
However, results of at least one analysis of these statistics suggests that this association of father's occupation with early childhood mortality may be attributed to the fact that his occupation is an indicator of household economic circumstances.
Several other individual and household characteristics could be examined for their influence upon probabilities of early childhood survival.
In addition, if data allowed, certain types of community level characteristics might also usefully be examined for their impact upon child mortality and morbidity.
However, the information provided above is sufficient to show that, whereas there are guidelines for the bearing of healthful children and for the preservation of maternal health and life, guidelines easily followed by adherence to certain demographic facts, other, socio-environmental, conditions mediate the extent to which rational childbearing patterns ensure maternal and child health and well-being.
VII.
IMPLICATIONS
In the foregoing, it has been shown that patterns of nuptiality and of reproduction influence levels and conditions of infant and early childhood and maternal mortality and morbidity.
The woman's age at first marriage or union and at first birth, the number of children born and order of birth, and the amount of time that elapses between births directly or indirectly impinge upon the viability of young children and the probability of their survival at least beyond five years and have an effect on maternal health and mortality.
With the possible exception of age at first union, these factors are readily susceptible to control and can be moderated.
Rational reproductive behaviour, supported by intelligent application of family planning techniques, will modify these demographic patterns and reduce their maleffects.
1.
Age at Marriage
Although the governments of many developing and developed countries have indicated an age at which marriage is permissible for both sexes, infraction is common.
Traditionally, societies have specified an age as being appropriate for marriage or union formation and the commencement of family building.
Efforts to alter these patterns in the absence of other institutional changes tend to encounter societal obdurateness.
In addition, as is now the experience of populations in a number of the economically more advanced countries, when certain changes in society conflict with other conditions, there may be compensating changes that are not necessarily desirable.
For example, in developed countries, as current education standards require more extended formal education and increasing proportions of women subscribe to these advancements, as younger women are enabled to and elect to join the labour force, marriage is postponed, and the secular trend towards younger age at marriage is reversed.
But either as a compensation or as a contributing factor, the entrance of women into non-legal unions at increasingly earlier ages has occurred, in some cases in tandem with late age at marriage.
One dramatic concomitant is rising fertility among unmarried teenage girls, though changes in women's education standards and work status can hardly be held accountable for such a sharp upswing in teenage fertility as the past decade has witnessed.
In developing countries today, in spite of the relevant laws, the age at which girls first marry or enter a union depends largely upon cultural standards and the tolerance for deviation.
In some societies, there are no options, no acceptable alternatives to early marriage.
Where that is the norm, there tends to be little investment in the education of girls.
In these regions, early marriage is clearly incompatible with the formal schooling of women; the more educated the woman, the less likely she is to have ever married.
As noted above, the mother's education has a profound influence on the probability that her children will survive early childhood, yet her opportunities to obtain schooling are compromised by early marriage and the conventions that prescribe it.
In developing countries particularly, early marriage has as one consequence  a lengthening of the period that women spend in childbearing.
Indeed, cultures that support early marriage tend, with few exceptions, to be those in which, barring marital disruption, reproduction continues until menopause.
But the bearing of children at advanced ages to satisfy a demand for large numbers of them as, for example, in the Africa region is associated both with higher levels of maternal mortality, early childhood mortality and the morbidity of infants and young children.
Hence, societies' encouragement of early marriage as a step towards achievement of a large family may hinder rather than aid attainment of family size goals.
In high fertility societies such as are found in the Africa region, the modification of these goals would be a first step in efforts to reduce maternal and child mortality.
2.
Age at Birth of Child
In the opinion of some scholars, the effect of maternal age upon child mortality is mediated by social and economic factors.
Others have emphasized that the relationship of mother's age at birth of child to its survival through infancy and early childhood is through the mother's physical health and maturity, particularly in the tendency of these to cause low birth weight, birth defects and congenital malformations.
If childbearing were restricted to ages 20–34, the consequent five per cent reduction in child mortality would have little aggregate effect in countries of the Caribbean region and some in East Asia, where mortality is comparatively low, but at rates of 250 and more child deaths per 1,000 population aged 0–4 years, as in several countries of the Africa and Indean Ocean regions, this could represent a considerable number of deaths averted.
But such an altered pattern of reproduction would also contribute to a reduction of maternal and child morbidity.
There would be a comparatively lower incidence among young children of heart defects and such life long debilities as result from chromosomal aberrations, the frequency of which rises with maternal age, a relationship that occurs in both developing and developed regions.
In addition to the health benefits that would accrue from postponement of childbearing until age 20 or after, in some countries, there would also be social gains, including the option of longer schooling.
And these would in turn improve the circumstances of childbearing and child rearing.
This is particularly relevant in the light of the growing evidence that much of the unwanted sequela from adolescent childbearing has social and economic origins.
In the light of the nearly universal trend towards earlier age at menarche and the rising age at marriage, there is in many countries a resulting larger gap in time between sexual and social maturity and between fecundable age and the ages at which childbearing becomes socially desirable.
And women in many developed countries are tending increasingly to adjust by forming non-legal unions that often produce offspring.
In the case of adolescents, this course can have important repercussions both for the individual woman and for the society though, in some countries, social policy moderates the incidence of the phenomenon and cushions its effect.
It is important to note that, in any given society, mating patterns are not easily  manipulated by policy and edicts, but change in response to education, socio-cultural processes and aspects of development.
Thus, an enlightened programme to combat pregnancy among teenagers in developed countries, for example, would involve education about family planning and responsible parenthood, along with attempts at achievement of the postponement of mating.
On the other hand, since most teenage mothers in the great majority of developing countries are married, corrective measures might be concerned first with advancing the age at first marriage through an alteration of the cultural elements that prescribe early marriage and affecting greater use of contraceptives among married teenagers.
3.
Birth Order and Family Size
Higher rates of fetal loss and of mortality in infancy among first than among subsequent births characterizes populations in which fertility is high and women are youngest at first birth.
Because experience of a child death is casually associated with non-use of contraceptives, where infant mortality is high among first births, as in all but the Western Hemisphere region and in developed countries, the first experience of a child death tends to occur when the woman is young, and she is then less likely ever to use contraceptives.
Family planning and health programmes should focus upon such women to gain their acceptance of family planning and their understanding of its benefits for themselves and their children.
The markedly lower probability that children of higher birth order than of intermediate parity will survive early childhood obliterates any gain that there might otherwise be from bearing many children to ensure survival of a moderate number; sustained childbearing at high parities is itself a cause of infant and early childhood as well as maternal morbidity and mortality.
It has been estimated that, in developing countries, elimination of fifth and higher order births alone would effect a maternal mortality reduction of four per cent, while elimination of fourth and higher order births along with the confinement of reproduction to ages 20–34 would reduce infant mortality by 12 per cent , other things being equal.
Smaller families are healthier families from the perspective of both mother and children.
Many unwanted health conditions are less common in these than in large families of five or six and more children.
In view of the value placed upon health and survival universally, the health benefits of a few, well spaced children, when taught in the context of fertility regulation and wasteful reproductive patterns, represent a primary motive for family planning.
4.
Length of Inter-Birth Interval
Among the fertility patterns associated with the health of young children, length of the interval between births has the greatest impact.
Several recent studies have confirmed the efficacy of lengthy spacing.
From one analysis of data for 25 developing countries, it was determined that, if all children were born at least two years apart, about one in five infant deaths would be averted.
According to another report that was based upon essentially the same data, the spacing of second and higher order births at least two years apart would reduce  infant mortality by 10 per cent and the death rate of children aged 1–4 years by 21 per cent.
In traditional societies where prolonged breastfeeding has been the custom, the advantages of lengthy spacing are widely recognized though, as in Kenya, the tradition has begun to fade among some peoples along with the advance of modernization.
Because the ability of breastfeeding to sustain the period of infecundity due to  amenorrhoea over long periods depends, inter alia, upon the frequency and intensity of suckling, and in the light of the generalized view that lengthy spacing is essential to child survival, in most African and some other societies, breastfeeding is reinforced by abstinence.
But the growing employment of women in the modern sectors of the economy and the declining ability to enforce post-partum abstinence in the conditions or urban life have curtailed adherence to these traditions.
The pervasiveness of these practices in the past and the desire for healthful spacing that remains among many peoples should be the principle upon which fertility regulation by modern means is introduced.
Large families are preferred in many cultures, though the people nonetheless desire that there be reasonably lengthy intervals between births.
Yet family planning programmes have almost invariably focused upon the cessation of childbearing after two or three children, a tactic that has been the signal to many women and couples that the service did not meet their needs.
If couples learn and adopt means of spacing at adequate intervals, if breastfeeding is prolonged and if appropriate contraceptives are used during the period of lactation (where abstinence is not practised), the result will not only be improved health and mortality conditions but also a concomitant spread of knowledge as to means of terminating childbearing.
Achievement of longer intervals between births would also reduce completed family size, and the elimination of high order birth, with their comparatively poorer survival chances, would bring about an amelioration of maternal and child morbidity and mortality conditions.
Socio-economic and environmental conditions and levels of medical technology and practice can either mediate or reinforce the influence of nuptiality and reproductive patterns upon fetal, infant, early childhood and maternal health and mortality.
The socio-economic conditions are not readily amenable to change, interrelated as they are with culture, mores and national capacity for development.
Yet, the extent to which improvements can be made in education, among women particularly, in the modernization of water supply and sanitation systems, and in the adequacy of medical care, among other things, will influence the way in which reproductive patterns relate to child and maternal morbidity and mortality.
Equal access of rural and urban people to education, health and family planning facilities would reduce differences in the rural-urban mortality rates.
And improvement in the working conditions of pregnant women, such as exclusion from exposure to vibration and radiation, for example, would improve both maternal and fetal health.
Family planning can alleviate these health and mortality conditions, but success is more probable if relevant programmes are implemented within the context of development.
VIII.
OVERVIEW
1.
Discussion of Findings
Much of the ill health and untimely mortality that befalls mothers and very young children in developing countries is directly attributable to patterns of reproduction and family size.
The elements of family building that are capable of such impact are age of woman at first marriage or union and at birth of each child, parity and family size, and length of inter-birth interval.
Barring very special circumstances, these events and patterns are within the control of individuals and couples that possess the knowledge and means of family planning.
Yet, owing to the intervention of many factors, the deliberate regulation of fertility by other than traditional means (i.e. control by breast-feeding and post-partum abstinence) is commonplace only in some of the economically more advanced countries.
People in most developing countries want large families.
In conditions of high mortality, they recognize that attainment of this goal requires continuous childbearing, although the scientific evidence is that this defeats the drive towards the goal.
But when women experience child loss, the rationale of family planning for health or other purposes tends to have little meaning for them, and many reject non-traditional means of spacing or limiting births.
Culture defines status, and fro women and men in many societies achievement or retention of status depends upon the number of children that one has; for the women, having many children may be the only means of acquiring status within the family and the community.
In some cultures, the demands made and penalties imposed by family and society ensure that women will bear many children.
For these reasons, too, the women may find unattractive the idea of controlling the number and timing of births by other than traditional means, some of which are ineffective.
Yet, the physical demands of numerous pregnancies too closely spaced may have maleffects for the mother and child, and commencement of childbearing before the woman is physically mature may represent a serious risk to health and life for the mother and her young children.
Babies born to teenagers, especially those who are unmarried as is frequently the case in developed countries, and to older women with many children are often unwanted.
Certainly, the young women may, in any case, be unprepared for motherhood.
Though statistics are lacking, it seems reasonable to conjecture that these conditions foster child abuse and neglect, even infanticide.
The latter was, for instance, a commonly applied solution to unwanted births and illegitimacy in 19th century Japan.
While the WFS statistics show that maternal age and child's birth order influence child mortality, the effect is not such that confining these traits to desirable limits would reduce infant mortality to the extent that, say, mother's education would, although important improvements could be effected.
The association of maternal age and parity or birth order with child health and mortality reflects in part the relationship of these two demographic attributes to social and economic factors.
And in this context, the latter are held to have the stronger impact.
Conversely, the length of inter-birth interval strongly influences the health and mortality both of the  child that precedes the interval and the one that follows it; both are impaired by short intervals.
Yet, it is debatable whether or how length of the interval influences the mother's health or survival.
In societies that place a high value upon children and childbearing (and in many others as well), women may not be able to determine independently when they will marry, whether and when they will use non-traditional means of birth regulation or how many children they will have.
The family may determine the time of marriage, and the husband, his parents or the wife's parents or another person may make decisions that dictate the number and spacing of births.
In these circumstances, it is required that information about preferred reproductive patterns and the regulation of births should be provided to all who share in the decision-making processes.
The growing tendency for women in many developed countries to postpone legal marriage until between ages 25 and 30 years and then to begin having children also implies health risks.
This is true also in respect to the accelerated decline in age of women at first union and the high frequencies of early teenage pregnancy.
These trends reflect, in part, the changing role and importance of the family as an institution as well as the changing position of women.
However, as studies have disclosed, late age of mother at birth of a child is everywhere associated with health impairments.
And while childbearing by teenagers in the 15–19 age group does not appear to carry excessive health risks in the more advanced nations, in some of these countries, the risks to personal well-being can be considerable.
The effects of reproductive patterns upon maternal and child health and on their general well-being are modified by a number of social and other factors, among which are the mother's education, father's education, occupation and income, and mother's residence as to rural or urban place, but the mother's education is by far the most powerful.
Educated women have healthier children and enjoy better health themselves.
It is posited here that the maleffects of reproductive patterns upon maternal and child health and mortality represent largely unnecessary personal and social burdens, some of which can be eliminated by successful family planning and some by the formal education of both women and men, but especially women.
It borders upon the tautological to focus upon the relationships between unhealthful reproductive patterns and the demographic characteristics of women who do or do not use contraceptives.
But the evidence available confirms that the women most susceptible to maternal morbidity and mortality and who are most likely to experience loss of an infant or a child under age five belong to groups among whom contraception is relatively less frequently practised, i.e. under age 20 and over age 39 (in some countries, over age 34), with one or no children or many children, a rural resident, and/or with primary school education or less.
Obviously, the effective use of contraception precludes short birth intervals.
From a policy perspective, it may be considered propitious that the patterns of fertility that impair the health of infants and young children are the same reproductive characteristics that bear in a  maleficent sense upon the well-being of mothers.
This confluence simplifies the task of social policy, inasmuch as measures that will alleviate many health problems of young children will also have a salutary effect upon mothers.
Information provided to the public about health aspects of reproduction should therefore reflect the relationship between patterns of fertility and maternal and child health.
Present knowledge implies that the favourable alteration of these fertility patterns will result in improved maternal and child health and a reduction of their mortality.
Simplistically, it would appear that this change could be accomplished merely by making family planning information, services and supplies available to all women of reproductive age and motivating them to use the services, confining childbearing to ages 20–34, reducing the total number of pregnancies and lengthening inter-birth intervals, but much more is involved.
It cannot be overemphasized that many non-biological factors mitigate the influence of fertility patterns upon health and mortality.
As seen in Table 2, the effect of maternal age changed, in Hungary, as the level of infant mortality declined.
And it is well established that infant mortality is a highly sensitive barometer of socio-economic conditions (and very possibly also of the state of health and medical technology).
The changes in that country also occurred during a period in which education spread rapidly, fertility declined sharply (with occasional fluctuations) and family planning knowledge and methods became widely available.
2.
Optimal Demographic Conditions for Childbearing
The question arises as to what are the most favourable conditions for childbearing.
This is not clear cut.
Health care of superior quality can vitiate the influence of factors that would have dire effects in the context of poor health and medical standards.
Better educated mothers may be able to compensate for some unfavourable conditions, where women with no schooling may not, and so on.
But several important demographic factors can be identified as prerequisite, for a variety of reasons, in any circumstances.
Age at first union should be advanced, at least to age 18–19 or, preferably to age 20 or beyond.
The first birth also should be deferred beyond this age, but a first child should not be postponed too long either (at least, not beyond age 35).
Births of high order (third or fourth) should not occur to women under age 20.
Ages 20 to 34 years represent the most favourable period for childbearing; ages 20 to 29 are the safest.
These ages are deemed efficient, because they are associated with minimum child loss and impairment and comparatively fewer adverse effects upon the mother.
Termination of childbearing after the third birth (although desired family size tends to be higher, especially in much of the developing world) is preferable from a health perspective.
But where there is a desire to restrict rates of population growth, the goal maybe fewer than three.
Births should be spaced at intervals of three to five years, but not longer.
(Mothers over age 30 risk some hazards in electing to have another child, if an interval of three to five years cannot be effected before age 34).
GLOSSARY
This Glossary contains short definitions and/or explanations of some demographic, sociological and statistical terms and of abbreviations used in the report.
The terms of abbreviations that are defined or explained are capitalized; capitalized words in the definitions refer to other entry-words in the Glossary.
ABORTION is defined, with reference to the woman, as any interruption of pregnancy before 28 weeks of gestation resulting in a dead fetus.
Both spontaneous abortions (miscarriages) and induced abortions may be classified, depending on the duration of gestation, as early or intermediate fetal deaths.
Induced abortions are those initiated by deliberate action undertaken with the intention of terminating pregnancy; all other abortions are considered as spontaneous.
ABSTINENCE — The avoidance of sexual relations (coitus) for a period of time.
Abstinence following birth (see post-partum abstinence) should be distinguished from periodic abstinence or the rhythm method and from terminal abstinence which, in several cultures, is an accepted way of behaviour under certain conditions (e.g. for a woman living with her married daughter or daughter-in-law who also has a child or for a woman who wants to cease childbearing altogether).
ADOLESCENT — A person who is entering adolescence, the age following childhood, which is marked with puberty and followed by young adult age.
(Often refers to persons in the age group between puberty and young adulthood, that is about 14–17 years or some similar period in the teens; the limits of which depend on the timing of puberty and adulthood in a particular population).
ADOLESCENT SUB-FERTILITY (OR SUB-FECUNDITY)— A physiological condition of teenage girls during the first few years following menarche, when their fecundity has not yet reached that of the level of adult women.
AGE —(duration of life at death, at birth of child, at delivery of fetus, at marriage or at another event) is the estimated or calculated interval between the date of birth and the date of occurrence of the event, expressed in completed units of time.
In the WFS surveys, it refers to the interval between the reported date of birth and the date of interview or other event measured in completed years.
(Thus a child who did not reach the first birthday is counted as zero year old; from 12 completed months to 23 completed months as one year old, etc.)
In cultures, where date of birth is not kept in a registry and is not well known, WFS estimated age on the basis of responses to such questions as "How old are you?" or "For how long did the child live?" etc.
Respondents often estimate their ages in rounded figures (ending in digits 0 or 5) or give other erroneous answers.
Consequently, age data contain a considerable error component that differs among surveys.
AGE-SPECIFIC RATES — The frequency of demographic events (live births, deaths, marriages, etc.) that occurred during one year in a population defined by age (usually one or five-year age groups) and also often by sex relative to the size of population of the given age or age group (and sex) relative to the mid-year size of the same population (expressed per 1,000 population).
See also infant mortality, toddler mortality, child mortality.
AMENORRHOEA — The absence of menstruation.
This is a natural condition before menarche, and it re-occurs after menopause, during pregnancy as well as after abortion or birth (post-partum amenorrhoea) that lasts for some months even if the women does not breastfeed or nurses only for a short period.
Breastfeeding affects the duration of post-partum amenorrhoea.
For practical purposes the easily observable amenorrhoeic period can be taken as a proxy for the anovulatory period, though ovulation can precede the first menstruation after birth, so that women may become pregnant during the amenorrhoeic period.
ANOVULATORY PERIOD — A time period during which the ovary does not produce and discharge ova.
(See also amenorrhoea).
AVERAGES — Measures of central tendency for data, such as the mean, median and mode.
Average and mean are often used interchangeably.
BIRTH — The act or process of delivering a child.
The term refers to both live births and still births (late fetal deaths).
It is often used to mean only live births.
BIRTH CONTROL — Deliberate effort to prevent births either by abstinence, contraception, abortion or sterilization in order to accomplish the timing of the first birth (postponement) or ensure a desirable interval between successive births (see spacing) or to terminate childbearing altogether.
BIRTH INTERVAL, see intervals.
BIRTH ORDER — live birth order is the numerical order of a child in relation to all previous live-born issue of the mother, irrespective of whether pregnancies were nuptial or extra-nuptial.
Occasionally, birth order refers to total birth order that takes both live births and still births (late fetal deaths) into account.
BIRTH SPACING, see spacing.
BIRTH TIMING, see intervals, spacing.
BIRTH WEIGHT — Weight of fetus or of infant at birth, usually measured in grams.
(See also immature births).
BREASTFEEDING — Suckling; a still nearly universal way of feeding infants and young children in most developing countries, first exclusively by lactation (full breastfeeding that often lasts about three to six months), then introducing supplementary food (partial breastfeeding that may last for several years until  weaning).
Suckling at the breast provides a stimulus for the pituitary gland to release prolactin that may have an effect (through not fully clarified ways) on ovulation and amenorrhoea.
Thus breastfeeding provides some contraceptive protection.
However, not all breastfeeding women are protected, and the protection seems to depend, among other things, on the intensity and frequency of breastfeeding, thus decreasing with the length of the breastfeeding period.
CHILD MORTALITY — A particular group of age-specific death rates that measures the frequency of death among children.
In the WFS surveys, it relates to the age group 0–4 years, and may be divided into the mortality of children under one year) see infant mortality), of one year old children (sometimes called toddler mortality) and of children aged 2–4 years (child mortality in a narrow sense).
CHILDBEARING AGE (PERIOD)— The reproductive period in the life of women, which begins with the first menses (the age at menarche) and ends with menopause, when menstruation ceases.
For practical demographic purposes, women of the age group from 15 to 49 years are considered as those being in the childbearing age; although births may also occur to somewhat younger or, in exceptional cases, to older women.
CHILD SPACING, see spacing.
COHORT — A group of persons that has experiences the same event (e.g. birth or marriage) at the same time or during a specified period; for instance, birth cohort or marriage cohort.
COMPLETED FAMILY SIZE — The number of children (live-born babies) a woman has borne by the time she has reached the end of the childbearing age.
In this context, the term is synonymous with completed fertility.
Completed family size sometimes refers only to the number of surviving children.
(See also family size).
COMPLETED FERTILITY — The number of live births born to a woman or to a female cohort that has reached the end of the childbearing age or become sterile.
For practical reasons, often the (mean) number of children ever born alive to woman aged 45–49 years is considered as completed fertility.
CONJUGAL UNION — Any kind of sexual union (e.g. consensual, common law, visiting, etc.) of a relatively stable and continuing nature between a man and a woman.
(See also marriage, unions).
CORRELATION — measures the strength of the linear relationship (see linear regression), i.e. how strongly the variables are associated with each other, how well they vary together.
Correlation does not necessarily imply causality, i.e. a change in one variable is not necessarily the cause of a change in another (a change in both may be caused by a change in a third).
If an increase or decrease in the value of one variable is accompanied with an increase or decrease, respectively, in the other, the correlation is positive (for instance, the later women marry the later they have their first child) while, if the positive change in one variable is incidental to a  negative change in another, the correlation is negative (e.g. the later women marry, the lower their completed fertility).
The strength of the relationship is measured by the correlation coefficient.
(See also regression).
CORRELATION COEFFICIENT (R)— A quantitative expression of the degree of strength of the linear relationship between two variables.
For this reason, the low value of the correlation coefficient does not necessarily mean the lack of relationship between variables; it may be due to the non-linear nature of the relationship.
The value of the correlation coefficient may vary between 1 and — 1; the limit values reflecting perfect positive or negative linear relationships, respectively, i.e. that all values of both variables fall on the regression line (with positive or negative slope), while values close to zero indicate weak or non-existing linear relationship or, perhaps, some kind of non-linear relationship.
(Correlation coefficient in this study denotes product-moment correlation coefficient.
(See also correlation, linear regression, regression).
CULTURE — The way of life and the man-made environment of a social group.
One aspect of culture includes all material objects that were made or utilized by mankind (material culture).
The relevant technology, however, is a part of the non-material culture (culture in the social sense) which includes knowledge, belief, moral and any other capability or pattern for behaviour acquired and transmitted by individuals as members of society.
The essential core of the culture (non-material consists of language, tradition, custom and social institutions.
CUSTOM — A well-established, traditional mode of socially relevant behaviour passed on from generation to generation that prescribes the proper ways of behaving in given situations or under given conditions.
For instance, while feeding the baby at the breast is a natural function, a custom may prescribe that breastfeeding should last until the child can walk or speak, etc.
Another custom may prescribe sexual abstinence during this period (or even that husband and wife should be temporarily separated).
Observance of the custom is encouraged by social recognition and enforced not by law but buy social disapproval of its breach that may include exclusion, avoidance and other informal sanctions.
DEATH — The permanent disappearance of all evidence of life at any time after live birth has taken place, or, by similar definition, the post-natal cessation of vital functions without capability of resuscitation.
(This definition excludes fetal death).
DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION, see theory of the demographic transition.
DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES (FACTORS)— The basic demographic variables are sex, age and family status.
Other demographic factors affecting health of mother and offspring include age at first marriage (or union), at first and subsequent births (maternal age, paternal age), birth order, party, family size, birth and pregnancy intervals.
(See also variables).
DIFFERENTIAL MORTALITY — Differences in levels and patterns of  mortality among population groups distinguished by age, education, occupation or other demographic and socio-economic variables.
EARLY FETAL DEATH — Death of a fetus of less than 20 weeks of gestation.
(See also fetal death).
EARLY NEONATAL MORTALITY — MORTALITY of new-born infants during the early neonatal period.
(See also neonatal mortality).
EARLY NEONATAL PERIOD — The first week of extrauterine life (0–6 completed days).
EVER-MARRIED (WOMEN)— The term includes currently married women and women who once married but at the time of the observation were divorced, separated or widowed, and excludes single persons.
For the interpretation of "married" in the WFS surveys, see marriage, married women, unions; in some surveys the term may be synonymous with "ever-mated" women.
FAMILY — The basic social institution.
As a kinship unit, it minimally consists of one or more men living with one or more women in a legally or socially recognized and more or less permanent sexual relationship with particular rights and obligations, together with the offspring or without them.
In a broader sense it includes all relatives living together or accepted as a family, including adopted persons.
For demographic or statistical purposes the family needs to be specifically defined and the definitions may vary for different purposes.
The family should be distinguished from the household, since a family may live in one or more households and a household may include one or more families.
FAMILY SIZE — Though, in other contexts, it may refer to the size of the family (i.e. the number of family members), in connection with fertility studies it usually denotes the number of live births to a woman (sometimes only those children who are alive at a given time, e.g. at the time of the observation).
(See also completed family size).
FECUND WOMEN — In general, women who have the capacity to participate in reproduction, i.e. able to get pregnant and have children.
In the WFS, however, those women were considered "fecund" who were either pregnant or did not report fecundity impairment.
Certain questions were asked only of currently married fecund women.
FECUNDITY — The physiological capacity of a woman (or man, couple or population group) to reproduce, i.e. to produce a live child.
(See also fertility, fecund women).
FERTILITY — As a demographic term, it refers to the actual reproductive performance of women and is distinguished from fecundity.
(Medical literature does not always make such clear distinction between the two terms).
Both terms apply to individuals (either males or females) as well as to couples or groups  of individuals.
Demographic studies of fertility usually concern specific groups of women or the female population of childbearing age.
(In many Latin languages, the etymological equivalents of these terms are used in the opposite sense).
FETAL DEATH is death prior to the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product of conception, irrespective the duration of pregnancy; the death is indicated by the fact that after separation the fetus does not breathe or show any other evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of voluntary muscles.
According to the duration of pregnancy early, intermediate and late fetal deaths may be distinguished.
(See also still birth, abortion).
FETAL MORTALITY — refers to the frequency of fetal deaths.
Usually expressed as the ratio of fetal deaths; i.e. the number of fetal deaths per 1,000 live births.
FPA — Family Planning Association; a name most frequently used by member organizations of the IPPF.
It often refers to any individual member organization irrespective of its actual name, i.e. whether it is an association or federation or whether it stands for Planned Parenthood, Family Well-being, Responsible Parenthood, Protection of the Family or Family Health, etc.
GESTATIONAL AGE — The duration of pregnancy.
HOUSEHOLD — A socio-economic unit that consists of persons who share the same living quarters and at least one principal meal.
(See also family).
IMMATURE BIRTHS — The birth is immature if the child's birth weight is 2,500 grams or less.
Immature births are often, but not necessarily, premature births.
INDUCED ABORTION, see abortion.
INFANT — A child who has not reached his/her first birthday; i.e. 0–11 completed month or 0 year old.
In the early days of life the infant is sometimes called a new-born.
INFANT MORTALITY (rate)— The mortality of live-born children before reaching their first birthday.
Infant mortality rate is usually calculated as the number of infant deaths in a calendar year per 1,000 live births in the same year.
INFECUNDITY — Antonym to fecundity.
(See also sterility).
INFERTILITY — A status of not producing a live-born child either for voluntary or physiological reasons (voluntary infertility and physiological infertility respectively).
INSTITUTIONS (SOCIAL)— The basic social institution is the family.
In general, institutions are organized social groups embodying social roles, relations, processes, norms and instruments or complexes of cultural patterns, norms and procedures, which satisfy some important social interest (e.g. educational, economic, religious, etc).
INTER-BIRTH INTERVALS, see intervals.
INTERMEDIATE FETAL DEATH — Death of a fetus of 20–27 completed weeks of gestation.
(See also fetal death).
INTERVALS — The period between the dates of two demographic events.
Birth timing or spacing is measured as the length of time that has elapsed between marriage and first birth, between successive births (closed birth intervals) and between the last birth and the observation (open birth interval).
Inter-pregnancy intervals that are used to measure the period of exposure to the risk of conception are reckoned from the end of one pregnancy to the beginning of the next one.
In the WFS surveys, however, the pregnancy intervals are computed similarly to the birth intervals, i.e. they refer to the periods between termination of successive pregnancies.
IPPF — International Planned Parenthood Federation.
 "J" -SHAPED CURVE — see linear regression.
LATE FETAL DEATH — Death of a fetus of 28 completed weeks of gestation and over, still birth is defined as being synonymous with late fetal death.
(See also fetal death).
LATE FETAL DEATH RATIO — Annual number of late fetal deaths per 1,000 live births in the same year.
LINEAR REGRESSION — For practical reasons, the relationship between two variables is often described by a linear model, in the form of Y=A+BX (where Y and X are the dependent and independent variables, respectively, A is a constant and B is the regression coefficient).
This model determines a straight line (the regression line) if presented on a chart (i.e. in a coordinate system, where the vertical axis shows the values of Y and the horizontal axis that of X).
The A constant denotes the Y intercept on the vertical axis and B, the regression coefficient, denotes the slope of the line.
Thus, the B value expresses the change in the mean of Y (the dependent variable) per unit change in the X (independent variable).
Therefore, the regression coefficient is often considered as a measure of the effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable.
If B=O or the value of the regression coefficient approaches zero, there is no relationship between the variables (i.e. the independent variable has no effect on the dependent variable).
The strength of the relationship is measured by the correlation coefficient.
Sometimes, the variables are not connected by a simple linear relationship, the nature of their relationship is non-linear (curvilinear), i.e., its description requires fitting of a curve (exponential growth curve, logistic, etc.) instead of a straight line.
The curves describing the relationship between demographic phenomena and  demographic variables often take the shape of the letters "U" and "J" or the form of a reverse "J" .
(See also regression).
MARITAL STATUS — The state of being single (never-married, i.e. bachelor or spinster), married, divorced, separated or widowed.
For the interpretation of "married" in the WFS surveys, see married women.
MARITAL UNION — see conjugal union, marriage, unions.
MARRIAGE — It refers both to the social institution that sets up and sanctions the union of persons of opposite sex (see family) and to the state of being married.
In the WFS surveys questions about marriage of the women interviewed referred to "marital unions," i.e., "More or less stable cohabitation with a man whether based on a marriage which is sanctified by religion, law, or custom, or is simply a" marriage "of convenience." 
Marriages may be monogamous in which one man (husband) is united with one woman (wife) or polygamous in which there is more than one wife (polygyny) or — rarely — more than one husband (polyandry).
(See also unions).
MARRIED WOMEN — In the WFS surveys, since marriages were broadly interpreted, all women who entered into a kind of conjugal union were considered as married.
(See also marriage, unions).
MATERNAL AGE — denotes the age of women at birth (or at still birth or abortion) in completed years.
MATERNAL CAUSES — In the Eight Revision of the International Classification of Diseases used to Code Cause of Death, maternal causes are items B40 that refers to abortion (causes 640–645) and B41 that includes other complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium as well as delivery without mention of complication (causes 630–639, 650–678); in the Ninth Revision, items AM42 abortion (causes 630–639), AM43 Direct obstetric causes (640–646, 651–676) and AM44 Indirect obstetric causes (647, 648).
The classifications of maternal causes of death in the eight and ninth revisions are practically identical, since causes B40 from the earlier 1965 revision and AM42 from the next (1975) revision both refer to deaths from abortion, and cause B41 from the next (1975) revision both refer to deaths from abortion, and cause B41 from the earlier revision was only divided into two parts AM43 and AM44 in the later revision.
MATERNAL DEATH — death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and the site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management, but not from accidental or incidental causes.
MATERNAL MORBIDITY — morbidity due to maternal causes.
MATERNAL MORTALITY — Annual frequency of maternal deaths.
If maternal deaths are related to the total population, they result in cause-specific mortality rate (generally expressed per 100,000 population).
However, case  fatality rates (i.e. the proportion of fatal cases among the reported cases of a disease) express more clearly the severity of a cause of death; therefore, in order to approximate case fatality, maternal deaths are usually related to live births (see maternal mortality rate) or, less frequently (since reliable data are seldom available), to pregnancies.
MATERNAL MORTALITY RATE — Annual number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in the same year.
MEAN — Without further specification it refers to the arithmetic mean (the word average is sometimes used synonymously); a measure of the central tendency in the values of a variable of the population observed.
It is computed as the sum of the values divided by the number of observations.
MEDIAN — If a set of observations is arranged in increasing (or decreasing) order of their values, the middle value is the median.
(See also median age at first marriage).
MEDIAN AGE AT FIRST MARRIAGE (or AT FIRST BIRTH)— It relates to a central tendency in the age of first marriage (or first birth) of women (or of a specified group of women).
The median age divides the women into two equal size groups; one half of the women first married (or had a first birth) at a younger and one half at an older age.
MENARCHE — The appearance of the first menstruation (menses or period) that marks puberty of women.
MENOPAUSE — refers to the cessation of menstruation; usually marks the end of the childbearing period.
MISCARRIAGE — A lay term for spontaneous abortion; synonymous with early and intermediate fetal death.
(See also abortion).
MORBIDITY — The relative incidence of disease.
MORTALITY — The state or condition of a population as being subject to death; the relative incidence of death.
(See also mortality rate).
MORTALITY RATE — Annual number of deaths per 1,000 population.
For age-specific mortality rates, see age-specific rates.
MORTALITY TRANSITION — The continuous decrease of mortality from a higher to a lower level, a component of demographic transition.
(See also theory of demographic transition).
MULTIGRAVIDA, see party, pregnancy order.
MULTIPARA — A term used mostly in medical literature, referring to a woman at  her second or subsequent confinement.
(See also party).
NEONATAL MORTALITY — MORTALITY of new-born children during the first four weeks (or first month) of life (neonatal period).
Since infant mortality takes its heaviest toll on new-born babies during the first month of life, special attentions is given in mortality analyses to mortality in the neonatal period.
(See also neonatal mortality rate).
Mortality of infants following the neonatal period is called post-neonatal mortality, i.e. mortality of infants aged 1–11 completed months.
For measuring perinatal mortality, the mortality of the new-born during the first week of life is sometimes distinguished as early neonatal mortality.
NEONATAL MORTALITY RATE — measures the chance of death during the first month of life; it is calculated as the number of deaths under 28 days of age (or under one month) during a specified time period per 1,000 live births that occurred in the same period.
NEONATAL PERIOD, see neonatal mortality.
NULLIGRAVIDA, see parity.
NULLIPARA — A term used mostly in medical literature, referring to a woman who has had no confinements.
(See also parity).
ORDER OF BIRTH, see birth order.
PARITY — usually refers to the number of children born alive to a woman.
In some cases, parity is determined with respect to the number of previous live births and still births (late fetal deaths).
Women who have not borne any live children are called zero parity women (or nullipara in the medical literature); first parity women are those who have borne one live child but no more (primipara); and so on(multipara).
A woman who has never been pregnant is referred to as nulligravida; a woman pregnant first time as primigravida, and at later pregnancies as multigravida (see pregnancy order).
PATERNAL AGE — denotes the age of father at birth of child in completed years.
PERINATAL MORTALITY — Mortality during the perinatal period.
Since the causes of late fetal deaths and deaths of new-born infants in the early neonatal period often result from similar underlying factors, perinatal mortality includes both late fetal deaths and early neonatal deaths.
Perinatal mortality is measured by the perinatal mortality ratio.
PERINATAL PERIOD — The period of prenatal existence after viability of fetus is reached, the duration of labour and the early part of extrauterine life is defined as perinatal.
PERINATAL MORTALITY RATION — The annual number of late fetal deaths plus infant deaths during the early neonatal period (sometimes infant deaths  during the first month of life) per 1,000 live births that occurred in the same year.
Thus the perinatal mortality ratio is the sum of the late fetal death ratio and the under-7-day mortality rate.
PER CENT(PERCENTAGE)— A proportion or a part in a hundred; i.e. the number of cases of a part divided by the number of total cases and multiplied by 100.
POPULATION GROWTH — natural growth or natural increase is the difference between the number of live births and deaths.
A negative difference indicates population decline (negative growth).
Total growth also includes the balance of immigration and emigration.
POPULATION PARAMETERS — Numerical values that characterize a population.
POST-NEONATAL MORTALITY, see neonatal mortality.
POST-PARTUM ABSTINENCE — Normal sexual relations will obviously not be resumed immediately after termination of a pregnancy, which is naturally followed by a period of abstinence.
However, there is no agreement among researchers as to the length of this "natural" period of abstaining or to the length that amounts to a "contraceptive method" or to a "traditional custom of post-partum abstinence" .
Anthropologists noted "post-partum taboos" even if they were for a month.
Islamic rule prescribes a 40-day period of abstinence, i.e. a "natural" period until the possible date of the first menstrual onset.
Most sub-Sahara African ethnic groups followed or are still observing the custom of a long, traditional post-partum abstinence of one or more years (often until the suckling child is weaned, or can walk, talk, etc.).
The custom is observed in the belief that a new pregnancy — through its detrimental effect on breastfeeding — would endanger the health or cause the death of the suckling child and, probably, also in recognition of the fact that frequent pregnancies may be harmful to the mother's health.
Abstinence is often supported by temporary separation of the couple or by their separation from bed.
The WFS surveys considered abstinence as a way "to go without sex for several months or longer to avoid getting pregnant" .
The criterion of the purpose of avoiding pregnancy was emphasized in most surveys and interpreted as avoiding pregnancy for the reason of contraception.
Thus the WFS data on abstinence in many countries significantly underestimated the prevalence of post-partum abstinence, since most women in these countries observe the custom for health reasons and not as a contraceptive measure.
However, several WFS surveys inquired separately about the number of months after the birth or the age of the child when the respondent resumed sexual relations; from the answers to this question a more valid picture emerges both on the prevalence and the length of abstinence.
POST-PARTUM AMENORRHOEA, see amenorrhoea.
PREGNANCY (or GESTATION)— A status or condition of a woman that  ordinarily begins with implantation of the fertilized ovum in the uterus, and lasts until the fetus is aborted or a birth occurs.
PREGNANCY INTERVAL, see intervals.
PREGNANCY ORDER — Numerical order of a pregnancy in relation to all previous known pregnancies of the mother, irrespective of their outcome and whether they were nuptial or extra-nuptial.
From a medical viewpoint, a woman is considered during her first pregnancy as a primigravida and, during her subsequent pregnancies, as a multigravida.
PREMATURE BIRTHS — A birth is premature if it occurred before 37 completed weeks of gestation.
Premature births are usually immature births, i.e. their birth weight is 2,500 grams or less.
PRIMIGRAVIDA, see parity, pregnancy order.
PRIMIPARA — A term used mostly in medical literature, referring to a woman at her first confinement.
According to more general usage, primiparous women are those who have born only one child (have had only one birth)(See also parity).
PUERPERIUM — The period that begins with lying-in following delivery and lasts about six weeks or 42 days until the female reproductive system returns to its normal state.
R — see correlation coefficient.
RATE (DEMOGRAPHIC)— The relative frequency of occurrence of a demographic even (e.g. births, deaths, etc.) in a population during a period of time (usually a calendar year).
The rates are usually calculated per 1,000 population.
(See also age-specific rates).
RATIO — Usually a quotient of the size of one population (or sub-population) to another or the number of a particular event in relation to the number of another event.
For instance, the still birth ratio (the number of still births per 1,000 live births) or the masculinity ratio (the number of males per 1,000 females).
REGRESSION — describes the nature of the relationship between two or more variables.
In the case of bivariate regression (when only two variables are involved), one objective of the regression analysis is to learn whether the variable of concern (i.e. the dependent variable), for instance birth weight, does depend on another variable (i.e. the independent variable), say, on maternal age and, if so, what is the nature of the relationship.
(For this reason, birth weight should be regressed on maternal age).
Another objective may be to predict the unknown values of the dependent variable from the known values of the independent variable.
The strength of the relationship is measured by correlation.
(See also linear regression, correlation coefficient).
REGRESSION COEFFICIENT, see linear regression.
REGRESSION LINE, see linear regression.
REPRODUCTIVE PERIOD, see childbearing age.
SAMPLE — A part of the population that, in the case of the WFS, was selected by probability sampling and represents the population from which it was selected.
In the case of such representative sample, the population parameters can be estimated from the sample values.
These estimates are subject to sampling errors and valid only between calculable limits (confidence interval).
Calculations for the sampling errors of some variables have been published in the individual WFS country reports, but the WFS data are given usually without the relevant confidence intervals.
Not all samples are selected by probability sampling (e.g. the WHO collaborative studies).
SOCIO-ECONOMIC VARIABLES (FACTORS)— Literacy, education, economic activity, income, occupation, industry and other social or economic attributes and characteristics.
SPACING — Child-spacing or spacing (or timing) of births.
Birth spacing is sometimes used synonymously with birth timing (see intervals), but usually it refers to efforts aiming to achieve the "proper" (healthy, economic or convenient) timing of births either consciously (by planning and controlling the timing of births) or in accordance with traditions (by following customs relevant to breastfeeding and post-partum abstinence which assure the "proper" spacing), and the results of such efforts as they are manifested in the birth intervals.
SPONTANEOUS ABORTION, see abortion, miscarriage.
STANDARDIZATION — A procedure used in comparative demographic analysis that eliminates the influence of differences in population structures on rates or means.
STERILITY — Physiological incapacity to reproduce (i.e. to produce a live-born child).
It may be permanent (due to some permanent physiological impairment) or temporary (as, for example, during the period of post-partum amenorrhoea).
STILL BIRTH is defined as synonymous with late fetal death, that is, one of 28 completed weeks or more of gestation.
STILL BIRTH RATIO — Annual number of still births per 1,000 live births in the same year; synonymous with late fetal death ratio.
SUBFECUNDITY, see subfertility.
SUBFERTILITY — FERTILITY that is lower than "normal" or at a level below the level that is average for the population.
In non-contracepting populations, subfertility is sometimes, considered as an evidence of subfecundity, i.e. fecundity that is lower than "normal" , though it may be due to fertility regulatory customs, such as the practice of extended breastfeeding and/or observance of the custom of long post-partum abstinence or to polygamy (see marriage).
SURVEY (DEMOGRAPHIC)— An inquiry that employs statistical data collecting and processing operations to provide information on a particular demographic subject (e.g. fertility or human reproductive behaviour) or on several topics (multi-purpose survey).
The survey usually extends only to a specified population group or to a sample of the population (sample survey) selected by using the principles of sampling.
TERMINAL ABSTINENCE, see abstinence.
THEORY OF THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION — It was formulated on the basis of population trends experienced during the period of transition from agrarian to industrialized economy in countries that are now economically developed.
According to the theory, pre-industrial populations can be characterized by high levels of birth and death rates, and low growth rates.
However, due to changes incident to economic development, mortality decreases rather promptly while the decline of fertility lags behind it, causing rapid population growth.
Industrialization, urbanization, extension of education, etc. then gradually erode the old, traditional social institutions, customs, norms, etc, that regulated fertility and create new conditions conducive to small family ideals realizable through birth control methods that lead to a decrease in fertility and, finally, to the restoration of the balance between birth and death rates on a lower level, when the demographic transition is considered as completed.
TODDLER MORTALITY — mortality of one-year-old children (i.e. mortality during the second year of life).
See child mortality.
TOTAL BIRTH ORDER, see birth order.
TRADITION (SOCIAL)— refers to the values, standards, beliefs, sentiments and, in general, the ways of thinking in a social group, which have been handed down from generation to generation.
The main vehicle of its transmission is socialization, the process of learning the culture, which is most intensive in the formative years of childhood.
Tradition, along with custom and social institutions, is one of the major components of non-material culture.
UN — United Nations.
UNIONS (MARITAL)— Union is a non-formal marriage that is not established (and sanctioned) by law, religion or custom but by reason of cohabitation.
Such "consensual" , "common law" or "companionate" unions (or "marriages" ), however, may be recognized to a certain degree by society (or even by the law).
The WFS considered all kinds of more or less stable unions as marriages, including "visiting unions" in which the couple do not live together.
(See also conjugal union).
 "U" -SHAPED CURVE — see linear regression.
VARIABLES — Characteristics, attributes or qualities that can vary in magnitude among individual cases or which have different categories are referred to as variables in statistical analyses where, usually, their relationship (for example, between education of mothers and the number of children ever born to them) is studied.
(See regression, correlation).
Sometimes, the term is used more generally, even when statistical analysis is not involved (for example, demographic variables, socio-economic variables).
VIABILITY — the capability of a fetus of independent existence outside the mother's body.
Also, as a lay term, it refers to the capability of an infant to survive infancy or of a child to survive childhood.
VITAL STATISTICS — Facts systematically collected and compiled in numerical form relating to or derived from registration records of vital events, such as live birth, death, fetal death, marriage, divorce, etc.
WFS — World Fertility Survey.
WORLD FERTILITY SURVEY; an international research programme carried out during the period of 1972–1984, undertaken by the International Statistical Institute with the collaboration of the United Nations and in co-operation with the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population.
The WFS was designed to assist countries in conducting scientifically designed, nationally representative and internationally comparable demographic surveys on human fertility behaviour.
For a list of developing countries participating in the WFS, see Table A.3.
WHO — World Health Organization.
WHO COLLABORATIVE STUDIES — were conducted in the 1970s with the collaboration of health centres in nine developing countries.
The studies sampled selected rural and urban communities or ethnic or religious sub-groups.
The study samples ideally contained about 2,000 — retrospective — interviews with eligible women.
The results were published by WHO.