

Introduction
This Handbook has been designed for those who intend to become teachers of English as a Foreign Language and for those who already find themselves teaching EFL but wish to improve their formal qualifications.
It is directed to native English as well as to non-native speakers.
There are many people who come into English-language teaching without having passed through formal pedagogic processes, so that when they are confronted with the terminology of the subject, they may be at a disadvantage to those who have already been to teacher-training college or who have a university degree in linguistics.
How should one know the meanings of allomorph or T-G grammar?
There are also words that are common enough in general contexts: reward, register, generalisation — but what is their significance in the context of English-language teaching?
This book covers such subjects.
There are also extensive entries on classroom practice, teaching methods, the language laboratory and the psychology of learning.
The reader is requested to bear in mind that the Handbook is not a grammar, or a book on linguistic science, literature or psychology (though it contains items on all these subjects)— it is rather a practical book directed towards the study of teaching English as a Foreign Language.
Entries are in alphabetical order; cross-references are printed in bold type.
References to other works are shown in shortened form, eg (Heaton 1975) in the text; full details are given in the bibliography at the back of the book.
Other useful information is also given at the back of the book.
A
a posteriori A Latin phrase, meaning from what comes after.
a priori A Latin phrase, meaning from what came before.
abbreviation
A shortened form, used to save space and also used to save time when writing hand-written texts, eg adj = adjective.
A list of abbreviations and acronyms is given on p 194.
ablative
A form in Latin nouns indicating an agent, instrument or cause.
ablaut
In philology, which is the study of how languages have developed through history, ablaut refers to the systematic vowel changes in verb forms of Indo-European languages, as in drive, drove, driven.
abridged
Shortened, as in abridged passages.
abstraction
In psycholinguistics, learning to respond to similar classes of cues and stimuli in different circumstances is called "abstraction" by Miller (1951).
It involves recognising the crucial element which is similar in each context, and is the basis of acquired cue value (Rivers 1964).
accent
1 The prominence, expressed by means of stress or intonation, which is given to a syllable.
In the word de'mocracy, the accent is on the second syllable; in demo'cratic it shifts to the third syllable.
Intonational accentuation, combined with stress, often indicates emphasis, as in I do wish you'd be more tidy!(high fall on do).
2 A mark or symbol, usually above a letter, to indicate the quality of a vowel or consonant sound or syllabic stress.
English does not employ accents in this way though borrowed words, such as fe∘te, fiancé, ro∘le, etc may retain them.
When two distinctly different vowel sounds occur one after the other and must be pronounced individually, a hyphen should be used where another language might employ an accent, eg co-operation/and not cooperation, thus avoiding the natural wish to pronounce the double o as /u/ or /u: /.
3 The individual, local, national or foreign way of speaking a language: a Yorkshire accent, an Australian accent, a Swedish accent, etc.
4 The means whereby a word is made to stand out in an utterance.
Accent always entails the occurrence of a strong stress on the appropriate syllable of the accented word; when this word contains the nucleus of the word group, accent is also shown by a change of pitch or by sustaining pitch.
In the written language the reader is left to make up his mind which are important words, helped to a greater or lesser degree by the style of the author, by italicisation, spacing, punctuation and so on.
But in speech, these words are specifically pointed out so that the listener can be in no doubt.
These words are pointed out by means of accent.
accidence
See under inflection.
Accusative case
Also object case.
The case used for the person or thing on which the action takes effect, eg I bought the car.
acoustic treatment
See under language laboratory.
acquired cue value
Based on abstraction.
Psychologically, as the response is always rewarded when this crucial element is present, the response becomes more and more strongly connected with the relevant cue and extinguished as a response to other cues.
In this way a weak stimulus may come to have an acquired cue value (Rivers 1964).
acronym
Also protogram.
A word formed by the first letter of a group of words, eg NATO — North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, SALT = Strategic Arms Limitation Talks.
Of course, acronyms do not always work as well as one would hope.
The acronym DIY (= Do It Yourself) when spoken as a word produces something like/di:j/, which is unacceptable.
The letters pronounced separately, D.I.Y., do not produce a particularly pleasing sound and perhaps for that reason this pronunciation is not popular among the general public, so in the spoken language DIY Shop usually remains the rather cumbersome Do It Yourself Shop.
acrostic
A word puzzle, or word arrangement, in which the first and last letters of the lines make a word or words.
actions
Objects along are not sufficient to teach meaning.
Much has to be taught through gestures, like pointing and touching, and actions, like giving and taking.
These may be used, alone or with objects, to convey the meaning of demonstratives (this, that), directional prepositions (to, from), verbs of action (go, come) and nouns of action (smile, fall).
To convey structural meaning through actions, the following points are essential.
1 The action should be entirely isolated from other actions, significant or non-significant.
2 The timing of the action should reflect the tense of the verb.
3 The gestures should be clear and conventional.
action series
A learning technique in which individuals perform a series of sequential actions and say what they are doing as they perform each action.
Useful in practising continuous tenses.
active voice
See under voice.
activity
See under creative activity.
adage
Old and wise saying: a proverb.
ad lib Abbreviation of the Latin phrase ad libitum, which colloquially means without restraint.
It is sometimes used as a verb, meaning improvise, eg by making additions to one's part in a play.
addendum (pl addenda)
A thing to be added, which has unintentionally been left out.
This irregular plural ending may occur when the word comes directly into English from Latin rather than via French.
It is a member of a class known as classical nouns.
adduce
To put forward as proof or as an example: He adduced the reasons, as he saw them, for the changes in literary style during the last century.
adjectival clause
See under clause.
adjectival phrase
See under phrase.
adjective
A word that names a quality, or that defines or limits a noun.
In class structure grammar these form a class.
The main formal feature of the English adjective is the possibility of forms ending in -er, -est (comparative and superlative).
It is interesting to note that prepositions such as in and out can appear adjectivally, for example the in thing, it's out, it's not on.
compound adjective
These mostly consist of two elements, the second of which is usually an adjective, eg seasick, red hot, highly dangerous.
descriptive adjective
This denotes a quality or characteristic and answers the question Of what king?
emphasising adjective
For example own (I am my own master) or (the) very (That's the very thing I've been looking for!).
possessive adjective
Also possessive pronoun.
For example, my book.
adjunct
An amplification of the subject, predicate, etc.
It is a word or phrase added to qualify or define another word or words in a sentence.
adverbial adjunct
This qualifies a verb, adjective or adverb.
The dog barked furiously (qualifying a verb); The idea sounds all right(adj); He plays really well (adv).
attributive adjunct
This qualifies a noun: twenty people, my sister, what colour? a stone wall, etc.
It is subordinate to the noun it qualifies.
predicative adjunct
This qualifies nouns and pronouns without being subordinate to them.
The term is usually restricted to nouns and adjectives accompanying a direct object: Have I made this clear?;
I considered him an honest man; Let's have her in; He likes his coffee strong.
prepositional adjunct
This is a prepositional phrase that qualifies a noun: father-in-law, will-of-the-wisp, stock-in-trade, etc.
adverb
A word which answers how, where and when questions and modifies verbs, adjectives and other adverbials such as soon, there and quickly (Hornby 1974).
The word-class adverb is often defined by position rather than by form.
Items such as happily, out and sometimes are often considered to be members of this class.
The great majority of adverbs have -ly as a suffix: glad (adj) —gladly (adv).
Most adverbs in this category are formed from adjectives and the -ing form of verbs: pleasing-pleasingly.
In class structure grammar these -ly adverbs are members of an open set.
A small but expanding open set of adverbs is marked by the suffix -wise, as in clockwise.
Note two open set adverbs which do not take -ly: fast and hard.
Most adverbs have comparative forms: soon-sooner, often-more often, reckless-more reckless.
adverb of frequency
These adverbs and adverbial phrases answer the question How often?
Examples: frequently, often, seldom, sometimes, usually, every day.
emphasising adverb
For example precisely, just, exactly: That's just/precisely/exactly what I want.
adverbial adjunct
This qualifies a verb, adjective or adverb.
The dog barked furiously (verb): the idea sounds all right(adj); He plays really well (adv).
adverbial clause
A subordinate clause functioning as an adverb.
This may therefore be a clause of time, place, cause, reason, purpose, result, condition, concession, manner or comparison.
adverbial particle
Many prepositions are used adverbially in English.
(prep) He looked/up the chimney (didn't look down it).
(adv) He looked up/the word (looked for it in a dictionary).
adverbial phrase
A phrase functioning as an adverb.
affective goal
Instructional aims relating to student attitudes, feelings, and values to be developed during a course of study.
affective taxonomy
A hierarchical system of classifying student behaviour related to their attitudes, feelings, and values.
It consists of five stages: receptivity, responsiveness, appreciation, internalisation, and characterisation.
affirmative
See under emphatic affirmative.
affix
If a word can be segmented into more than one morpheme, of which one is a root, any morpheme which is not a root is an affix.
They are classified as prefixes, infixes and suffixes, according to their position in the word (at the beginning, middle or end).
affricate
The manner of articulation of an affricate consonant starts with a complete structure, like a plosive, but continues with a comparatively gradual release with friction.
This explains the choice of two amalgamated symbols for each of the two English affricates: /and/.
Unlike plosive, the release stage of affricates can never be omitted, eg which chairs contains no unexploded allophone as does bad dog.
agreement
Also concord.
A grammatical term which refers to the fact that certain words must agree in gender, number, case or person.
agglutinatives
These are languages in which simple words and elements can be combined to express compound ideas.
In Swahili, for example, the word alikuona, meaning He saw you, is composed of four parts a, li (past tense), ku (you) and ona (see).
aids to teaching
mechanical
slides
overhead projector
film
film strips
cineloops
episcope or epidiascope
record-player
TV (broadcast or closed circuit)
radio
audio-visual
VTR video tape recorder
VCR video cassette recorder
tape-recorder
cassette recorder
spirit duplicator
photocopier
typewriter
thermal copier
non-mechanical
blackboard or chalkboard
whiteboard or dryboard
flannelboard
magnet board
flip charts
picture dictionaries or stories
realia
wallcharts
plastiboard
maps and plans
model theatre
glove puppets
models
small toys
newspaper items
cardboard clocks
drawings and photographs
diagrams
Blu-Tack
aitch
The letter H. To drop one's aitches is to fail to pronounce the /h/ at the beginning or end of a word by saying, for instance, 'am instead of ham.This is characteristic of a Cockney accent.
Thus I have /ai hæv/ would become //or possibly //.
Some foreign learners also have trouble with their aitches.
O'Connor (1972) gives useful hints on how to overcome the particular difficulties of foreign learners.
alexandrine
In prosody, this is an iambic line of six feet or twelve syllables.
Alexander the Great was the subject of a poem in this metre which was written in Old French.
alexia
A disease in which cerebral lesions cause an inability to read, popularly called "word-blindness" .
Also known as dyslexia.
allegory
A narrative description of a subject under the guise of another suggestively similar subject; a simile extended into a story; a sustained metaphor.
alliteration
The repetition of a consonantal sound, usually at the beginning of words, although medial and final alliteration are common, eg After life's fitful fever.
Used in poetry.
It is a particular feature of Anglo-Saxon poetry.
allograph
A variation of a grapheme.
For example, the printed g and the hand-written g; the capital or the lower case; the two hand-written forms of the letter r.
allomorph
A variant of a morpheme; for example, the past tense endings -t, -d and — ed.
allophone
One of the several possible renderings of the same phoneme.
The particular phoneme used generally depends on the surrounding sounds or the position of the sound in a word.
For example, the aspirated allophone of/p/ occurs in pie and the unaspirated in spy.
Another example is the three allophones of /1/: clear, dark and devoiced respectively in little place.
Furthermore, points out O'Connor (1973 p 123), because languages have"different numbers of phonemes, and different allophones representing them, it follows that in a foreign language we do not hear the sounds in the same way as a native speaker does…
Differences which in our language are significant may only be allophonic in the foreign language…
In Spanish /d/ and /t/ are allophones of the same phoneme, yet because in English these sounds represent different phonemes, we hear the differences in Spanish quite clearly, whereas a Spaniard does not."
allude to (v)
To refer to.
To mention is now more usual than to allude to: He alluded to a rather delicate matter.
allusion (n)
An indirect reference: It is unkind to make allusions to a person's physical defects.
almanac
An annual book or calendar of months and days, with information about the sun, moon, stars, tides, anniversaries, etc.
The best-known in the UK is Old Moore's Almanac.
alphabet
A series of graphic symbols in which a language is written.
logographic alphabet
This represents the words or morphemes of a language.
phonemic alphabet
A system of symbols which consistently represent each phoneme of a language with the same symbol.
phonetic alphabet
A system that represents speech sounds on the basis of their articulation without regard to their phonemic status.
syllabic alphabet
A system that represents the syllables of a language.
alternant
Term used by Bloomfield (1933) meaning allomorph or morph.
alveolar ridge
The part of the gums immediately behind the upper front teeth.
American English See under English language.
ampersand
The sign & which stands for and.
anagram
A word or phrase formed by the transposition of letters, eg plum–lump.
analogue (n)
A parallel word or thing.
analogy
A similarity in two things which are different in other ways; in teaching, the creation of a word or grammatical construction on the pattern of another.
Teacher Where is the book?
Pencil.
Student Where is the pencil? analysis See under lesson analysis.
Separation into parts.
The grammar translation method of teaching languages is based largely on finding out how a language works and analysing its structure.
anapaest (US anapest) In prosody, a foot consisting of two unaccented syllables followed by one accented syllable: I am "mon/arch of" all/I sur'vey.
anaphora
The device of syntactical cross-reference through pronouns, auxiliary verbs, etc; referring to something mentioned before.
anaphoric "one" 
When one refers to something already mentioned: The year had been one of great political unrest.
anaphoric "to" 
Verbs, nouns and adjectives that may take an infinitive with to may be followed by to without an infinitive to refer to a preceding verb or verbal group: Don't go unless you want to (Zandvoort 1957).
anecdote
A short, usually amusing story about a person or event.
anglicise
To make something English; translate into English.
anglicism
An idiom that is particularly English in character.
Anglo-
A combination form meaning English, as in Anglo-French, Anglo-Indian, Anglo-Saxon (see under English language: Old English).
annotate (v)
Make a remark, note or commentary in the margin of a book to explain the meaning of a passage.
anomalous
Different in some way; irregular, as in anomalous finites, which are  verbs that form their interrogative and negative without an auxiliary, eg I am not; need you?
Normal verbs, of course, use the auxiliary or helping verb do: I run — I do not run.
antecedent
A word grammatically related to a word that follows it, especially the noun or pronoun to which a relative pronoun is related.
The word book in The book that he gave me is the antecedent of that.
anthology
A collection of poems or prose extracts by different authors.
antithesis
Contrast of ideas vividly expressed: Give me liberty or give me death!
antonym (n)
A word that is opposite in meaning to another: large — small.
The opposite is synonym.
anxiety
See linguistic anxiety.
aphaeresis (or apheresis)
The removal of the first letter or syllable(s) of a word, as in plane (from aeroplane).
aphasia
A total or partial loss of the power of speech or of understanding words.
aphorism
Also apophthegm.
A short statement giving a general truth or maxim: Tomorrow is another day; all's well that ends well.
apophthegm (or apothegm)
Also aphorism.
A short, pointed or forceful saying; maxim: Still waters run deep.
aposiopesis
A sudden lapsing into silence because the speaker is unable or unwilling to complete the sentence: Had you been there-but what good would that have done?
apostrophe
The sign ('), to show the omission of letter(s) or number(s), as in won't, '83; for the possessive, boy's, boys'; for plurals of letters: There are two l's in the word traveller in English, but only one in American (traveler).
appendix (pl appendices)
Something which has been added, especially at the end of a book, eg bibliography, list of references.
apposed clause
See under clause.
apposition
In grammar, putting a noun or noun equivalent beside another for the purpose of a more complete explanation or description, eg in The news that he had won surprised Tom, a young lad of eight the clause that he had won is in apposition to the noun news and the phrase a young lad of eight is in apposition to the noun Tom.
appositional subject
See under clause: apposed subject clause.
approval
A form of secondary reinforcement, such as praise from the teacher.
archaism
A word, phrase, spelling or construction that has become out of date: quoth he, peradventure, burthen (burden), etc.
archaic
No longer used except for special purposes.
areal (adj)
A kind of classification of language according to geographical location, as opposed to a structural or genetic classification.
article
A monosyllable which may precede a noun.
definite article
This is written the and pronounced //before vowel sounds and in rapid speech.
Its use in English is more restricted than in some other languages.
indefinite article
This is written an and pronounced //before vowel sounds; a pronounced //in other cases.
There are also stressed forms, //and //, used when the word is emphasised or used by itself when the speaker is casting about for a substantive.
Its use in English is less restricted than in some other languages (Zandvoort 1957).
articulacy
The measure of a person's total control over his native language.
articulation
The positioning of the speech organs; the physical activity involved in making speech sounds; the production of sounds through the use of the vocal organs.
artificial language
See under language.
aspect
A verb form which relates activity to its inception, duration and completion.
1 Perfective aspect: He has gone (present): He had gone (past).
2 Progressive or continuous aspect: He is going (present); He was going (past).
aspiration
A small puff of air often occurs in the release of voiceless plosive.
Aspiration is strongest at the beginning of a stressed syllable: port, tiger, incur, but there is no aspiration if the syllable begins with /s/: sport, sty, scarf.
assessor
An examiner.
assign
In psychology, words learned through glosses or native language equivalents come under Osgood's heading "assigns" (Osgood 1953).
Assigns acquire their meaning through association with other signs or words and so are more complicated than signs, which derive their meaning from the direct experience of the individual (Rivers 1964).
See kinesics.
assignment
1 A term used by Mary Finocchiaro, which she defines as the natural out growth of a lesson.
This, she says, is the last stage of achievement of a lesson, beginning with the preparation and introduction of the lesson, through the stages of presentation, repetition and summary.
If the teaching item has been demonstrably proved to have been learnt, it can be said that the assignment has been achieved.
2 Also homework.
To ensure continuity, homework should be given after each lesson.
Homework should be differentiated according to the learners' ability.
It should all be corrected, either in the classroom or, preferably, individually by the teacher (Finocchiaro 1968).
assimilation (n) 1
A term used to describe how one phoneme (which would be present in the word in isolation) is replaced by another under the influence of the surrounding sounds.
One sound may yield to another in different ways.
It may lead to the complete disappearance of a consonant, as in castle or a partial transformation  as in irresistible, originally in-resistible.
Consonants are more likely to be affected than vowels.
Some examples of assimilation: with regard to voice: news, newspaper with regard to manner of articulation: come in, income However, as this is an automatic process, there is no need to teach how to assimilate.
It is unrealistic, if as a teacher, one insists on two t's in the best time.
Such pedantry can only inhibit speech flow (Haycraft 1971).
2 Foreign words may be assimilated into another language: for example, the French word ro∘le into English or the English word weekend into French: The leading ro∘le in the film is played by Richard Burton; On a passé un très bon weekend (a\) Cannes.
Association of Recognised English Language Schools (ARELS)
The professional organisation which brings together recognised schools with the common aim of improving and maintaining the standards of English language teaching.
The Association also acts as an information centre for all aspects of teaching in the member schools.
It is also interested in the welfare of foreign students in Britain.
associative shifting
See under learning.
assonance
This occurs when two words have the same vowel sounds in conjunction with different consonantal sounds: A stitch in time saves nine.
asterisk
The star-shaped symbol (*) used to mark words, etc for reference or distinction.
attention pointer
A term used by Lado (1964) to mean a phrase which directs the attention of the students to a particular problem, eg Note the position of the adverb.
attitude
The feeling or sentiment of the speaker about his situation.
The speaker expresses this by intonation rather than by words.
attribution and independent possessives
See under pronoun: possessive pronoun attributive See under adjunct: attributive adjunct.
Descriptive of a word or phrase used as an adjective before a noun, eg in a red rose, red is attributive; in the rose is red it is not.
audio-lingual
See also under method.
Listening and speaking; Lado (1964) explains that this approach to language teaching considers listening and speaking the first task in language learning, followed by the mastering of the reading and writing skills.
audio-tutorial laboratory
See under language laboratory.
audio-visual
Listening and seeing; the audio-visual approach to teaching a foreign language concentrates on what the student may hear or see, usually with the use of gestures, slides, film strips, flashcards, blackboard drawings and so on.
In the teaching of meaning, visual aids or"visuals' help to avoid the use of the mother tongue.
According to Lee & Coppen (1964), audio-visual aids have several advantages.
1 They can brighten up the classroom and bring variety and interest into the lessons.
2 They can help to provide the situations (contexts) which may be used to illustrate linguistic items.
3 Aural aids can give the students the opportunity of listening to and imitating native speakers.
4 They can stimulate both children and adults to speak the language, not only to read and write it.
5 Aural aids can help the teacher to improve his grasp of the language he is teaching.
6 They can also impart information about the country or countries concerned.
The section on teaching aids and resources by Brian Hill and Edith Baer provides useful comments.
Some are included below.
Resource-based learning, they say, provides no magic solutions and the teacher's ro∘le in selecting material and controlling the learning process is crucial to success.
When these aids are properly integrated into the course work they give a unique dimension to teaching.
For the average mixed adult class, where understanding and responding in basic linguistic situations is likely to be a primary aim, they provide a realistic stimulus for oral and aural activities.
blackboard
This has been termed the most versatile visual aid.
It is standard equipment in every classroom.
Some hints on blackboard use:
(a) Begin with a clean board.
(b) Effective use can be made of coloured chalk.
(c) Be tidy.
(d) Write clearly and large enough for all students to be able to read your writing.
(e) Sometimes invite a student to write on the blackboard, eg to write out a dictation you have just given.
(f) Be sure you have means of cleaning the blackboard: a duster or an eraser.
cassette recorder
See tape-recorder.
episcope
Also epidiascope, opaque projector (OP).
This works on a mirror projection system, more effective in blackout conditions.
Useful to project news items, photos, diagrams, etc and avoids the need for photocopying.
Difficult to achieve magnification, ie to enlarge newsprint (but this can be done on the overhead projector).
experience chart
This is a series of sentences or utterances in the student's own words about any experiences in which he may have engaged; useful for reading for beginners (Finocchiaro 1968).
facial diagram
Section of face, showing the position of the organs of speech.
This kind of diagram is effective in showing the articulation of vowels and consonants (Lado 1964).
film
Film combines pictures with movement, colour and sound.
Theoretically one can have the best materials taught by the best teachers, but although a number of films have been made, and probably will continue to be made, they  have not had the success that was expected of them in the fifties.
They have a number of disadvantages:(a) The cost of production — few colleges can afford to make them.
(b) Films date quickly.
(c) The classroom teacher has no control over the content of the filmed lesson (or broadcast TV films).
(d) Should the class teacher disagree, at least in part, with the way the film teaches something, the film may be seen once and then abandoned.
(e) It is necessary to buy costly projection equipment.
However, film may be useful in teaching cultural aspects of a language, or in teaching English for Special Purposes (ESP).
Mary Finocchiaro (1968) believes sound films have disadvantages at the early stages of learning.
It is difficult to stop the film, and the language used may not be simple enough.
Silent film may be used more effectively.
However, if a 16 mm projector is available, use it.
Sound quality is important and so is the competent projection of the film itself.
There are three kinds of film: documentary film designed for language teaching; general film for entertainment; and documentaries.
film loop
Also cineloop.
This is a length of film with ends spliced together to permit continuous repetition.
film strip and slide projector
Relatively inexpensive, easy to operate, and needs little servicing (but keep spare lamp handy).
More effective if blackout available.
Don't wave a finger in front of the screen — use a pencil and be precise.
Several courses link film strips and slides to the tape-recorder.
Film strips and slides can be used to great effect.
They help take students out of the confines of the classroom, while affording them the opportunity to practise pronunciation, grammar, structure and vocabulary.
Film strips can be stopped at each frames and a slide can be held as long as necessary in the machine, enabling the teacher and students to make statements and ask questions in as much times as is needed.
The fact that there is no sound track makes it possible to practise language at the students' level (Finocchiaro 1968).
flannelboard
An effective device for helping students to visualise concepts, story sequences and grammatical changes.
It can be constructed easily and cheaply by tacking a square of white or green flannel to a board 24 ins by 24 ins (60 cm by 60 cm).
A one-inch (2.5cm) square of sandpaper (rough side out) or of flannel glued to the corners of the picture or of the cutouts to be displayed is sufficient to keep the picture on the board.
flashcard
This is a strip or square of cardboard which is held up momentarily in front of the class by the teacher or fixed to the wall or blackboard in order to teach a linguistic item.
The cards may have a word or words, phrases, drawings or photographs on them.
They are a considerable aid in presenting a situation and in eliciting oral responses from the class.
Some hints on their use:(a) Make sure your flashcards clearly bring out the point you want to teach, ie are uncomplicated.
(b) Don't try to teach more than two linguistic items at the same time, eg the  present continuous tense plus vocabulary concerned with the post office would be enough for one period.
(c) Make sure the cards are large enough for students at the back of the class to see and understand.
(d) Don't wave the cards about; hold the card steadily in front of the class long enough for the students to grasp what situation you are trying to present.
(e) Be sure students on your right and on your left as well as those in front of you have a good chance to see the flashcard and understand it.
(f) Hold the card at about the same level as your shoulder, ie above the heads of the first row of students.
(g) While showing the card to the class, talk the situation through.
(See also Lado 1964 and Lee & Coppen 1964.)
gramophone
See record-player.
headcard
A picture card giving the general situation for structural practice accompanied by other picture cards giving more detailed examples.
objects
Ostensive procedures include the use of objects (and actions and situations).
Objects, or models of them, may be used to teach not only vocabulary but structure as well.
The easier these objects can be seen and felt, the easier it is to get the meaning across:(a) Names of things like pencils, tables and books may be taught by a pointing naming technique, the success of which depends on making clear what is being pointed out.
(b) Quality words have meanings which may be effectively presented in contrast to their opposites by means of objects which best bring out their opposing qualities.
For example, long is clearer when contrasted with short.
(c) Certain abstract words, like food, metal and beauty may be taught by grouping together a number of objects, models or samples belonging to the same class.
(d) Structure words which indicate relationship — words like on, in and under — may first be presented through objects which illustrates their particular type of relationship (Mackey 1965).
opaque projector (OP)
See under episcope.
overhead projector (OHP)
Easily maintained, simple to operate, does not need blackout.
The teacher can remain facing the class, so it is easier for him to maintain attention.
Transparencies can be revealed as the lesson progresses, thus focusing attention on the teaching point and also creating a sense of anticipation of what will be revealed next, ie helps to keep up interest.
By using overlays, one can build up a picture stage by stage.
Make full use of colour.
photocopy
Do not present your students with a poorly produced, almost unreadable photocopy.
If the teacher does not take the trouble to present his class with reprographic material of an acceptably high standard, his students will be unlikely to take the trouble to try to read and understand it.
This negative and careless attitude on the part of the teacher can only help to stimulate a negative response among his students.
It is also a waste of time, resources and money to produce such material.
And remember, if the photocopy is difficult for a native reader to read it must be even more difficult for a foreigner.
Furthermore, the teacher should not forget to relate his photocopied material to an item or items which have been, are being or will be referred to during the lesson.
Not doing so will also create negative results.
picture series
This is a series of related pictures — six to eight of them — on a chart.
They may illustrates contrasting sounds (minimal pairs), countable objects, uncountable objects, activities and so on.
pocket chart
This is made simply by stapling four or five strips of cardboard or similar material to a larger sheet to form pockets.
Clearly tabulated folders or envelopes containing cards with the words necessary to form language patterns centred around one cultural or language feature are attached to the bottom of the chart as needed.
Useful for practising language items.
Probably more suitable for use with children.
radio
This is an excellent aid to teaching.
The radio is widely available — there are few households that don't have one; it is inexpensive, compared with other mechanical or electronic equipment, and it is an endless source of material on every possible topic.
Radios today seldom need repairing or the attention of a technician; they do not need accessories which can be expensive and can get lost or damaged.
It is also relatively easy for anyone to record programmes, especially if one owns a music centre or a combined radio/cassette recorder.
There are, however, regulations concerning the copyright and performing rights of programmes.
The radio does also have its disadvantages.
It can be fairly expensive, since sound reproduction must be very good, and it should also have a facility for making recordings.
So a cheap transistor would not be suitable.
Putting a microphone in front of the loudspeaker is not good enough.
Radio material should be recorded before use in the classroom.
This means owning the necessary equipment or having free access to it.
Recording means buying magnetic tape or cassettes on which to record the broadcast material.
All the electronic equipment used should be of as high a standard as possible since the poorer the recording, the less useful it is as a classroom aid to teaching.
It is also important that the teacher is quite familiar with the electronic equipment he is using in order to get the best results from his efforts.
Good sound quality and definition are essential.
The radio could be brought into the classroom and a "live" broadcast used, which would give it topicality and make a real life situation, but this is not recommended.
In such a situation the teacher cannot choose when to use the programme, and unless it is a rebroadcast, he will only have a very general idea of what the programme will be about or what its language content will be (vocabulary, grammar, structures, level of difficulty, appropriateness, etc).
He will not be able to edit it or to introduce pauses to allow for comprehension; nor will he have been able to prepare practice exercises (oral or written) based on the broadcast.
And of course he won't be able to use it again, which he might regret.
The radio provides a wide variety of voices (gets away from the overfamiliar teacher's voice) and is suitable for more  advanced levels.
It can be an excellent source of material for oral comprehension, note taking and summarising, written exercises on vocabulary and grammar, discussion groups and so on.
record-player
Songs, dances, stories, etc are found on record and can be valuable in language teaching but there are disadvantages:(a) Records are rather bulky and can get dirty or scratched easily.
(b) It is difficult to stop the record or start it at exactly the point that the teacher wishes.
These disadvantages are largely overcome by using the tape-recorder or cassette recorder, so if possible put the record material on tape or cassette.
sliding selection chart
Take a strip of cardboard 8 ins by 24 ins (20 cm by 60 cm) and one narrower strip which is slightly longer.
The wide strip will contain a language pattern which is well known to the pupils, eg give him the large book.
Slits will be made on both sides of him and large to permit insertion and easy sliding of the narrower strip.
The latter strip will contain words which the pupils will be expected to substitute for him and large, eg me, them, English, small.
By sliding the narrow strip through the slots, combinations such as Give me the English book may be formed.
Useful for oral and written exercises (Finocchiaro 1968).
stick figures
Drawings, usually of people and animals, in a simple style where the arms and legs look like sticks; these may also be called pin figures or matchstick figures.
teaching machine
This machine may be as simple as a cardboard box with a slot into which a programme can be introduced, and with a knob which the student turns as he completes one line or frame.
On the other hand, it can be a highly complex electronically controlled device into which the programme (the course content) is inserted.
Material is presented in the smallest possible increments.
The student learns immediately whether he has answered correctly.
Programmed texts are excellent for individualised learning since not only can students work at their own pace but they receive immediate confirmation of the correctness of their response (Finocchiaro 1968).
teletrainer
Two telephones permit students at opposite ends of the classroom to engage in conversation while the rest of the class listens.
television (TV) programme
TV programmes, unless specifically designed to teach English, suffer from the same disadvantages as sound film for beginners.
On the other hand, they can be valuable to help students visualise the social and cultural backgrounds in which communication takes place.
video tape-recorder (VTR)
The equivalent of the tape-recorder, but much more expensive.
Useful for ro∘le-playing — students can see themselves in situation when the VTR is played back.
Education TV film can be recorded off the air and played at will.
The video cassette recorder (VCR) is easier to operate than the VTR.
A certain skill and training is needed to make VTR material, but is worth the effort for the interest it can create (Hill in Baer 1976).
vocabulary wheel
A large circle is made of cardboard or other stiff material.
At  regular intervals on the circle are placed pictures of uniform size, either related to a central theme or without any specific relationship.
On the circle is placed a second circle with a small window, the size of a picture.
In the centre is a long paper fastener which permits the second circle to spin round so that the picture will appear in the window.
The wheel may be used for the identification of objects, for forming original sentences based on the pictures, and for building up stories around the picture (Finocchiaro 1968).
whiteboard
A board with an off-white plastic surface.
Water or spirit based felt tipped pens are used for writing on them.
It is also possible to buy magnetised whiteboards.
In the latter case, small, metal discs slightly larger and thicker than a large coin, hold pictures, drawings, etc onto the board and in that way avoid the need for drawing pins.
auditory impression
The effect on the sense of hearing.
aural discrimination
See teaching: teaching aural discrimination.
aural-oral
See audio lingual.
autobiography
The written life of a person, written by the person himself or herself.
autograph
A person's own handwriting or, more commonly, his signature, especially when the person is famous.
automated language learning
There are certain characteristics peculiar to the use of machines in language teaching: Listening To develop the ability to understand the language spoken at a normal speed.
Imitation To develop the sounds, stress, rhythm and intonation of a native pronunciation.
Repetition To master the complexity of skills involved in speaking a language.
Observation of context Learning language as a co-ordinated system of behaviour.
Semantic drill To give practice in putting words in the right contexts.
Pronunciation Drill To give practice in forming the correct sounds.
Practice In reading and writing.
Testing of attainment In auditory comprehension, pronunciation, speech, reading and writing.
In short, all language skills may be subject to automation.
What is the difference, then, between teaching by machines and the teaching by a teacher in the classroom? 1 The learner has no control over the teacher, but he can have control over the machine.
2 The learner cannot ask questions of the machine, but he can ask questions of a teacher.
3 The machine cannot interfere with the content and gradation of the course.
4 The machine takes care of necessary repetitive drills — this saves class time and relieves the teacher of much of the routine of repetition.
5 The machine gives the slow learner as much repetition as he requires without retarding the others.
6 The machines permits up to 100% participation.
7 The teacher may coach and correct any learner individually without disturbing the others.
8 The class may be divided into any number of levels without increasing the number of teachers.
9 Through listening and comparing with the standard model, the student is encourage to evaluate his progress himself.
10 With a machine, the learner may devote as much time as he wishes to practice.
Nevertheless, the most highly automated programme of language teaching is no better than the material it contains; it is what we put into it that determines the quality of the automation.
(Adapted from Mackey 1965)) autonomous and heteronomous languages The context here is sociolinguistics and more particularly the relationship that exists between the terms language and dialect.
Peter Trudgill (1974) explains that Dutch and German are autonomous, since both are independent, standardised varieties of language with, as it were, a life of their own.
On the other hand, the non-standardised dialects of Germany, Austria, and German-speaking Switzerland are all heteronomous with respect to standard German, in spite of the fact that they may be very unlike each other and that some of them may be very like Dutch dialects.
This is because speakers of these German dialects look to German as their standard language, read and write in German and listen to German on radio and television.
Speakers of dialects on the Dutch side of the border, in the same way, will read newspapers and write letters in Dutch, and any standardising changes that occur in their dialects will take place in the direction of standard Dutch, not standard German.
autonomous linguistics
See under linguistics.
auxiliary
The Oxford English Dictionary defines an auxiliary (helping verb) as "a verb used to form the tenses, moods, voices, etc of other verbs," eg will, would, can should, have, am, etc.
availability
Also disponibilité.
In designing a course of study where a choice has to be made between two items, how available are they?
In a classroom situation blackboard is more available than, say, theatre.
avoidance behaviour
See under behaviour.
B
back chaining
Also backward build-up.
A sentence is divided up into meaningful segments.
The students repeat the last segment several times with correct stress and intonation.
They then repeat the last but one segment with the last segment and finally they repeat the whole sentence.
This technique may also  be employed in a forward direction.
Chaining is useful as a phonological drilling technique.
The technique of back chaining may be referred to in the teaching of intonation.
For example Practice the intonation of the model exchange.
The model exchange is the piece of language which is highlighted by a picture strip or box before an exercise.
The teacher takes each line separately and practises the intonation by the "back chaining method" .
Teacher Listen, please: What times does the plane leave? train leave…does the train leave…
What time…
What time does the train leave?
back formation
The formation of verbs from nouns when previously there had been no corresponding verb, eg televise from television.
Compound nouns in which the second element denotes an agent or an action may have for their first element a noun denoting the object of the action: housekeeper, housekeeping.
On the analogy of the morphological pattern keeper-keeping-keep, a verb-stem (to) housekeep is sometimes formed by subtraction from housekeeper and housekeeping.
banter (n)
Humorous ridicule; good-humoured personal remarks.
banter (v)
To converse jokingly.
bard
A minstrel or poet, eg the bard of Avon (Shakespeare).
The term bard has generally been superseded in English by the word poet.
bardolatry
An enthusiastic admiration of Shakespeare (Advance Learner's Dictionary).
base form
A word from which others are derived; courage is the base form of courageous.
basic English
See under English language.
basic sentence
Also marker sentence, rubric.
See under lesson analysis: lesson plans.
Illustration of typical constructions or sentence patterns in the target language.
For example in the revision of I want to + infinitive I want to go to Italy might be taken as the basic sentence.
bathos
The sudden change in writing or in speech from what is deeply moving or sublime to what is foolish or unimportant.
battery
In testing, a large number of sections or items which together make up the complete test.
BBC English
See under English language.
behaviour
avoidance behaviour
A wish not to learn, caused by unpleasant drives which become intense.
The student may seek escape in passivity and make only perfunctory efforts to learn the target language; or he may express antagonism by making no effort to adopt the correct pronunciation or by a deliberate use of native language patterns in the target language.
Avoidance behaviour may be active or passive (Rivers 1964 pp 92–3).
copying behaviour
According to Miller & Dollard (1941),"The follower (the student) learns to model his behaviour on that of another (the teacher) through responding to cues of sameness, for which he is rewarded by a reduction of  anxiety, and to cues of difference, which increase the strength of the anxiety drive.
The student is made aware of the band of tolerance within which his behaviour is acceptable as a match for the model-act by the reactions of an external critic (the teacher) who rewards and punishes sameness and difference.
As a result, the copier (the student) becomes aware of the discriminative cues and so he is able to act as his own critic, thus advancing his learning with his own efforts, without further need of a teacher or critic.
matched-dependent behaviour
Pattern drill, dialogue memorisation, directed or controlled dialogue, recombination practice, narrative: these procedures approximate to what Miller & Dollard (1941) have called matched-dependent behaviour, where the student carefully copies the actions of the teacher in every way.
Rivers (1964) tells us that the essence of this type of behaviour is that responses are connected to a cue from the leader (the teacher).
The student's behaviour is reinforced by approval and self-satisfaction.
This would seem appropriate to the early stages of learning a foreign language, but is too restrictive if carried on to an advanced level.
operant behaviour
Behaviour that has an effect on the environment, which has a return effect on the organism (the student).
In Skinner's instrumental learning/conditioning process (as opposed to Pavlov's classical conditioning) the student emits a foreign language response which is comprehended and thus rewarded by the reinforcement of the teacher's approval.
It is now likely to recur and, with continued reinforcement, it becomes established in the student's repertoire as an instrumental response, capable of obtaining certain satisfaction for the student in the form of comprehension and approval in classroom situations.
It is even more strongly reinforced if by means of it he obtains what he wants in a foreign language environment.
With regard to methodology, audio-lingual techniques (A-LM) seem to meet this situation as they provide plenty of opportunity for the student to use foreign language responses in the classroom situation and to receive the reinforcement of acceptance and comprehension.
So do the techniques of certain other methods, such as the notional approach to language teaching.
Basic to all operant conditioning is the principle that the response must occur before it can be reinforced (Rivers 1964, p32).
teacher behaviour
See under classroom techniques.
verbal behaviour
According to Miller, Galanter & Pribram (1960), behaviour is organised on several levels of complexity.
Using a cybernetic model (an analogical comparison between minds and computers) they worked out the thesis that man has, through language (that is, through verbal behaviour) "the capacity to use plans to construct plans to guide human behaviour" .
Plan is defined as "any hierarchical process in the organism (student) that can control the order in which a sequence of operations is to be performed" .
Skinner (1948) states that"verbal behaviour is emitted behaviour which is reinforced by a listener and develops according to the same principles as other operant behaviour.
In certain circumstances the speaker becomes his own listener and  reinforces his own verbal behaviour."
In other words, verbal behaviour is the individual's use of conventional speech patterns (La parole)(Rivers 1964 pp 44, 177).
behavioural environment
This is an important element in what Lewin calls "life space" , within which there may be"locomotion towards a situation which satisfies a need.
What this situation is depends upon the individual's perception of his environment and how it can meet his needs.
The behavioural environment on which this situation depends is the interrelationships among past achievements, momentary goals, social atmosphere and individuality"(Rivers 1964).
behavioural objectives
The aims for student performance expressed in terms of mastery of specific elements of the target language.
behavioural relations
Osgood (1953) has called these the "representing relation" , "the mediating relation" , "the empathic relation" and "the communicating relation" .
They are the four behavioural relations of signs (words).
representing relation
The categories in which the native speaker places things.
It may seem that at a superficial level these categories are the same in other European languages as they are in our own.
But one will note the different sensory categorisation implied by the French parfum and the English perfume.
The parfum of ice-cream would certainly not fit into the English category.
mediating relation
That between the self-stimulation and the overt response, between words and habits.
At the sound of his own voice saying bonjour, the Frenchman automatically extends his hand.
An Englishman on saying good afternoon does not automatically extend his hand in greeting.
empathic relation
The response made to a sign (word) and that made to the object represented by that word.
This may vary from an identical response to a very different one.
In certain contexts, the word apple may arouse the same mouth-watering reactions as the sight of the fruit itself.
On the other hand, a Frenchman may have feelings of complete indifference to camels, but react violently if someone says to him chameau.
communicating relation
That between mediation processes and particular classes of instrumental skills — the language skills.
The foreign learner must make efforts to manipulate these skills in the same way as the native speaker if he is to convey the "meaning" he intends (Rivers 1964).
behaviourism
See under learning: purposive behaviourism.
behaviourist psychology; behaviourists
The behaviour of any organism is explained and described in terms of the organism's responses to the stimuli presented by features of the environment.
According to the behaviourists, psychologists have no need to postulate the existence of the mind or of anything else that is not observable.
Behavioural psychologists prefer to limit themselves to the physically observable.
Pavlov, Thorndike and Skinner are particularly well known for their research in this field of psychology, though Pavlov himself was a physiologist.
The neo-behaviourist school of thought, on the other hand, allows for emotional processes which are not physically observable  (intervening variables).
Members of this school are Osgood and Mowrer.
bibliography
A list of written works which have been consulted and which the reader may refer to for more information.
bibliophile
A person who loves and collects books.
bilabial
Pronounced with both lips, as with /b/.
bilingual
Being able to use two languages fluently, especially when they are learned together during childhood.
bilingualism
Bilingualism arises when two or more languages are used alternately by the same speaker.
It may be subdivided along a number of parameters.
1 Bilingualism proper versus multilingualism — according to the number of languages spoken.
2 Diglossia — that is, where the two or more languages spoken are varieties of the same language, for example , Classical and Colloquial Arabic.
3 Native versus non-native bilingualism — that is, where there are two first languages (mother tongues) as opposed to one first language and one second language acquired appreciably later.
4 Reciprocal versus non-reciprocal bilingualism — that is, where language A is used or understood by speakers of language B but not vice versa .
The effects of bilingualism may be linguistic, psychological or social (Meetham & Hudson 1969).
binary language
See under language.
biography
The written life of a person.
blank verse
In prosody, verse that scans but does not rhyme.
True blank verse is written in iambic pentameters (that is, each line is divided into five metrical feet, each foot consisting of two syllables with the stress on the second syllable).
blending
Change or omission of sounds in language spoken at conversational speed.
The expression Won't you go? when spoken with abnormally precise diction would be, but at normal speed becomes.
block capital
Term used when a whole word or sentence is required in large, or capital, letters.
Hand written capital letters are easier to read than lower case, or small letters, since the latter usually become highly personalised.
When filling in forms etc it is important that the writing is clear and easily understood.,
Bloomfield, Leonard
One of the most distinguished linguists of the modern period, Bloomfield was largely responsible for the establishment of linguistics as a scientific discipline.
He was among the founders of the Linguistic Society of America and one of its early presidents.
His best known work was Language (1933) which had a profound influence on linguists of his own and succeeding generations.
His descriptive and comparative studies of the Algonquian languages are among the classics of American Indian research.
At the time of his death in 1949 he was professor of Linguistics at Yale University.
blurb
The publisher's description of the contents of a book, printed on the paper jacket back cover or on a promotional leaflet.
body language
See under language.
bondage
In class structure grammar, bondage happens when a dependent clause is bound to an independent clause.
The symbols for such clauses are: independent clause α dependent clause β
booth
A cubicle or small compartment separating each student from the others in a language laboratory.
This helps acoustic isolation and reduces classroom distraction.
bound form
A form or morpheme which cannot exist on its own as a complete utterance.
It must always be accompanied by other forms, eg ab- in abnormal.
In, on the other hand, can be both bound or free: indifferent (bound), in the box (free).
bowdlerise (v)
To expurgate; remove from a book anything thought to be objectionable.
From the name of Thomas Bowdler, who published in 1818.
The Family Shakespeare from which were omitted "those words and expressions which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a family" .
boxing
Also framing.
This may help students to see the basic structure and to combine and manipulate vocabulary and grammatical items.
brackets
Marks () which indicate a parenthesis and show that an item is grammatically separated from the rest of the sentence.
Braille
A system of reading and writing devised for blind or unsighted people.
They system was invented by a Frenchman, a teacher called Louis Braille, who died in 1852.
breath-group
Also sense-group.
A sequence of words which ends at a point where a pause may be made without any detrimental effect to the sense of the utterance.
breve
The mark  placed over a vowel to show it is a short vowel: fa(v)t.
Contrast with macron, showing the vowel is long as in fa(-)te.
British multi-level linguistic system
See under class structure grammar.
bulletin
An official, printed statements of news announcements or general information.
bunkum
Purposeless or senseless talk: You're talking a lot of bunkum!
C
caesura
In poetry, a break between words within a metrical foot; a pause near the middle of the line.
calligraphy
Handwriting; the art of beautiful handwriting.
canon
A body of writings accepted as genuine; those books of the Bible accepted as genuine by the Christian church.
It also refers to other sacred books and to a great author's works, eg the Chaucer canon.
canto
A division of a long poem.
Dante's Divine Comedy has 100 cantos.
capitalisation
The use of capital letters, usually for proper nouns and their derivative adjectives: Germany, German.
carataxis
This happens when a succession of items are placed one after another in a sentence without words to indicate their order or importance.
carrel
A sound-proofed booth similar to the kind found in a language laboratory, for self-instruction; usually has electric power sockets, a fairly large work surface for listening to cassettes, watching a TV monitor, looking at slides, etc.
Appropriate for use with mechanised teaching programmes and teaching machines.
A teaching carrel may also be found in some well-equipped reference libraries, where it can take the form of an enclosed cubicle large enough for one person, with a door and a high window.
Inside there is a simple desk and a chair.
Some learners find that the sense of almost complete isolation in such a carrel is a considerable aid to concentration.
case
The form of a noun, pronoun or adjective which in inflected languages expresses its relation to other words in a sentence.
English is largely uninflected.
Cases are treated under nominative (subject), accusative (object), genitive (possessive) and vocative.
The trend in English as a Foreign Language (EFL) teaching is to use the terms subject, object and possessive.
The vocative case indicates that the person or thing being named is being addressed directly, eg Yes, sir; O Lord, which art in Heaven.
casuistry (n)
The judgement of right and wrong by reference to theories, social connections, etc, often with false but clever reasoning.
casuist (n)
A person who uses casuistry.
catalogue
A list of names, places, goods in a special order, eg a catalogue of books, a sales catalogue.
catalogue (v)
To put in a catalogue, eg All these books have been catalogued.
cataphora (n)
Something which refers forward, to the text that follows.
catchword; catchphrase
A word or phrase used so often that it becomes a slogan.
category
One of a possibly exhaustive set of classes or groupings.
Words may be categorised into verbs, nouns, adjectives, etc.
category of communicative function
A term used in notional English syllabuses to categorise concepts, eg abuse, comparison, distance, motion, solicitude, termination, urge, value, weight, wish.
For instance, the following questions are categorised as request.
category scale grammar
See under  grammar : class structure grammar.
category symbol
a symbol generated by transformational/generative grammar.
Category symbols can generally be identified with classes rather than with functions.
catenation
In phonology, the features which chain sounds together.
Catenation is concerned with the grouping of phonemes into syllables (syllabification), and the grouping of syllables through junction (or juncture), assimilation, elision and word linking.
causative
A kind of passive voice as in these sentences: He had his hair cut; They got their work done; This room needs/wants decorating.
chaining
A useful method of impromptu drilling when a phrase or sentence is causing difficulty, for example in long conditional sentences.
Marker sentence If I'd known the price, I wouldn't have bought the book.
Teacher If I'd known Student If I'd known Teacher the price Student the price Teacher If I'd known the price Student If I'd known the prices, etc
This practice may be done in a forward direction (forward chaining) or a backward direction (back chaining).
It is important that the teacher should divide the sentence into though-groups for easy pronunciation and repetition.
characterisation
Behaviour which involves assimilation of the subject matter, attitudes, and values of the foreign language and culture to the point that one is identified by them.
The student engages in advanced studies or chooses a career related to the foreign language study.
A considerable portion of his time is devoted to promoting the study of the foreign language, literature, or culture.
Alternatively, he may be engaged in promoting harmonious relations between  nations with differing languages and cultures.
The major decisions and judgements he makes in regard to his life are so strongly influenced by his foreign language background, interests and values, that he is known as a linguist, a language teacher, or a diplomat.
This stage in the student's performance objectives characterises the person who is active in one of those professions.
Chaucer, Geoffrey
See under English: Middle English.
Chomsky, Noam Avram
According to Lyons (1970), Noam Chomsky is not only unique within linguistics but is probably unprecedented in the whole history of the subject.
His first book, Syntactic Structures, published in 1957, drew heavily upon his earlier unpublished work, The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory.
Short though it was and relatively non-technical, it revolutionised the study of language from a scientific point of view; he has spoken with unrivalled authority on all aspects of grammatical theory.
That is not to say that all linguists, or even the majority of them, have accepted the theory of transformational grammar that Chomsky put forward.
They have not.
There are at least as many recognisably different "schools" of linguistics throughout the world as there were before the "Chomsky revolution" .
But the "transformationalist" or "Chomskyan" school is not just one among many.
Right or wrong, Chomsky's theory of grammar has been undoubtedly the most dynamic and influential in modern times.
chunking
In the psychology of learning, "chunking" may be combinations of items and relationships which are called"chunks'.
According to Miller (1956), who coined the term, a single chunk may contain a small or a large amount of information.
Short-term memory seems able to contain a fairly constant number of chunks, regardless of who much or how little information each contains.
For example, the number of unconnected words we can hold in immediate memory is about the same as the number of unrelated digits, even though a word contains much more information than a digit.
circa
Also c., ca., circ.
Used with dates, a Latin word meaning about, eg He was born circa 1392.
circular letter
One sent out to many persons or organisations.
circumlocution
Also periphrasis.
Talking around the subject and not coming directly to the point; saying in 30 words what might equally be said in 10.
class; set; system; structure
Classification, "putting into classes" , is one of the means by which language tries to understand and to a certain extent, manipulate nature.
For example, an oak is different from an elm or a beech; but occasionally, it is useful to consider them all together: the word tree makes this possible.
That is, English recognises a category to which the name tree is given; but it does not follow that the categories of one language are always identical with the categories of another.
The term set is used in its generally accepted modern sense, that is a collection of items which have something in common.
These items are usually words but they may be, say, groups or other units.
In particular it is important  to note whether the sets are open sets (like the set of all nouns which is capable of being added to indefinitely) or closed sets (like the set of demonstratives).
The terms open and closed are very similar to infinite and finite, but, as the equivalence is not quite complete, it is best to use the former pairs of words when discussing linguistic sets.
The term element in linguistics means a fundamental part of a structure.
A structure is a potential piece of language that is something like a framework having certain open places that can be filled by appropriate items but not by inappropriate ones.
The group the old pullover has a structure in which the can be replaced by, for example, an, my, Joe's, this, but not by Joe, Monday or want which would produce a non-English group, eg *Monday old pullover.
(*indicates a piece of language which is not used or which has not been recorded.)
The words, the, an, my, Joe's are not themselves elements; the element is the place they occupy in the structure of that group.
Similarly in the clause Politicians speak in two voices, there are three elements: politicians, speak and in two voices.
A class is, broadly speaking, an important set.
The words fatty, fatuous and fateful are members of the set of words whose first three letters are f, a, t, but there is no significance in this feature and it does not make a class.
(The following classes are restricted to words.)
Classes may arise in the following way.
1 A class of words may consist of all the words that may occupy a certain element in a structure, eg prepositions: such classes are positional classes.
2 A class of words may share a significant similarity of form, such as sequences of sounds or letters, eg adverbs.
3 A class of words may undergo regular change of form to provide for certain changing circumstances, in particular:(a) They may change form because they appear in more than one element of a structure: It is my father; It is my father's car.
The form of father changes because it is occupying a different element.
This particular change is typical of nouns.
Similarly in He loves her; She loves him the form he is replaced by him after loves, while her becomes she after loves.
This suggests that these words he, she, him, her, belong to the same class.
They are, in fact, personal pronouns.
(b) They may change form because of their relationship to some changing word (or other item) in the structure, eg the demonstrative this changes to these if dependent, say, on men rather than man.
(c) They may change form because they reflect what is for the language being considered, a regularly observed semantic distinction.
Such changes are made in English to account for the notion more than one and for the notion meaning approximately in the past in verbs.
The word regular is very important here, but it does not mean without exception.
Not every noun has a plural form, but, because such words behave in other ways like words which do form plurals, they are admitted into the noun class, eg advice — it is impossible to say *advices, but it is accepted into the noun class.
Classes under 2 and 3 are form classes; their members frequently coincide.
Subdivision is carried out only in so far as it is profitable; too much splitting would cause more problems than it would avoid.
The variation in form mentioned above in 3 gives rise to what are called systems.
Systems consist of a very small number of terms which thus constitute closed sets.
Number and tense are examples of systems in English.
All languages have systems but they do not all use them for the same purposes; what is an essential distinction in one language may be quite disregarded in another.
So to sum up: if the words in a language are compared with the cards in a pack, the numbers in each suit would be like the open set classes.
It would be easy to envisage them being added to 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and so on.
The two colours and four suits, however, form systems; they are essential for the organisation of games with cards just a linguistic systems are necessary for the organisation of a language.
(Adapted from Scott, Bowley, Brockett, Brown & Goddard 1968.)
class structure grammar
See under grammar.
classical conditioning
See under learning: conditioned reflex.
classroom
Several lists have been made of useful hints.
classroom management
1 Have a regular procedure for taking and recording attendance.
A student assistant could help with this.
2 To facilitate learning of student names, alphabetical seating arrangements might be desirable.
Or students may write their names on pieces of paper and place them on their desks for the teacher to see.
3 Service squads: mature students can be assigned to special duties such as looking after audio-visual equipment or charts.
4 The maintenance of student and teacher records is valuable.
5 Ideally, the teacher should know his students' names, addresses, number of years of English study, place of study, etc.
6 The teacher should find out what his pupils are studying in other classes or what his mature students' professions, jobs and intentions are, in order to integrate their language work (cf Special Purposes English).
7 Background information as to physical, emotional or social conditions will be of value.
8 It is essential to keep up-to-date records of student progress in all phases of work.
9 Records should be kept of individual homework and projects and special language needs.
10 For periods of absence, the teacher should make some provision for informing the substitute teacher where lesson plans, etc are kept.
11 A list should be kept of instructional material, community resources, community events, national or local events, and so on.
classroom techniques
Some hints.
1 Know your students' names as soon as possible.
2 Keep your whole class actively involved as much as you can.
3 When it is time for interrogation, vary your approach — don't always begin questioning from the same point in the classroom; don't always start with the same students but criss-cross about the classroom in a pattern that cannot be identified by the students.
4 Never make your students feel stupid or ignorant; if you want to make a joke at a student's expense, that's all right as long as he  doesn't mind his leg being pulled.
5 Be wary of topics such as politics, sex, race and religion which are very effective in getting a discussion going, as people often have strong feelings on them or find them interesting, but there is the danger of hostility being generated and the discussion getting out of control.
This may result in permanent damage being done to the previously friendly atmosphere of the classroom.
6 If you teach abroad, respect the customs and conventions of the country; it's not for you to shock or try to change their society.
7 Do not ingratiate yourself with your class or you'll begin to lose their respect.
8 Equally, do not act like a martinet.
9 Try to be fair and show equal interests in all your students, not just your favourites or those who make life easier by usually getting the answer right first time.
Show interest in the weaker ones too — they need your encouragement and approval.
10 Ask the brighter students more difficult questions; give the weaker ones less demanding work.
11 Don't allow yourself to be dominated by the student who always knows, or thinks he knows, the answer or who is always asking you questions or giving his opinion on the state of the world.
He may not even realise he isn't giving the others a chance.
12 Try to involve potential troublemakers as much as possible in the classroom activities and never threaten what you know you cannot do.
13 Restlessness or inattention on a general scale suggests the teacher is either labouring the point too much or that the material is too difficult or too easy.
14 Remember the students want to respect you and they want to learn; you start off a class with a great fund of goodwill.
Goodwill that is lost is extremely difficult to retrieve.
principles of learning
See also under learning: theories of learning.
There are two main schools of thought in this regard: the behaviourist approach and the cognitive approach.
The behaviourist laws commonly assume the form of maxims.
1 Get the students to utter the same structure repeatedly (overlearning).
2 Get the students to do so correctly.
3 Do this through good grading of structures by arranging them in order of difficulty (facilitation) and by introducing them one at a time if possible.
The behaviourist approach is repetition and the drilling to the point where the student automatically makes the correct  response .
Lessons must be designed so as to  prevent the learner making mistakes.
The cognitive principles of learning can conveniently be summarised under three headings.
1 the need for experience.
2 the process of assimilation.
3 developmental stages.
These three principles are not only suited to adult learners but they have been readily adopted in the primary school, and the following are suggestions for practising cognitive principles in the classroom with younger children:(a) Give experience of the language they are learning — teach them rhymes, tell them stories, talk to them.
(b) Give them activities — painting, modelling, playing games, and so on.
(c) Don't stick rigidly to a predetermined language syllabus — allow the activities that take place in the class to range freely and develop naturally and let the occurrence of stimulating events that happen in the environment influence the vocabulary and structures that are introduced and practised in each lesson.
teacher behaviour
J.F. de Freitas, at Hammersmith and West London College, has adapted advice given by Mordecai Rubin to his trainees at Columbia University.
These do's and don'ts in no way outline a "system" but they focus on some of the mechanisms and ideas sometimes neglected by practising teachers already familiar with these general concepts.
Do 1 Be energetic, alive and emphatic.
2 Show pleasure at good responses.
3 Be intensely attentive when waiting for answer of imitation.
4 Enunciate clearly.
Exaggerate if necessary.
Make sure students can see your lips, and facial expression.
5 Use arm movements for intonation and rhythmic practice.
6 Move your glance from group to individuals.
Involve all.
7 Use choral and individual response for oral practice.
8 For individual response, pose the question, then pause so that everyone will think.
9 Be friendly but maintain "authority" during lesson.
10 Use facial expressions and gestures to clarify meaning.
Present new words in context.
11 Vary voice — volume, pitch, and speed.
12 Plan and go over lessons in your mind beforehand.
13 Monitor and note down areas of difficulty after lesson for future practice.
14 Be pleasant, good-humoured and always interested.
Don't 1 Don't bury your head in the script.
Go over it aloud and learn what it's about before the lesson.
2 Don't spend too much time correcting one individual or just saying "NO" .
3 Don't repeat wrong sounds and forms when correcting them.
4 Never show annoyance or impatience.
5 Don't use one technique to the point of monotony.
Vary your approach.
6 Don't call on individuals until you think they know correct answer.
(Testing is not teaching).
7 Leave irrelevant questions till later.
Avoid being sidetracked.
8 Don't let the student imitate anyone but the teacher.
9 Don't be satisfied with sloppy pronunciation.
10 Don't persist in a procedure that fails to work.
Adjust.
11 Don't worry if you used some words they don't know.
12 Don't lose attention of class while displaying visuals, writing on the blackboard, etc.
Talk, explain what you're doing.
Ask for help if necessary.
13 Don't assume students understand.
Watch faces.
Take nothing for granted.
14 Don't sound tired and bored, even if you are!
Don't sit down the whole time while you're teaching.
clause
A clause is part of a sentence but, unlike a phrase, is complete in itself, having a subject and a predicate.
As soon as it stands on its own it ceases to be a clause and becomes a simple sentence.
In class structure grammar (see under grammar), a clause may be defined as "a syntactic unit which usually has a subject (S) and a predicate (P); they often have a complement (C) and an adjunct (A) as well." 
adjectival clause
This functions as an adjective and therefore qualifies a noun or a pronoun in another clause.
In The man whom we visited is a cousin of mine the clause whom we visited is adjectival, qualifying the man.
adverbial clause
A subordinate clause which functions as an adverb: Of Comparison In John is taller than his brother was at that age the clause than his brother was at that age qualifies is.
Of Concession In He passed the exam though he wasn't well prepared the clause though he wasn't well prepared qualifies passed.
Of Condition In If it rains today I shan't go shopping the clause if it rains today qualifies shan't go.
Of Manner In They did the job in the way they were told the clause in the way they were told qualifies did.
Of Place In I planted it where you suggested the clause where you suggested tells where I planted it.
Of Purpose In I walk to college every day in order to save money the clause in order to save money qualifies walk.
Of Reason In Because I was late I missed my turn the clause because I was late tells why I missed my turn.
Of Time In They sang as they walked along the clause as they walked along tells when they sang.
apposed subject clause
In class structure grammar (see under grammar), most clauses have only one subject, but there are occasions where two subjects occur in the same clause.
Such occasions arise with the use of it and there.
There are three main uses of it as subject:(a) As a non-referring subject: it was raining (no referent).
(b) As a referent subject: The paper was wet.
It had been lying on the ground (referent-the paper).
(c) As a substitute subject: To stay in bed on a wet day is pleasant becomes It is pleasant to stay in bed on a wet day.
Thus when it replaces an item at S (subject) and that item is written in a later place in the clause, an apposed clause is created.
The it is the substitute subject and the second subject is the appositional subject.
contact clause
A clause in which the relative pronoun, who, whom, which, that, has been left out: The book (which) you gave me is very useful.
co-ordinate clause
Two or more clauses joined together by co-ordinate conjunctions.
defining clause
A clause which defines or clarifies the antecedent and is essential to the meaning of the complete sentence.
Without it, the main clause would not make much sense: The architect who designed the National Theatre is Sir Dennis Lasdun.
dependent clause
In class structure grammar (see under grammar), this may be finite or non-finite.
Finite I agree (independent); I agree if you do (dependent).
Non-Finite Opening the door cautiously, I saw a burglar.
Non-finite clauses are those whose predicator element consists of a non-finite verbal group, such as those in which the first verb in sequence is in one of the following forms.
main clause
One that does not depend on any other clause.
non-defining clause
This may be left out and the main clause will still make sense: Christchurch College, Oxford, which we visited yesterday, is one of the largest in the University.
noun clause
A group of words containing a finite verb and functioning as a noun does.
The following are two examples:(a) As subject of a sentence: What was so good about the film was the acting (the clause what was so good about the film is the subject of was).
(b) As the object of a preposition: He depended entirely on what his teacher taught him (the clause what his teacher taught him is the object of on).
restrictive/non-restrictive clause
See defining/non-defining clause.
subordinate clause
Any clause dependent on another: We will go to the theatre tonight (main clause) if we can get tickets (subordinate clause).
clear /l/
A clear /l/ is the more liquid sounding allophone of /l/, which only occurs before a vowel in English and has no velarisation.
clerihew
A form of humorous verse named after Edmund Clerihew Bentley, who initiated it.
It consists of two rhymed couplets about a famous person.
The lines do not have to scan:
George the third
Ought never to have occurred.
One can only wonder
At so grotesque a blunder.
cliché
Also hackneyed phrase.
An overworked word or phrase.
climax
A series of expressions arranged in order of increasing importance, used for rhetorical effect.
the opposite is anti-climax.
cloze procedure (testing)
Similar in appearance to completion items, cloze tests should not be confused with simple blank-filling tests.
Whereas in ordinary completion tests the words for deletion are selected subjectively (consisting largely of structural words in certain tests and key content words in other tests), in cloze tests the words are deleted systematically.
Thus, once the actual text has been chosen, the construction of a cloze test is quite objective; every nth word is deleted by the test writer.
Certain test writers argue that the blank substituted for the deleted word should correspond to the length of the missing word but in many cloze tests all the blanks are of uniform length.
The interval at which words are deleted is usually between every fifth and every tenth word.
However, if every seventh word has been deleted in the first few sentences, then every seventh word must be deleted for the rest of the test.
The fifth, sixth and seventh words are the most widely favoured for deletion.
The principle of cloze testing is based on the gestalt theory of "closure" (closing gaps in patterns subconsciously) and thus the cloze tests measure the reader's ability to decode "interrupted" or "mutilated" messages by making the most acceptable substitutions from all the contextual clues available.
The length of the text is usually about the same as that of texts used for multiple-choice reading items.
There are two methods of scoring a cloze test: one mark may be awarded for each acceptable answer or else one mark may be awarded for each exact answer.
Both methods have been found reliable, but the former entails the additional work of defining what constitutes an acceptable answer for each item.
No student should be penalised for misspellings unless a word is so badly spelt that it cannot be understood.
(For further reading see Heaton 1975.)
cluster
See also under consonant.
The sequence or bunching together of consonants, eg jumps, or of other language items.
cockney (n, adj)
A Londoner, or London variety of English, especially of the East End.
The word possibly derives from the French coquin (a rogue or rascal).
code
Instead of saying I am happy and he is happy, we prefer to say I am happy and so is he.
Code is used in order to avoid unnecessary repetition.
cognate (adj)
Of the same linguistic family; of parallel development in different allied languages.
cognate (n)
A word in one language which is related etymologically to a word in another language, eg German Haus and English House.
cognitive process
See also under classroom: principles of learning.
The various stages in the acquiring of knowledge.
cohesion
The concept of cohesion is a semantic one; it refers to the relations of meaning that exist within the text, and that define it as a text; it occurs when the interpretation of some element in the discourse is dependent on that of another.
Cohesion is expressed partly through the grammar and partly through the vocabulary.
This gives rise, therefore, to grammatical cohesion and lexical cohesion.
Texts cohere, so cohesion within a text (texture), depends upon something other than structure; it is a property of the text as such, and not of any structural unit such as a clause or sentence.
Cohesive relations are relations between two or more elements in a text that are independent of the structure (for example between a personal pronoun and an antecedent proper name, such as John…he).
A semantic relation may be set up either within a sentence or between sentences with the consequence that, when it crosses a sentence boundary, it has the effect of making the two sentences cohere with one another(Halliday and Hasan 1976).
For example, this particular entry, which is itself a text, coheres within itself, but its component elements cannot be said to relate, or cohere, to the previous or following entries, except within the context of the whole handbook.
This is because the texts under these headwords are distinct and separate entities.
collate
To make a careful comparison between copies of text, manuscripts, books, etc; put together information from different sources.
colligate (v)
When two grammatical items occur together in a specified syntagmatic relation, they are said to colligate and the combination is a colligation (as opposed to a collocation).
collocation
Here are three definitions:
1 A group of words frequently found together and producing collectively a meaning not apparent from the meaning of each component part of the group (Ridout and Clarke 1970).
For example Mike Yarwood takes off (impersonates) the Prime Minister very well.
2 Two or more words normally associating with each other and having much the same meaning as the nominal phrase, eg the very poor, a summit meeting.
(Firth 1968).
3 A tendency to co-occurrence.
An item is said to "collocate with" another item  or items.
A lexical set is a grouping of items which have a similar range of collocation, eg seat, bench, chair, stool, collocate easily with sit (Halliday, McIntosh and Strevens 1964).
colloquialism
An expression used in common speech, but not used in formal language.
colloquy
Act of conversing; conversation.
colon
The punctuation mark (:) used to mark antithesis, illustration, listing or quotation.
comedy
A play whose purpose is to amuse the audience.
comma
The punctuation mark (,) of the least separation indicated between parts of a sentence; also used to separate groups of figures (4,7,25 etc).
common core English
See under English.
communication arts
Another term for language arts or skills, that is, listening, speaking, reading and writing.
communicative
Describing practical knowledge of how language is used: communicative competence.
communicative function
What the speaker uses language for, as opposed to how he does it.
Asking a question is a communicative function, while forming an interrogative is not.
community language learning
See also under transactional analysis.
This approach to language learning is suitable for monolingual groups.
The basic procedure of community language learning has two main steps: investment, and reflection.
In the investment phase, the learner commits himself as much as possible, as he engages in conversation with other members of the learning community.
In the reflection phase, the learner stands back and looks at what he has done in the investment phase.
An important factor in both phases is student security.
At first, the student has numerous negative feelings.
These feelings may come from a previously held prejudice against speakers of the target language or earlier bad experiences with language in general.
Other negative feelings may arise out of the learning situation itself, or the student's total ignorance of the language to be learned.
As the process of CLL goes on, the student becomes familiar with the new language and these negative feelings are dealt with, and the student may be expected to become more and more secure and independent.
In addition to the learners, there is at least one resource person who knows both the target language and the native language, and who has some experience in a non-directive style of counselling as opposed to the more traditional role played by the teacher using the audio-lingual method.
PROCEDURE
The students, seated in a closed circle, simply talk with one another in the foreign language, record what they say on tape, play it back, write it down, and identify and discuss the component parts.
The resource person stands outside the circle.
However, none of these details is essential.
They are merely one  method of making possible the ability to communicate out of which a community can grow.
Investment phase
This has five stages, according to the student's degree of independence.
1 The student says aloud, in the L1, whatever he wants to say to one of the other learners (short sentences).
The resource person, standing behind the learner, supplies the translation, which the student repeats.
The resource person's voice must sound clear and supportive.
The resource person may correct a serious error and repeat the phrase again but with no trace of disapproval or reproach.
The student switches on the tape recorder just long enough to record his utterance, then passes the microphone to another learner to continue the conversation.
2 The student says the phrase first in the L2 without help, and then gives the L1 equivalent.
3 The learner is now enjoying his newly found ability in the target language, but makes numerous errors.
He becomes annoyed or discouraged if corrected too often.
A trying time for the resource person.
4 The learner is secure enough to accept or even welcome correction from the resource person.
5 The learner's use of the target language is basically correct.
The resource person is able to suggest a more precise and expressive use of vocabulary and structure to help him to make his speech more idiomatic and bring it closer to the native speaker's use of the language.
Reflection phase
There are three stages:
1 Immediately after the investment stage, the students talk about the experience in its cognitive, emotional, and physical aspects.
The resource person listens attentively and reflects back what is said, in the L1, in a non-critical way.
He neither agrees nor disagrees, nor does he answer their objections.
2 Playback of recording without interruption.
This stage takes little time after pauses, L1 originals, and the resource person's voicings have been edited out.
3 Playback sentence by sentence.
The sentences may be written on the blackboard and copied down by the learners.
Each learner supplies the translation of the utterances he was responsible for.
The resource person helps the group with any linguistic problems that arise.
(Adapted from Stevick 1976).
community resources
In English-speaking communities these are an aid which may help newcomers whose mother tongue is not English to more effective personal-social adjustment.
These resources include the following areas; welfare, health, places of worship, government agencies and schools and colleges of further and higher education.
comparative
The comparative is used when one object is compared with another separate object or group.
The superlative is used when we refer to one object or group that forms a part of a larger group of collection.
comparative linguistics
see under linguistics.
complement
Words which follow a verb to complete the predicate.
composition
1 See also under writing: composition writing.
2 The description of how a linguistic item is made up.
compound
compound adjective
These mostly consist of two elements, the second of which is usually an adjective, eg seasick, red hot, high dangerous.
compound participle
A word which has as an element either a past participle or a present participle, eg airborne, weatherbeaten, self-taught.
compound complex sentence
When an adjunct takes the form of a two-nucleus group with a subject and a finite verb, this "amplification" is called a clause and the sentence a compound sentence: When the authorities arrived, the ceremony began.
By extension, the term clause may be applied to both (or all) members of the sentence, the leading member being distinguished as the main, head or principal clause from the other(s) as sub-, subordinate or dependant clause(s).
Parallel to the division of adjunct, we may divide sub-clauses into attributive clauses, predicative clauses and adverbial clauses.
Furthermore, we have to add subject clauses, object clauses and predicative clauses.
(See Zandvoort 1957.)
compound word
A word made up of two or more elements, each of which may also be used as a separate word, eg son-in-law, newspaper, goldsmith.
repetition compound
A word such as goody-goody, fifty-fifty, bye-bye.
comprehension exercises
See under reading.
concatenation
The linking together of a series of sounds.
See catenation.
conceptualise (v)
To form an image in the mind.
The teacher helps the student to conceptualise new meanings through his presentation of material.
This is an important element in the audio-lingual method.
concession
This is most usually expressed by means of a subordinate adverbial clause, with although, however, even so, etc: Although we won the war, some say we lost the peace.
concord
Also agreement.
A grammatical term which refers to the fact that certain words must agree in gender, number, case or person.
condition
There are three main sentence patterns for expressing condition in English.
1 S + V (future tense) + if + S + verb (present tense): I shall go if I have time.
This expresses a fact, idea or intention which will be realised if a certain condition is fulfilled.
It is possible for the future to appear in the subordinate clause as well: The firm will expand if the investors will put up the money, although the normal pattern is the future tense in the main clause, followed by the present tense in the subordinate one.
2 S + V (conditional tense) + if + S + V (past tense): I would write to him if I knew his address.
In this case the result of a condition that is supposed or imagined is stated.
The above example is hypothetical, ie because I don't have his address I can't write to him; but if I had it I would then be in a position to write to him.
3 S + V (conditional perfect) + if + S + V (past perfect tense): I would have  bought a new car if I had had enough money.
In this pattern a hypothetical condition in the past is expressed.
All conditional sentences may begin with the subordinate if clause or start with the main clause: If I have time I shall go.
It is also possible to express condition through subject-verb inversion in rather more formal or literary style: Had I had enough money I would have bought a new car.
condition (v)
See under behaviour: operant behaviour and learning: conditioned reflex and operant conditioning.
conjecture
To guess; put forward an opinion formed without facts or proof: It is a matter for conjecture.
conjugate (v)
To give the inflections of verbs in voice, mood, tense, number and person.
conjunction
A word that joins other words, phrases or clauses, such as but, and, although, as .Many conjunctions functions as other parts of speech, chiefly as prepositions, such as before, till, since.
That functions also as a relative pronoun: It was pointed out that the situation was improving (conjunction); The book that you gave me is very interesting (relative pronoun).
connectionism
See under learning.
connectives
An important function of intonation in speech is to show the connection between parts of a sentence or between separate sentences.
The proverbial "Never venture, never win" is pronounced with a rise or a fall/rise at the word "venture" .
In written texts the intonation is likely to be replaced, and the connections between units made explicit, by conjunctions: "If you never venture, you never win" .
Links between sentences can to some extent be made explicit in a similar way, by using connectives such as therefore, thus, on the other hand, or words referring back to previous sentence (Turner, 1973).
connote (v)
1 To suggest in addition to the fundamental meaning.
2 To imply or involve.
connotation (n)
connotive (adj)
Linguistic signs may be classified as denotive (or referential) or connotive (or expressive) according to whether their meaning is intellectual or emotive.
console
The panel of switches, knobs, tape-recorder(s), etc found in a language laboratory.
From the console the teacher can control and direct the language laboratory activities.
consonant
A speech sound produced by a complete or partial stoppage of the breath.
To every breathed consonant (other than the glottal stop) there is a corresponding voiced consonant, ie one produced with the same position or movement of the articulating organs, but with voice substituted for breath or vice versa.
Thus /v/ corresponds to /f/ and /b/ to /p/.
Consonants tend to contribute more to making English understood than vowels do.
There are various ways of classifying consonants.
1 Friction Consonant There are nine consonant phonemes whose main  sounds all have friction as their most important feature.
They are/f, v, 0, o(x), s, z, S, z, h/.
For all of them the lungs push air through a narrow opening where it causes friction of various kinds.
Gliding Consonant There are three, which consist of a quick, smooth non-friction glide towards a following vowel sound, the consonants /j, w/r/.
Lateral Consonant For the sound/I/, the tip or the blade of the tongue is pressed against the alveolar ridge, while the sides of the tongue remain lowered to allow the air to pass out of the mouth laterally, ie over the sides of the tongue.
This is the only lateral phoneme in English.
Nasal Consonant There are three in English, represented by nasal/m, n, n, /.
In all nasal consonants, the soft palate is lowered and at the same time the mouth passage is blocked at some point, so that all the air is pushed out of the nose.
Stop Consonant Here the breath is completely stopped at some point in the mouth by the lips or tongue-lip or tongue-back, and then released with a slight explosion.
There are four pairs of phonemes containing stops: /p, b/; /t, d/; /k, g/; /, /.
Like the friction consonants one of each pair is strong and the other is weak.
2 According to the organs which articulate them (Jones 1909): Alveolar Sounds articulated by the tip or blade of the tongue against the teeth ridge, eg normal /t/.
Dental Sounds articulated by the tip of the tongue against the upper teeth, eg /0, o(x)/.
Glottal Sounds articulated in the glottis, eg /h/.
Labial or Lip Sounds Sounds which may be sub-divided into bilabial: sounds articulated by the two lips, eg/p, m/and labio-dental: sounds articulated by the lower lip against the upper teeth, eg/f/.
Palatal Sounds articulated by the front of the tongue against the hear palate, eg /j/.
Palato-Alveolar Sounds which have alveolar articulation together with a simultaneous raising of the main body of the tongue towards the roof of the mouth, eg/S/.
Velar Sounds articulated by the back of the tongue against the soft palate, eg /k/.
(The velum is the technical name for the soft palate.) 3 On the other hand, classifying consonants according to the manner in which the organs articulate them, one can distinguish eight main classes (Jones 1909): Affricate Resembling a plosive but with separation of the articulating organs performed less quickly, with the resulting fricative sound during the process of separation, eg //.
Flapped Formed like a rolled consonant but consisting of a single tap only, eg flapped /r/.
Fricative Formed by a narrowing of the air passage at some point so that the air in escaping makes a kind of hissing sound, eg /f, z, /; fricative /r/.
Lateral Formed by an obstruction placed in the middle of the mouth, the air  being free to escape at one or both sides, eg /I// Nasal Formed by completely closing the mouth at some point, the soft palate remaining lowered so that the air is free to pass out through the nose, eg /m/.
Plosive Formed by complete closure of the air passage and suddenly removing the obstruction so that air escapes, making an explosive sound, eg/p, d/.
Rolled Formed by a rapid succession of taps of some elastic part of the speech mechanism, eg/r/.
Semi-Vowel A gliding sound in which the speech organs start at or near a "close" vowel and immediately move away to some other vowel (or occasionally to some other sound of equal or greater prominence, such as syllabic /I/).
consonant cluster
A group of two or more consonant sounds, eg /sk/  in skin or /mps/ in jumps, which are in a sequence of close transition.
retroflex consonant
Jones (1909) uses this term to describe sounds which are made by the tip of the tongue placed on the hard palate, that is further back than alveolar /t, d/.
The sound represented by the letter q may be described as a very retracted variety of /k/.
semi-consonant
The sounds /j/, /w/ and dark /l/ are considered to be semi-consonants.
contact clause
See under clause.
context (n)
1 The patterned relation between linguistic events and non-linguistic phenomena.
2 A socio-cultural situation.
3 The surrounding words in an utterance that give a word or structure its particular meaning.
contextualise (v)
To put into a context or situation in order to make a linguistic item easier to understand.
multiple context
Using words in many different contexts, graded and supplementary readers help to make the meaning of vocabulary items clearer, more specific and more complete.
The meaning is clearest when the words, except any new ones, are known already.
The more general the meaning, the greater the number of contexts needed to cover it; the more particular the meaning, the fewer the contexts needed.
Familiarity with both the form and the content of the text helps us to understand its meaning.
Knowledge of the subject matter helps us to understand the meaning of a text in a foreign language (Mackey 1965 p 252).
contiguous (adj)
Similar to another thing.
contiguity (n)
Similarity to proximity.
contiguous conditioning
This occurs when a student learns a word (ie becomes acquainted with it) in a rewarding situation while he either hears the native language word or is confronted with the object or event to which it refers.
This explains latent acquisition of vocabulary and language patterns as well as active acquisition (Rivers 1964 p 38).
continuant
All consonants except plosive, affricates and semi-vowels, ie fricatives, nasals, laterals and /r/ can be lengthened.
They could therefore be called continuants, though the term is usually applied to the frictionless continuant /r/.
continuous aspect
See under aspect.
continuous progress instruction
Continuous progress permits students to advance in a course at their own pace.
In the case of well-motivated students with a high aptitude, the learning rate may be increased by one and a half times or even more, according to Valette and Disick.
Similarly, slow learners are allowed to continue their foreign language study over a period of three or four years in order to master one or two levels.
No penalty is attached to a slower rate of progress.
The enrichment provided by continuous progress is vertical rather than lateral.
In other words, students move on to the next unit as soon as they have mastered the previous one, rather than spend their extra time unnecessarily on application of material just learned.
contour
Also intonation.
The variations in the pitch of the voice, also known as tunes or patterns.
contraction
The shortening of words or word groups by elision or a combination, the missing letters or sounds being indicated by an apostrophe: can't, Jim'll, o'clock, etc.
contract teaching
In contract teaching, students receive a written list of the behaviour they must demonstrates in order to prove that they have mastered a particular unit of study.
Both the material to be covered in tests as well as the criteria used in evaluating student performance are clearly communicated in writing.
In addition, the learning steps a student must follow to prepare himself for each test are specified.
They include both classwork and homework, such as vocabulary lists and exercises, reading assignments, oral tape drills, and written exercises and compositions.
In some cases, the elements of the contract may be negotiated between the teacher and individual students.
contrastive linguistics
See under linguistics.
contrastive stress
See under stress.
contrived dialogue
See under dialogue.
conundrum
A puzzling question, especially one that is asked in the form of a riddle.
converse (n)
An idea or statement which is the opposite of another: He is happy but not rich is the converse of He is rich but not happy.
conversion
See under functional change shift.
co-ordinate clause
See under clause.
copula
A verb form, especially a finite of to be, that connects a subject and the complement or the nominal part of the predicate: His brother was a sailor.
copying behaviour
See under behaviour.
co-referential
Concerned with items that are identical in reference.
In Pick-up the books; Put them over there, books and them are co-referential.
correcting
See under lesson analysis: technique of correcting.
correlative
Referring to words, usually conjunctions, which often occur  together, though not usually used next to each other: neither and nor in He neither smoke nor drank.
counselling-learning
A broader approach to language learning than community language learning.
Counselling-learning is not so much a collection of ideas as a full and personal  commitment on the part of the teacher.
countable noun
See under noun.
counter
See under substitution: verbal substitution.
couplet
A general term for two successive lines of verse, rhyming with each other and of equal length.
course planning
Before planning the course, look ahead to the text of the coursebook to see if you want to change or omit any material.
You may want to supplement the contents with your own aids or those your college provides.
Do not be enslaved by the textbook.
Use it to consolidate and revise, as much as a "teacher" .
Coursebook pictures are useful for setting and extending situations, for teaching additional vocabulary and idioms and for setting composition homework.
Exploit the exercises included in the coursebook lesson.
Use the recorded material if there is any, either in the classroom or, better still, in the language laboratory if one is available.
coursebook
Also textbook.
A coursebook is necessary as it acts as a visual record of progress and can thus be a psychological support to the students.
It is also useful as a memory aid and for consolidation of classwork at home; at the same time the textbook can be a syllabus for the teacher.
The book should be written by someone with linguistic knowledge so that attention is paid to the principles of selection: for example, staging, grading, restriction and repetition.
The situations should relate to the students' needs and the language should be natural, useful and interesting.
There should be provision for practice of all skills, revision should be built in and the design of the text should be attractive and easy to read.
Most coursebooks have accompanying recorded material, which should serve to consolidate what is being learnt with the teacher from the coursebook.
coursebook evaluation
The following notes, questions and observations on courses which have a programmed development and which include written materials and tapes are just a few which may help one to assess the relative merits of the very many courses that are available to the EFL teacher.
New courses appear every year to compete with those which are already on the market (some of which may have been in use for many years) and which are quite successful in their various ways.
Coursebook authors and the teachers who use the fruits of their efforts are all individuals — they differ in age, experience, personality, their views on life, language priorities and so on.
Thus it is highly unlikely either that a course will be designed that is universally acclaimed as the definitive model for all courses or that any one teacher will find the perfect course that suits the needs of his students, his own personality and his own approach to language teaching, but he can change or adapt it as he sees fit.
Why use written material?
This provides a sequence of practices and presentations which are directed towards a goal.
This goal may be immediate or sometimes postponed, depending on form or function.
A course is normally programmed to make irregularities clear in the language system.
This helps the learner to predict what will happen, though often the most regular items are the most redundant (for example, the third person singular of the present simple tense).
The course writer attempts to cover the experience of the native speaker in about 2000 hours of learning.
He makes an inventory of forms, but not of contexts in which the forms arise — this would be a very difficult task as the forms often overlap and can cause confusion to the learner.
He may give more weight to pattern than to vocabulary: how to say things rather than what to say.
The course writer's patterning, whether overt or covert, does not necessarily lead to the patterning he intends the learner to produce.
Input is not always the same as output.
The learner's insight is not simply attained by understanding but by observation.
Contrastive linguistics is used especially in courses designed for monolingual groups (eg for teaching English to Italians in Italy).
Courses for multilingual groups (eg for teaching English in the UK, Australia or the USA) rely more on the author's experience and on the collective experience of his colleagues.
This is not too unscientific or random an approach, as it is often found that one can do an experiment in a defined situation and reinforce one's findings by consulting one's colleagues about their own experience.
The difference in the selection of vocabulary in different courses can be quite marked, as is also the case with grading and recycling.
Word counts can show remarkable discrepancies in the vocabulary control that is typical; for instance they may contain strawberry but not orange.
Choice of themes and situations is governed by religious, cultural and educational considerations of the country of countries for which the course is planned.
Some things can be talked about, others can't.
In language presentation and practice there should be a story of some kind or a series of anecdotes or incidents.
A business course should, naturally, have a string of business situations and a science course should have plenty of scientific vocabulary.
Another consideration is the use of humour, which should be at the right level of sophistication, otherwise it can fall flat (the best kind of humour is that generated spontaneously in the classroom).
Another point to consider is the register used; it is not easy to give examples of spoken English in written form and at the same time retain authenticity.
Coursebook English can easily become stilted, forced and unnatural — this is what Julian Dakin calls "structurespeak" .
The design of printed matter is left to the editor, although the author's treatment of his material will influence the layout.
Lessons should be easy to follow; that is, the teacher should find it easy to keep his place when he has to look frequently from coursebook to students.
The author should provide a clear index and an illustration list; the author should be involved in the recording of taped material, since here he is concerned with spoken, as opposed to written language.
This does not mean, of course, that his voice should necessarily be used in the actual recording of the material.
A course comprises words on paper, illustrations and sounds.
The author's aim is to create, the editor's position is that of midwife.
The results of this co-operation should be enjoyed by the learner and the teacher.
The teaching method will be implicit.
The author appeals directly to the teacher, saying "Do this with my work" .
He also points out additional practice.
The sequence of practice will include work that the student can do without the teacher; there should also be other reference material so that the learner can help himself when he is on his own.
The author should make the learner conscious of his ability, which in turn will reinforce his confidence.
Broadly speaking, the coursebook is a record of things learnt and things to be learnt.
The following is a checklist of points to look for when choosing a coursebook.
1 number of pages.
2 number of illustrations.
3 type size — this is important with regard to reading efficiency.
4 layout.
5 contents page — to check on themes used, etc.
6 structure list.
7 word list.
8 information about other books published, materials, tapes, etc — often carried on the inside back cover.
9 How does the author present the theme of a teaching item, eg verb or tense?
Does he control presentation, identify the item, sequence properly? 10 If a certain item is dealt with, how far removed is it from an item with which it could easily be confused? 11 Are the contexts situational, natural and not contrived? 12 Compare dialogue and prose texts: how many new words are introduced, and in what proportion to running words (words already used)?
How often are new words presented in a stretch of prose?
What is the exposure rate?
Do the new words figure in exercises? 13 Look at the first two lessons for phonological features.
Are there a lot of sounds in a string with perennial difficulty, eg He had his hat in his hand?
What phonological practice is there?
Is there a method of notation?
Does it appear regularly? 14 Are the texts and dialogues written in appropriate and realistic English?
How are the four language skills (listening, speaking, reading and writing) distributed? 15 Are exercises controlled?
Does the author use gap-filling exercises, short answers, multiple-choice questions, etc, and how are they distributed?
Are the answers at the back of the book or on the next page or are they in another book (this would mean extra expense)? 16 Does the student learn inductively or solely deductively? 17 Are the topics and stories interesting and appropriate or are they dull and irrelevant to your students' needs?
Can themes be enlarged upon and can they be used again for further work? 18 What are the illustrations like?
Do you think there are too many or not enough?
Are they too small?
Do they integrate well with the text or a dialogue?
Are they clear and easy to understand or is too much going on?
Are they well drawn or not?
Do you like the artist's style?
These points may equally be directed towards wallcharts, flipcharts and other illustrated material.
19 Is any recorded material available on reel-to-reel and cassette or only on one or the other?(think of the facilities that are available to you.)
Do you think students are given too much time to respond to each stimulus or not enough?
Again, are the exercises controlled?
Are voices sufficiently different from each other not to get confused?
Are they male or female, British, American, Australian, etc, or dialectal?
Is the quality of the recording good enough? 20 How many books are involved in the complete course?
Are they too large or too small?
Do they handle easily?
What about the quality of paper used?
Is the cover design attractive?
What about the price of the student's book, the teacher's book (if there is one) and tapes or any other ancillary material?
covert
Half-hidden; disguised; the opposite of overt.
creative activity
Any form of dramatic play, type of game, any audio-visual experience leading to language growth may be used to stimulate language learning (Lee & Coppen 1964).
creole
A mixture of language (usually incorporating English or French) which has developed into a language in its own right.
criterion-referenced test
Measure of student achievement of predetermined performance objectives.
Its purpose is to diagnose and remedy weaknesses rather than to exclude from further study the students who do not perform well.
cryptogram
Something written in a secret code.
cue
See under stimulus.
culture
The patterns of customs, traditions, social habits, values, beliefs and language of a society of human beings.
Politzer defines it as "the entire complex pattern of behaviour and material achievements which are produced, learned and shared by the members of the community" (quoted in Rivers 1964).
cultural anthropology
Within this context, this is the description of the customs, beliefs and traditions of human societies, from which come the specific meanings of words (Rivers 1964).
curriculum
A course of study in a college or school.
curriculum vitae
a Latin expression for a brief written account of one's personal history, mainly to do with one's education and employment.
It is used when applying for a job.
cursive
Script with the letters rounded and joined together.
cybernetics
The study of control and communication in the animal and the machine, a term first used by Norbert Weiner in 1947 (Oxford English Dictionary Supplement).
As an extension, explains Rivers (1964 p 189), it is the  application of the principles of control systems in machines to human behaviour patterns (see under teaching: teaching machines).
This has aroused considerable interest in recent years.
The central concept is that of feedback.
"Just as a thermostat registers the results of its operation, compares these with the original instructions and adapts its operations accordingly, so in many phases of human activity the organism seems to adapt to its performance.
Negative feedback (feedback of an error) leads to corrective adaptations…; positive feedback leads to reinforcement…
Some psychologists believe that there is constant activity in the nervous system and that the feedback makes possible a continuous re-adaptation and correction of incorrect practices, even while they are occurring."
D
dactyl (n)
In poetry, a foot consisting of one long syllable followed by two short.
dark /l/
A matter of resonance.
A dark /l/ has a resonance approximating to /u/ as in bill or people.
Compare with clear /l/.
dash
A horizontal stoke — in writing or printing to mark a break in sense, omitted letters or words, etc.
datum
A fact or piece of information, especially as a basis for inference.
decibel
A measure of intensity of sound.
declaim
To deliver an impassioned, rather than a reasoned, speech; practise the art of speaking or recitation.
declarative
An utterance in the affirmative.
declension
The different endings to nouns, pronouns and adjectives according to their use in a sentence.
dedication
The written or printed name of a person for whom the book is written, at the beginning of a book.
deduce
To arrive at a theory by reasoning.
deductive (adj)
deduction (n)
A feature of the grammar translation method; learning by deduction the student starts with a general truth and applies it to particular cases.
Contrast with induction, a feature of the audio-lingual method.
deep structure
See under grammar: transformation-generative grammar.
defining clause
See under clause.
definite article
See under article.
definition
From the point of view of methodology, new words may be defined  by words already known.
For example, breakfast is the meal eaten in the morning.
Definitions are only illustrations or explanations of artificial divisions of meaning.
They can include a simple comparison or synonym, eg this is something like that; this word can be used instead of that.
deixis
The capacity to refer an utterance to the context in which it occurs.
Deictic function is pointing out something for the first time, often using demonstratives as in Look at that picture!;
See those horses!
Where that and those are deictic pronouns.
demonstrative
These form a small class of words; they have special plural forms and also appear in pairs denoting nearness or remoteness from the speaker: this, that; these, those; here, there; now, then.
denote (v)
To be the sign of; be the name of.
denotive (adj)
A linguistic sign may be classified as denotive (or referential) or connotive (or expressive) according to whether its meaning is intellectual or emotive.
dependent clause
See under clause.
derivation
Origin, descent.
Many English words are derived from Latin, while much English grammar has a Germanic derivation.
de Saussure, Ferdinand
According to Jonathan Culler, Ferdinand de Saussure is the father of modern linguistics, the man who re-organised the systematic study of languages in such a way as to make possible the achievements of twentieth century linguists.
Born in Geneva in 1857, he was introduced to linguistic studies at an early age by a philologist, Adolphe Pictet.
In 1875, Saussure entered the University of Geneva, where he joined the Linguistic Society of Paris.
He then went on to the University of Leipzig where he stayed for four years, except for an interlude in Berlin of eighteen months.
In 1878, he published his Memoire sur le Système des Voyelles dans les Langues Indo-Européennes which has been called "the most splendid work of comparative philology ever written" .
He spent some time in Paris, where he taught Sanskrit, Gothic and Old High German.
In 1891, he returned to Geneva where in 1906, he became professor of General Linguistics.
Between 1907 and 1911 he gave lectures which were ultimately to become the renowned Cours Linguistique Générale.
In the summer of 1912 he fell ill and died in February 1913 at the age of fifty-six.
(Culler, Saussure, Harrester Press 1972.)
descriptive adjective
See under adjective.
descriptive grammar
See under grammar: types of grammar.
descriptive linguistics
See under linguistics.
determinative
Also determiner.
A structure word which limits or determines a nominal (noun).
These include articles, demonstratives and adjectives of indefinite number.
devoicing
All voiced sounds are likely to lose a certain amount of voicing when they occur at the end of a word or at the beginning.
Some voiced sounds may become devoiced under the influence of surrounding voiceless sounds: the /L/ in play has very little voicing; the /r/ in tray loses some voicing, making it slightly  fricative; the /v/ in fivepence will also be devoiced (because of the /p/) and may even be assimilated to a voiceless /f/: /"faifpens/.
diachronic
A diachronic, as opposed to a synchronic study of language is concerned with the way language evolves from one period of history to another.
diaeresis
The sign (¨) over the second of two vowels to show they are pronounced separately, as in nai¨ve .
In English it is more usual to use a hyphen as in co-operate.
dialect
The regional variety of a language differing from the standard language in vocabulary, pronunciation or idiom; it may be the variety of a language according to the user, which could be termed an idiolect.
dialectology
The scientific study of dialects.
In Britain large scale survey work of this nature did not begin until after the Second World War.
functional bidialectalism
A situation in which speakers of a dialect, or non-standard English, are able to express themselves in Standard English in order to cope with social situations, improve their position in society, and operate successfully in the business world.
dialogue
A series of utterances by two or more people; conversation.
contrived dialogue
A dialogue which has an abnormally high number of words or structures related to a particular topic.
directed dialogue
In methodology, explains Rivers (1964), this technique consists of learning the dialogue by heart, where the teacher suggests exactly what the students should say in both questions and answers.
The dialogue should be overlearned to the point of automatic response to the dialogue situation and practised in various adaptations.
However it should be noted that there is a limit to the amount of repetition that is effective, even with reinforcement, such as praise.
model dialogue
This may be used at the repetition stage of a lesson.
Dialogues are the commonest form of expression.
Since all elements in a dialogue are interrelated, they are more significant than isolated sentences.
So how is the dialogue presented?
In one method, the recordings give dialogues, without pauses, for learners to study and imitate.
In another, the dialogue is first presented as a unit for the learner to hear.
It is then repeated, with pauses for the learner to imitate.
And finally it is divided in such a way that the learner hears only one of the speakers and supplies the responses for the other.
At a more advanced level, the recording gives an account of a situation in which the learner is invited to place himself.
It then gives only one half of the dialogue of the situation, letting the learner invent the other half (Mackey 1965).
open dialogue
An oral practice exercise where the learner must complete his half of the dialogue by listening carefully to each stimulus.
An example: Alan Hello, I'm Alan, Alan Simmons.
What's your name?
Student…
Alan Are you a student?
Student…
Alan Are you English?
Student…
Alan Oh well, I'm English.
I'm from the south of England — London, actually.
What about you?
Where are you from?
Student…
Alan Oh, really?
I live in Manchester now.
Where do you live?
Student…
Alan And your parents?
Where do they live?
Student…
Alan Where is that exactly?
Student…
Alan Oh yes.
Well, I must go now.
Goodbye for now!
(Abbs & Freebairn 1977)
dictation
A useful testing device for beginning and intermediate students.
The responses that such students make will tell the teacher something about their phonological, grammatical and lexical weaknesses.
Other types of tests, however, provide more complete and systematic diagnosis and in less time.
diction
1 The manner of enunciation in speaking.
2 The choice of words and phrases in speech and writing.
dictionary
There are two traditions of lexicography (making dictionaries), both of which originate in England.
The earlier tradition is that of Samuel Johnson, compiler of the 1755 Dictionary of the English Language, in which the lexicographer acts as a linguistic legislator or arbiter.
The slightly later and opposing tradition is that of the lexicographer as the objective observer and recorder of language.
For the English-speaking nations, this concept was first realised on a substantial scale in what is now known as The Oxford English Dictionary,(originally entitled A New English dictionary on Historical Principles).
didactic
Intended to teach; having the manner of a teacher.
differential grammar
See under grammar; grammar and lexis, differential description of.
differential lexicology
See under lexicology.
differential stylistics
See under stylistics.
diglossia
See under bilingualism.
digraph
A combination of two letters to represent one sound, eg ph standing for /f/, as in photo.
diminutive
A suffix added to a noun or form of a noun that expresses the idea of a smaller form of the person, animal or thing referred to: duck — duckling, cigar — cigarette.
A diminutive form of a name can also express affection or familiarity: John — Johnny, Elizabeth — Liz, or Betty.
diphthong
A combination of two vowel sounds merged into the time space of a single long vowel (monophthong).
In English, the first element dominates: bi:, ba:,, bei,, bai, bau,,,,.
A frequent fault is making the diphthongs too long: each element is too clearly articulated.
Using the vowel frame, the articulation place of the diphthongs is as follows (the arrows indicating  the direction in which the tongue rises slightly.
A diphthong followed by, for instance, the ending -er (like tower) creates a triphthong, three vowels merged into the value of one long vowel.
The same care must be taken not to make the triphthong too long, or each element over-clear.
Those students making this mistake should practise saying coward and card within the same space of time; observing that the different between the two lies in a slightly more forward a element, followed by slight tension in the lips for coward, while the lip position is static for card.
English includes other diphthongs as well, notably mere and mare, cure and poor, all developed as a result of the silent r.
Students rarely mis-pronounce these diphthongs (except having the tendency to pronounce the r)(Haycraft 1971).
 centring diphthong
The beginning of this diphthong has a stronger stress than the end: here, idea.
closing diphthong
The lips are spread.
The movement of the tongue is easily felt if one repeats the diphthong a number of times in succession: /dei/ day, /meik/ make.
falling diphthong
 Centring and closing diphthongs are in this group, because the "prominence" of the sound undergoes a diminution as the articulation proceeds.
For instance, the end part of the diphthong /ai/ is less prominent than the beginning part.
rising diphthong
Diphthongs of the ie and ue types are easily pronounced in a "rising" manner in such a way that the end part is more prominent than the beginning.
For example happier, idiom.
direct practice In methodology, this is repetitive drill, including rote learning.
direct question
See under question.
direct speech
The exact words of a speaker given in inverted commas.
discourse
1 A self-contained text.
2 A conversation.
discourse function
Communicative function within the context of a conversation or discussion.
An approach to teaching and learning, or to the analysis of a language, which concentrates more on communicative than linguistic functions.
discrimination
In psychology, the process where limits are set to generalisations, or summing up.
 "By differential reinforcement of responses an individual can be led to make finer and finer distinctions among what originally may have appeared to be very similar stimuli." 
(Rivers 1964)
disponibilité
Also availability, although the French word seems to prevail.
In designing a course of study, where a choice has to be made between two items, how "available" are they?
In a classroom situation, a blackboard is more available than, say, a theatre.
distinguisher
In psycholinguistics, an item's meaning, it is said, can be analysed into a number of semantic markers — components or features also found in the meanings of other items, eg the -ly of an adverb such as clearly — and a distinguisher, which is the residue of meaning after the markers have been deducted (clear).
distracter
An incorrect response in a multiple-choice question.
disyllabic
Having two syllables: kitchen, football.
doggerel
Poetry which is of poor quality:
Our hero travelled afar
Until he got to Africa
Where he made a famous name
Shooting all kinds of big game.
dogma
A principle or group of principles.
dogmatic (adj)
Asserting opinions in an authoritative, arrogant way.
drama
A play for the theatre, radio or TV; the presentation and performance of such plays.
drills
Also pattern practice.
Most of the various pattern practice drills force the learner to make a grammatical or semantic choice in response to a question or a call word.
Pattern practice makes grammatical explanations superfluous and encourages learning by analogy.
Taped recordings have a pause after the prompt, cue or stimulus (whichever term is preferred) to permit the learner to supply the correct response.
In self-correcting drills, the pause is followed by the correct response, permitting the learner to compare immediately what he has said and what he should have said (Mackey 1965).
antonymy (opposites) drill
For : Teacher Married/single Student My friend has decided to get married.Why doesn't he stay single?
chain drill
A technique for ensuring pupil participation, in which one student asks a question or makes a statement to the student seated next to him, who in turn makes a statement or asks a question of the student seated next to him.
echo questions
The transformation of statements into questions by a shift in intonation.
In real life it is not unreasonable to expect that the learner may often hear things of which the meaning escapes him.
The echo question is a technique of eliciting clarification or confirmation  A He left an hour ago.
B An hour ago?
A Yes, an hour ago.
integration drill
For example: Teacher I know the man.
He owns the garage.
Student I know the man who owns the garage.
intonation drill
Teacher A bird in the hand (?)
Student is worth two in the bush.
Teacher A stitch in time (?)
Student saves nine.
Intonation practice is not confined to transformational drills.
All drills, whether grammatical or phonological, which preserve a constant pitch pattern in the responses are substitution drills from the point of view of intonation.
All grammatical drills give practice in sound combinations and rhythmic groupings: Teacher What's that?
Student It's a teacup.
Teacher It isn't a teacup.
Student It is a teacup.
Teacher Did you say "coffee cup" ?
Student No.
It's a teacup.
Teacher Did you say "the teacup" ?
Student No.
It's a teacup.
Teacher So she's a teacup.
Student No.
It's a teacup.
This  pronunciation drill demands variation in the rhythm and intonation of a sentence.
It uses combined pictorial and verbal prompt.
The prompt indicates which of the syllables of the sentence is to be the tonic syllable (ie carrying the main stress).
The first example shows the normal placing of the tonic.
The student looks at the picture and hears a comment; the student patiently replies, reading his answers aloud.
Collocation and implication relationships can also prompt words differing in sound or stress like ship and sheep; "blackbird and" white "sheep;" paperknife and "paper" knife.
meaningless drill
Drills may fail for several reasons.
1 The drills used are ill-designed or unsuitable in some respects for the learners for whom they are intended.
2 Drills, however well designed, are a limited form of practice.
3 Drills can often be performed well without any attention being paid to the structure or meaning.
(Adapted from Dakin 1973.)
mechanical drills
Drills which elicit repetition, substitution, and so on, but where it is possible to form sentences without understanding them.
minimal pairs
A useful step in oral instruction is to teach the learner to discriminate between phonetically similar but phonemically separate sounds in the target language.
Quite often this includes drill with minimal pairs, sets of words which differ from each other in just one phonemic contrast.
Thus, for example, a teacher working with the important English distinction between /i/ and /i: /might wright two columns of words on the board, such as : and then, as recognition drill, pronounce words randomly from the two columns, asking members of the class to identify the column from which each word is taken.
mutation drill
Here the student is provided with the infinitive, either in isolation or as a part of a sentence.
1 Teacher Read — Student I've already read it.
Teacher See — Student I've already seen it.
Teacher Hear — Student I've already heard it.
2 Teacher Do you want to read it?
Student I've already read it.
Teacher Do you want to see it?
Student I've already seen it.
Teacher Do you want to hear it?
Student I've already heard it.
prepositions drill
For example: Teacher The Queen — Student The Queen lives in Buckingham Palace.
Teacher The Prime Minister — Student The Prime Minister lives at 10 Downing Street.
Teacher Sailors — Student Sailors work on ships.
pronunciation drill
System and structure are not the exclusive properties of the grammar of a language.
They can be found in its phonology and in its vocabulary.
1 to give practice in preserving a stress pattern despite an increase in the number of syllables in the rhythmic group: Teacher Poll's doll was sick, sick, sick.
Student Poll's doll was sick, sick, sick.
Teacher Miss — Student Miss Poll's doll was sick, sick, sick.
Teacher Polly — Student Miss Polly's doll was sick, sick, sick.
2 to give practice in the placing of stress: Teacher "Rebels — Student" Rebels re'bel.
Teacher "Permits — Student" Permits per'mit.
Teacher "Portraits — Student" Portraits por'tray.
3 to give practice in changes in intonation: Teacher A bird in the hand.
Student A bird in the hand?
Teacher To live from hand to mouth.
Student To live from hand to mouth?
Teacher Every cloud has a silver lining.
Student Every cloud has a silver lining?
replacement drill
For example: Teacher He lost his pen.
She — Student She lost his pen.
Teacher Found — Student She found his pen.
sound bracketing drill
These give practice in making unaccustomed sounds by going from one phonemic boundary to another.
For example, the difference between /i/ and /i: /or /p/ and /b/.
This kind of drilling may be based on the use of minimal pairs.
substitution drill
For example, to teach the present perfect tense: Teacher Read — Student I've already read it.
Teacher Heard — Student I've already heard it.
Teacher Seen — Student I've already seen it.
synonymy drill
For example: Teacher Father walked here.
Student He came on foot.
Teacher Mother flew here.
Student She came by plane.
Teacher Father earns a lot of money.
Student He's very rich.
Teacher John works with wood.
Student He must be a carpenter.
Teacher A butcher — Student A butcher's a man who sells meat.
transformation drill
This may require the substitution of new words in each response and the mutation of their form: Teacher Do you want to go there?
No — Student No.
I've already been there.
Teacher Do you want to hear it?
No — Student No.
I've already heard it.
Teacher Do you want to see it?
Yes — Student Yes.
I haven't seen it yet.
Teacher Do you want to read it?
Yes — Student Yes.
I haven't read it yet.
In this drill the adverb is moved to the end of the sentence in which not is inserted.
Any drill which requires changes in word order, whether optional or obligatory, which requires the addition or deletion of grammatical constituents such as not and which further exacts the alteration of grammatical pairs such as already and yet, can be called a transformational drill.
Such a drill can practise: 1 Changes from affirmative to negative.
2 Changes in voice.
3 Changes in mood, for example from indicative to interrogative or from imperative to subjunctive.
4 Change in sentence type, from simple to compound or complex.
transposition drill
For example: Teacher (Ask for some.)
I like ice-cream.
Student Give me some ice-cream.
word grouping drill
For stress: Teacher Dancers — Student "Dancers" dance "dances Teacher Importers — Student Im'porters" import"imports
drives
Psychologically, these are tension states which energise the organism, ie make the student receptive to learning.
They are based on physical needs such as hunger and thirst which are satisfied by primary reinforcement in the form of food and water.
(See systematic drive reduction theory under learning: theories of learning.)
The reduction in the intensity of the stimuli associated with the drive is as reinforcing as the actual reduction of the drive itself: thus food in the mouth does not reduce hunger, but it is reinforcing as it reduces the drive stimulus or craving for food.
This leads to the concept of secondary reinforcement, in that things that are not actually drive- or need-reducing, but are consistently associated with the things which reduce the stimuli associated with the drive, can become reinforcing through this association and themselves reduce drive-stimuli.
Similarly, things which are consistently associated with drive-stimuli can acquire power to arouse a secondary drive, such as anxiety or fear.
Learning is considered to be a consequence of either primary or secondary reinforcement, but the strength of a response depends on the level of drive (or drives) which is operating at that particular moment.
Failure to act may be due to reactive inhibition which results from pain or fatigue and acts either as a barrier to repetition of the act or as a drive strengthening any activity associated with its reduction, such as rest (Rivers 1964 pp 171–2).
acquired drive stimulation
A psychological term meaning anxiety.
Reward reduces this condition.
It must be borne in mind, however, that too much  reward can reduce the drive-stimulus to zero after a certain point has been reached.
According to Rivers (1964 pp 54–5), if language responses which would be unacceptable to a native speaker are rewarded too readily, the student's anxiety about the perfection of his work will be reduced and the unsatisfactory responses will remain firmly entrenched in his memory.
At the same time, it is the responsibility of the teacher to watch the situation carefully, in the light of his understanding of his students, in order to see that this withholding of reward is not carried to the point where the student feels discouraged.
exploratory drives
This simply means curiosity.
The novelty of new subject matter and of the distinctive methods of foreign-language presentation awakens the student's curiosity or exploratory drive.
The foreign-language teacher usually starts off with a class with a set to learn.
Lewin explains "set" as a tension in the nervous system which continues, and brings about action, until some goal is achieved which releases the tension.
If the teacher explains the aims and objectives of the foreign-language course and the methods to be employed to attain them, he may transform this attitude into a readiness to learn by a certain method.
He will also obviate the effects of early disappointments at not being able to "speak like a native" after several weeks of study.
Instead, students will experience a high degree of satisfaction from being able to speak a number of simple phrases "like a native" , while realising that they are far from the ultimate goal (Rivers 1964 pp 83–4).
duration
Most speech sounds, except the plosions of plosive consonants, are capable of being continued during a longer or shorter period.
The actual lengths of sounds in connected speech vary greatly.
Words such as see, car, raw, two, fur, have fully lengthened vowels.
Diphthongs vary in length in the same way as the "long" vowels.
dyslexia
Word-blindness.
See alexia.
E
eclectic
Choosing and accepting freely from various sources.
effect
See under learning: law of effect.
ego-involvement
In psychology, the degree to which an individual's goals are real to him, as related to his level of aspiration (his momentary goals).
See also learning: theories of learning: filed theory.
(Rivers 1964 p 182).
ejaculation
An interjection but not synonymous with exclamation.
Exclamations are usually expressions of surprise or worry: Look at the time!;
What a dirty face you've got!
An ejaculation is an utterance thrown out suddenly and is very short: Help!;
Mind out!
elegy
A mournful poem.
Perhaps the best-known elegy in the English language is Gray's Elegy written in a Country Churchyard, of which this is the first verse:
The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly o'er the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
element
See under linguistic element.
elicit
To draw out, as elicit a response.
elide (v)
To omit a vowel or syllable.
In some consonant clusters, sounds are apt to be elided, ie omitted, in rapid speech.
Next week is usually rendered as /neks wi:k/, the /t/ being elided.
elision (n)
Just as the system of assimilation varies from language to language, so does the system of elision.
ellipsis
The omission of a word or words necessary to complete a grammatical construction correctly.
For example, in the sentence People have and still do disagree on this matter the form disagree cannot follow both have and do.
The correct sentence would be People have disagreed and still do disagree on this matter.
On the other hand, I started smoking again last month.
I wish I hadn't (started smoking again) is acceptable.
elocution
The art of style of speaking well, especially in public.
elucidate
To explain, make clear, with reference to a difficulty or problem.
embedding
In structural linguistics, a dependent clause which is structurally integrated into the main clause is said to be embedded in it.
emend (v)
To correct errors.
emphasising adjective
See under adjective.
emphasising adverb
See under adverb.
EL 1
English as a first or native language.
emphasising pronoun
See under pronoun.
emphatic affirmative
The anomalous finite do is used in the affirmative for purposes of emphasising the verb element: I do like strawberries!;
You did do that well!
encyclopaedia (or encyclopedia)
A book or set of books giving information about every branch of knowledge, or on one subject, with entries in alphabetical order.
endophora
Reference within the text or situation: it's the same dog as the one we saw yesterday.
In English, nearly all reference items are endophoric.
See also cataphora, exophora and homophora.
English language
Several varieties can be distinguished.
American English
The divergence of American English from British English was first noticed about 1750.
The scientific study of American dialects began in 1889 with the American dialect Society.
Later came Mencken's American Language, published in 1919; the quarterly American Speech was followed by Krapp's English Language in America in 1925 and later still a linguistic atlas of the USA was produced.
American speech forms have three major groupings: Eastern, Southern and  Mid-Western or General American.
It has been shown that there are as many as 10 major regional dialect areas.
Nevertheless, almost all Americans understand each other, and are generally understood by non-American native English speakers.
After Received Pronunciation,(RP), General American is the most fully described accent of English.
Its importance lies not in its exclusiveness, but in its inclusiveness.
It is the native accent of more than 203,000,000 people and is spoken over wide areas of the United States and in parts of Canada.
For details, readers are referred to Kenyon (1930).
basic English
An international language devised by Ogden and Richards in 1929.
It has a vocabulary of 850 words, some 70% nouns, 18% adjectives and adverbs, 2% verbs and the remaining 10% structure words.
Basic English has been criticised particularly because the limited vocabulary leads to circumlocution in order to express often quite simple concepts.
The word "basic" is a acronym of British American Scientific International and Commercial.
(Based on Ridout & Clarke 1970.)
BBC English
This is RP (received pronunciation) and is used by radio and TV announcers and presenters.
In fact, any accent or dialect may be heard on the BBC.
RP or BBC English is widely intelligible and is non-regional.
broken English
English as spoken by a non-native speaker who shows a lack of knowledge of English grammar, syntax and vocabulary.
This is accompanied by limited fluency and usually poor phonological achievement.
Nevertheless, the speaker is able to express himself in a limited fashion.
common core English
The English necessary for social communication, on which most coursebooks other than those concerned with English for Special Purposes are based.
English for special purposes (ESP) /Special purposes English
This is a specialisation according to the use to be made of the language by the learner.
As an example, specialised teaching courses have been prepared for pilots, air-traffic controllers, doctors, scientists, secretaries and businessmen.
Middle English (ME)
The Middle English dialects are mainly continuations of the corresponding Old English ones, but it is convenient to designate them in some cases by different names.
The four principal divisions are Northern or Northumbrian, Midland corresponding to the older Mercian, Southern and Kentish.
Southern and Kentish are included under "Southern English." 
Though Southern English represented geographically the old West Saxons, it also showed strong Midland influence.
This mixture of dialects is still stronger in the later language of Chaucer (1340?— 1400).
His writings fall into three periods: French 1359 — 1372 Italian 1372 — 1386 maturity 1386 — 1400 To this last period belongs his best-known work The Canterbury Tales of about 1387.
They were first printed by William Caxton in 1475; the collected works were first illustrated by William Thynne in 1532.
Roughly speaking, fully developed Middle English may be said to extend  from 1150 to 1450, the period between 1200 and 1450 being especially well marked and well represented by written documents.
The period from 1050 to 1150 is known as "Old Transition" , that from 1450 to 1500 as "Middle Transition" .
The difficulty of drawing a line marking the end of Old English and the beginning of Middle English is increased by the varying speeds of change of the different dialects.
Taking Southern English as standard one may call everything before 1300 Early Middle English, everything after 1300 Late Middle English.
non-standard English
Dialectal English; language in which the widely accepted rules of  grammar and syntax are not necessarily observed.
notional English
See under notion.
Old English (OE)
Also Anglo-Saxon.
There were four main dialects: Northumbrian Mercian, corresponding to the later Midland West Saxon Kentish Northumbrian and Mercian form the Anglian group.
The Southern group was formed by Kentish, which represented the dialect of the Jutes, and West Saxon which represented that of the Saxons.
The oldest surviving dated manuscript containing Old English words is a Kentish charter of 679, though some runic inscriptions are probably older.
At the end of the ninth century a great revival of prose and literature under King Alfred (849–901), took place.
From then on, West Saxon became the official language of the laws and the charters, although the local dialects were still represented in more or less unsophisticated texts.
social English
English used for communication outside commercial, scientific or other specialist contexts.
It is English for everyday communication.
standard English
Non-dialectical English.
It contrasts with regional dialects in its wide intelligibility and in the official recognition accorded it.
Sometimes it is meant to include RP or BBC English.
enjambement
A French term, used in poetry to indicate the carrying over of the sense from one line or couplet to the next.
enumeration
In presenting new material to a class, a meaning may be taught by listing or enumerating what it includes.
For example, dogs, cats, horses and cows are animals.
enunciate
To pronounce words: This speaker enunciates his words clearly.
environment
1 In linguistics, any series of symbols in a representation of a linguistic item has an environment, which includes the remaining symbols but excludes symbols representing constituents of the item it represents, and a context of the item, again excluding items of the which the symbol concerned is itself a constituent.
2 See under behavioural environment.
epidiascope
Also episcope.
See under audio-visual.
epigram
A saying that conveys much meaning in a few words; short poem ending in a witty turn of thought.
epigraph
An inscription on stone, statue or coin; words commemorating someone who has died.
epilogue
The last part of a literary work, especially a poem spoken by an actor at the end of a play.
episcope
Also epidiascope.
See under audio-visual.
episode
The description of one event in a chain of events, especially in plays on radio and TV.
epithet
An adjective or descriptive phrase expressing some quality or attribute: William the Conqueror, the Virgin Queen.
Epithets can be abusive: You clumsy fool!
epitome
A short summary of a speech or book.
Not common usage.
eponymous
Giving one's name to a people, place or institution, or to the title of a book or play.
erratum
An error in printing or writing, especially when shown in a list attached to a book.
Note the plural form: errata.
This irregular plural ending may occur when the word comes directly into English from Latin rather than via French.
It is a member of a class known as classical nouns.
Esperanto
See under language: artificial language.
Esquire (Esq)
A title of courtesy used in the UK in the address of a letter after a man's family name, instead of Mr before it.
essay
A short literary composition usually in prose.
When this is given as written practice it is usually between 250 and 3,000 words in prose on a given subject.
A method of writing essays may be stated simply in four stages.
1 Think about the subject and jot down ideas and facts as they occur to you.
2 Arrange these facts according to topics, constructing an outline for composition.
3 Write the essay.
4 Revise what has been written.
While the term essay may refer to a form of highly regarded literary style, the term composition is always limited to the classroom.
et cetera(etc)
From the Latin, meaning and the rest.
etymology
The scientific study of language and its history and derivation.
eulogise (v)
To praise highly in speech or writing in a formal manner.
euphemism
Speaking in pleasant terms of an unpleasant subject; substitution of a mild or vague expression for a harsh or direct one, for example pass away for die.
euphony
A pleasing sound; tendency to phonetic change for ease of pronunciation.
euphuism
an elaborately artificial style of writing or speaking which was fashionable in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
From the name of the chief character in John Lyly's Euphues.
The Anatomy of Wit (1578) and Euphues and his England (1580) are books written in this style.
evaluation
The teacher's assessment of a student's abilities in the four language skills, based on the student's classroom performance.
formative evaluation
The assessment of a student's mastery of specific elements which have been taught, in order to determine what still remains to be mastered.
summative evaluation
The general assessment at the end of a course of instruction; the evaluation is usually made for grading purposes.
exclamation
This is an interjection but not synonymous with ejaculation.
Exclamations are usually expressions of surprise or worry: Look at the time!;
What a dirty face you've got!
An ejaculation is an utterance thrown out suddenly and is very short: Help!;
Mind out!
exclamation mark
The punctuation mark (!) indicating an exclamation.
exophora (n)
The surrounding text or situation.
For example, in Pass me the sugar the referent (ie the sugar on the table in front of you) is identifiable on extralinguistic grounds.
See also cataphora and endophora, homophora, anaphora.
expectancy
See under intervening variables and under learning: purposive behaviourism.
explanation
In the presentation of new material in the classroom, if the native language is used for explanation, what does it explain?
In addition to explaining the meaning of words and their usages, the native language may be used to explain such things as grammar rules, the production of sounds, differences in the structure of the two languages and the situations about which the language is to be used.
Some methods avoid native language explanations altogether on the grounds that such explanations can only be abstract and confusing to the learner, and that they make him spend his time not so much in learning the language but rather in learning about the language (Mackey 1965 p 240).
expletive
A swear-word; word without semantic meaning, expressing an emotion, eg ah! phew! damn!
exploded drills
A drill which has been expanded in order to give the student time to respond to a stimulus, and which is the kind of drill used in a taped programme in a language laboratory.
exposition
An explanation of a theory, or interpretation of a theory.
Not to be confused with the French word exposition which is normally translated into English as exhibition.
expurgate
To take out improper or objectionable parts from a book.
extension material
This can take the form of reading texts, such as materials like advertisements, notices, timetables, graphs, charts, etc.
Or the text may consist of connected prose passages, items of information about some aspect of British life, letters, newspaper articles and so on.
Extension material is designed to develop reading, writing and communicative skills.
external behaviour
Any overt, observable behaviour with which a teacher is concerned.
In the area of the language skills, it refers to speaking and writing.
formative evaluation
Measurement of student performance at the end of a  lesson or unit (quiz, test, unit test).
The results are used to help the teacher to diagnose student deficiencies.
extinction
See also under learning: conditioned reflex.
In psychology, the student's forgetting what has been learnt.
River (1964) affirms that if a response "is not reinforced by a satisfying or rewarding state of affairs, it will tend not to recur and so will gradually disappear from the individual's repertoire by the process of extinction" .
extramural
Referring to study done outside normal college, polytechnic, university, etc, term-time or work done elsewhere than at the college itself as in extramural activities.
Literally it means beyond the walls.
extrapolate
To estimate on the basis of certain known variables.
F
fable
A short story in prose or verse which is written so that a moral may be learnt from it.
Aesop's fables are probably the best known.
facilitation
Psychologists have found that a great number of items can be learned in a fixed amount of time if these fit into established and interconnected patterns.
We learn systematic and regular series more easily than irregular ones.
The irregular ones lead to error analogy.
The more such errors appear in the learning process, the more likely they are to appear later in the use of the language.
Responses associated with one stimulus will also be associated with all similar ones; the greater the similarity, the stronger the association.
Therefore in the grading of material to be learned it must be taken into account that the smaller the difference from one step to the next, the better the learning.
This process is known as facilitation (Mackey 1965 p 206).
fadword
A word enjoying a popularity which is unlikely to last.
farce
A style of drama full of ridiculous situations intended to make people laugh, sometimes used as a medium for satire.
Perhaps the greatest farceur was the French dramatist Georges Feydeau, 1862–1921.
He wrote,"While planning the lunacies that will make the public laugh, I don't enjoy myself; I keep a straight face and the composure of a chemist dispensing a prescription.
I take a gram of complication, a gram of shamelessly immoral behaviour and a gram of observation and I mix all these elements together as best I can.
And I foresee, almost without fail, the effect they will produce."
fatigue
To psychologists, this means boredom or a tired feeling; Hull calls it "reactive inhibition." 
This is caused by: homogeneity of task, ie lack of variety emotions caused by frustration or discouragement a rate of learning which is too fast or too slow Fatigue may reduce the effort the student is putting into learning or he may fix his attention on particular elements of the work to be learned rather than on the  work as a whole.
In the latter case his learning will be less available for transfer to other situations; he may also learn faulty language habits.
(Based on Rivers 1964).
faux amis A French term, meaning false friends for instances where apparent likenesses conceal important differences; a common background to the language student's negative transfers: in Spanish burro means donkey whereas in Italian burro means butter.
fear
In psychology, this comprises emotional inhibitions when trying to use the foreign language.
The teacher needs skill in correcting language responses without embarrassing or humiliating the student.
Up to a point the language laboratory should provide a solution to this problem, but practice is needed in using the language in the presence of others (Rivers 1964).
feedback
In the context of language learning, positive feedback could be evidence that one's efforts at mastering a language are not in vain and that progress towards one's goal is being made; it could be simply a correct response in the language laboratory or praise from the teacher.
Negative feedback may show itself as disappointment at one's achievement, particularly when compared with other members of the group, or as boredom or frequent teacher disapproval or not enough attention from the teacher; it could be personal problems to do with one's family, love life, accommodation or money difficulties.
Negative feedback may not always be entirely detrimental, however, since it can also spur the learner on to make greater efforts.
feminine
Of female gender.
field
An appropriate area.
field, mode and tenor
Terms devised by Halliday, McIntosh & Strevens (1964) in order to define models of interaction of language and social setting.
Briefly, the field is the total event together with the purposive activity of the speaker or writer; the mode is the function of the text in the event, including spoken or written, extempore or prepared and its genre or rhetorical mode such as narrative, didactic, persuasive, phatic communion; the tenor refers to the type of ro∘le-interaction, the set of relevant social relations among the participants.
(Based on Halliday & Hasan 1976.)
field of discourse
A register; non-dialectical variety of language.
field theory
See under learning: theories of learning.
semantic field
Lexical meaning can be studied by defining a particular set of words which in some way refer to the same subject, such as all colour terms.
The meanings of these terms, taken together, constitute a single semantic field.
figure of speech
The more common figures of speech are allegory, euphemism, hyperbole, innuendo, irony, litotes, metaphor, metonymy, paradox, personification, pun, simile.
Any departure from the literal use of words is the figurative use of language.
final (adj)
In phonology, a term used when describing where sounds are made in the mouth, as with in sooner
finite verb
A verb which has person, number and tense and which can take a  predicate.
Non-finite verbs, which are incomplete, are infinitives, gerunds and participles.
Anomalous finites form their interrogative and negative without an auxiliary, eg I am not.
Firth, J. R.
Firth was the outstanding figure of his day in Britain and has no rival for the title"The Father of Linguistics’ in the UK.
His career as a linguist in Britain dates from 1928 when he was appointed to the Department of Phonetics at the University of London.
In 1938 he moved to the School of Oriental & African Studies in the same university and in 1944 he was appointed to the Chair of Linguistics, the first chair of that title in the UK.
Firth's contribution to linguistics was very great; it is an irony of history that his death in 1960 occurred on the eve of an unprecedented expansion in linguistic studies at British universities.
(For further reading see Firth 1968.)
fit
For example, when we speak we tend to express ourselves in short sentences — more"full stops’— but in the written language the same ideas are more usually expressed in longer sentences — more commas — and the style and the choice of words will not always be the same.
For example, the written sentence My next destination is Finland and in particular Kuusamo, which is a town close to the Soviet border might be spoken I'm off to Finland next.
Kuusamo, actually, It's near the Soviet border.
When we look at the English writing system we see how badly it fits the spoken language.
N, kn and gn all have the same value /n/ as in night, knight, gnat while bow can rhyme with go //as //or it can rhyme with now //as bow //.
fixate
To establish strongly in the mind, as in fixate behaviour.
flashcard
The flashcard is a simple example of one of the best documented principles of memory; things that are stored together tend to be recovered together.
For example, many units of information, of many different kinds, are commonly stored in a single, more or less unified "image" .
In the very simple case of a word presented visually for memorisation, some of this information will include the size and colour of the letters, various levels of meaning including the dictionary meaning, its part of speech, and other closely related words.
The image will also include some indication of the time, place and emotional tone associated with the experience.
Based on Shiffrin (1970).
flipchart
Several pieces of stiff paper or card, attached at the top, which allow viewing of only the top leaf; it can be free-standing or attached to the top of an easel or blackboard.
fluency
Speaking with no significant pauses or hesitations; smooth, easy flow of speech.
foot
A rhythmic unit greater than the syllable, analogous to the bar in music.
In prosody, it is one accented syllable with one or more unaccented syllables attached to it.
foreword
The introductory remarks found at the beginning of a book, usually by someone who is not the author of the book.
form
1 See also under linguistic form.
Form is contrasted in linguistic theory with content (meaning) or function (purpose).
2 The form of an item is its audible or visible phenomenon: how it sounds and how it looks.
formal item
Any meaningful stretch of language, of any extent, like the or in case I've thrown it away or the s in a plural like chairs.
It can be uniquely specified with reference to all the categories set up in a description of the form of the language concerned; it thus represents the intersection of a grammatical item and lexical item.
formally
As a rule, a term used in contrast to "semantically" ie practising the form rather than the meaning.
format
The shape, size, print, paper and binding of a book.
formula
An expression habitually used by native speakers, such as good morning, thank you, hullo.
fortis
A Latin word, meaning strong.
All voiceless sounds are fortis because they require more air and more energy in order to create the same turbulence in the air and therefore the same amount of volume as voiced sounds.
A fortis sound at the end of a syllable has a shortening effect on the preceding vowel, eg rope has a shorter vowel than robe.
forward chaining
See under chaining.
le français fondamental
One of the landmarks in the development of modern theories of language learning and teaching.
The aim of this project was to provide foreign learners of French with an indispensable minimum vocabulary; by eliminating all words outside this minimum the learner would avoid wasting time on unnecessary items.
The criterion used was frequency of occurrence: "the more frequent, the more useful." 
Work started in 1951.
Some 163 tape-recordings were made with 275 individuals on a wide range of topics.
These were analysed and a count was made of each word according to the number of times the word occurred in the conversation of the speaker and how many times in the total corpus; also an account was made of the varies words related to the profession or social class of the speaker.
Le français fondamental is a great pioneering effort in the application of linguistics to language teaching.
At the same time, criticisms which underlay le français fondamental have been made to illustrate the fact that such vocabulary selection, far from being all that linguists can contribute to the preparation of teaching materials, is still in a stage of development.
(See Halliday, McIntosh & Strevens 1964).
framing
See under boxing.
free stage
The final stage in a structure or vocabulary lesson, when students use the items freely in original sentences.
semi-free stage
This is the practice stage of the lesson where some control is still retained by the teacher, but where the students are beginning to form their own sentences.
fricative
See also under consonant.
When two parts of the mouth come fairly  close together, so that the air forced between them produces friction, the manner of articulation is referred to as fricative.
Fricatives are by far the largest group of English consonants, eg //.
frictionless
All fricatives can be prolonged.
The only other sounds which can be extended in this way are nasals, laterals and /r/.
As the manner of articulation of is already adequately defined as nasal or lateral, the term frictionless continuant is used to describe /r/.
The nasals and laterals are also naturally frictionless, but if they are subject to devoicing, slight friction may occur.
frustration
See under goal expectancy.
full stop
The punctuation mark (.)
for a pause at the end of a sentence or to show the end of an abbreviation.
full word
A term used in class structure grammar.
Full words are non-structural, open-class words which can be explained by means of synonyms or other words.
They are to be  contrasted with empty words, that is structural words,— those that belong to closed systems and can only be explained in terms of their uses in sentences.
See also under word: structure word.
function
The special activity or purpose of a thing; mode of activity or action by which a thing fulfils its purpose.
functional approach to teaching
Most language learners have a common aim to communicate intelligibly in the language of their choice.
At advanced levels of language learning it is less easy to predict accurately what exactly the learner wants to communicate, or in what situation he is likely to find himself.
At an elementary level, however, one can more confidently draw up a list of the most basic communicative needs of a foreign language learner.
For example, he needs to be able to identify himself and give personal facts about himself.
He needs to be able to ask factual questions concerning his environment (time of buses or trains, finding his way about a city, etc) and understand the answers to these questions.
He needs to be able to exchange ideas, express moods and emotions.
Thus a course based on a functional approach would take as its main starting point for language development what the learner wants to do through language (Abbs & Freebairn 1977).
functional change/shift
Also conversion.
Many English words belong to more than one part of speech.
Thus hope, love, sleep may be nouns as well as verbs; chief, square, vegetable may be nouns as well as adjectives; while may be either a noun, verb or conjunction; since may be an adverb, preposition or a conjunction.
Owing to their more extensive use of inflections, examples are much rarer in other languages.
This ability to belong to more than one part of speech, which is due mainly to the lack of inflections, should be distinguished from another feature that is even more typically English, ie the deliberate transfer of a word from one part of speech to another.
This is known technically as functional change, functional shift or conversion (Zandvoort 1957).
G
games
The essence of many games and contests in the classroom lies in outstripping, in friendly fashion, someone's performance or in bettering one's own.
The goal is visible and stimulating.
Taking part in games is largely an enjoyable pursuit and, in the classroom, brings variety and helps students to get to know each other and their teacher; games can thus help to create a relaxed, friendly atmosphere.
Learning a language can be achieved only by using it repeatedly.
According to Lee (1965), language games are a means of acquiring variety in the consolidation process of language learning.
The elements which bring language to life in a classroom are gestures, handling and touching things, incidents, pictures, some or all of which may be part of a game or a contest.
Games are suitable for all learners, children and adults alike.
It is usually possible to adapt a game to the learners' age group, needs or special interests.
There are games for various stages of achievement, for large or small classes, for practice in the use of vocabulary or sentence structure, for practising tenses and so on.
Games and contests depend on good organisation and the clear enthusiasm of the teacher.
This means the division of the class into groups or teams, the even matching of the teams and the "workability" of the games.
The teacher must also be completely familiar with the game being played and also show fairness in scoring.
Psychologically, it is sound to award points for success.
Games bring students and teacher closer together, which must help the process of learning and teaching.
Games themselves are too numerous to list here.
Mackey (1965) lists no fewer than 34!
gap-filling
A type of written exercise where the student has to fill spaces in sentences in order to test his knowledge of tenses, structure, vocabulary and so on.
gender
The grammatical grouping of words (nouns and pronouns) into classes: masculine, feminine and neuter.
General American
See under English language: American English.
general linguistics
See under linguistics.
General Service List
See under word list.
generalisation
1 A statement of the recurring features of form, function or meaning; rule of grammar.
2 In psychology, generalisation refers to the process that occurs when one stimulus, which is to some degree equivalent to another, can substitute for the other in arousing a conditioned response (behaviourist psychology).
It should be pointed out that the audio-lingual method group of theorists do not minimise the importance of giving grammatical rules.
They believe that the student first needs to acquire a perception of the analogies involved in the patterns of the language, and to be drilled until a considerable body of material has been learned, since analysis of the language is considered by them to be an  advanced study.
But it is nevertheless considered by Brooks (1960) that generalisations are necessary when a student's prior training has conditioned him to require to "know what he is doing" (River 1964).
generic
Of a genus; common to a whole group or class.
genus (n)
A class, sort, kind.
genitive
The possessive case.
attributive genitive
The genitive is grammatically subordinated to its head word, eg the ship's captain.
See also independent genitive.
classifying genitive
Sheep's eyes are not the eyes of one particular sheep but a kind of glance or look; a busman's holiday is a holiday spent doing one's normal paid work.
Similarly a stone's throw, as the crow flies, etc.
The classifying genitive is highly idiomatic and its meaning is not to be taken literally.
genitive suffix
's (singular) or s' (plural) as in the boy's books = the books which belong to the boy and the boys' books — the books which belong to the boys.
(Zandvoort 1957.)
group genitive
The genitive suffix is always added to the last element of a word group: the Prince of Wales's birthday; a day or two's rest.
independent genitive
The genitive without a headword: I think it's father's.
local genitive
This kind of genitive occurs especially in prepositional adjuncts of place: Old St Paul's was burnt down in 1666; Harrod's, the butcher's.
objective genitive
This can be rephrased with the words in the object case, eg readers of Jane Austen = people who read Jane Austen.
post genitive
This happens when the genitive is the principal part of an of-adjunct to a preceding noun: It was no fault of the Doctor's, I'm staying with a friend of Mary's.
specifying genitive
Examples are My mother's picture; England's greatness, as opposed to the local genitive.
The former is attributive and specific, while the latter refers to locality.
genre
A French word, meaning kind, sort, style.
Geordie
d A person from Newcastle, UK; the local dialect of that area.
gerund/gerundive
Words derived from a verb stem by means of the suffix -ing may be used in a variety of meanings and functions according to the context in which they occur.
A gerund may exhibit all the syntactic properties of a noun: He is good at singing (music), or a verb: I like swimming (to swim).
It also shares many of its syntactic properties with the infinitive with to (Zandvoort 1957).
gestalt
A term used in psychology, meaning the form which is lost when the parts are examined in detail without reference to their relationship to the whole.
Re-arranged, the parts make up a different whole which has a different form or gestalt.
This is illustrated in the notes which make up a musical tune.
Ehrenfels in Austria first called attention to this gestalt quality or form quality and founded the Austrian Gestalt School of Psychology (River 1964).
gesture behaviour
See under kinesics.
gloss (n)
Words of explanation or translation inserted between the lines of a text; footnote.
gloss (v)
To insert such words.
glossary (n)
A collection of such notes; list and explanation of special words.
glottis
The vocal cords and the opening between them.
glottal stop
Represented in phonetic script by the symbol (), this glottal plosive is formed by closing the glottis completely (bringing the vocal cords into contact) suddenly opening it (separating the cords).
By its nature, this sound is neither breathed nor voiced.
This consonant in an exaggerated form is the plosive sound heard in coughing.
A cough may be represented in phonetic transcription.
glottal wave
The sound wave generated by the larynx which acts as the carrier wave for speech.
glottochronology
The comparison of the vocabularies of different languages in order to estimate the closeness of their generic relationship through man's development.
goal expectancy
See also under learning: purposive behaviourism.
The learner's expectation of success based on his previous experience in a learning situation.
In foreign-language learning students expect, or are led to expect, certain achievements.
If the teaching is not orientated so that these goals may be reached, then what is achieved will not appear rewarding and so will cause discouragement and frustration (River 1964 pp 57,170).
grading/gradation
This concerns the order in which language items are taught.
While the process of arriving at an inventory of teaching items is called limitation, the process of putting these into the most appropriate order is known as grading.
It can be sub-divided into two distinct operations: Staging This takes the list of teaching items and arranges it into blocks of the right size for the various years, months, weeks, days and classes of the teaching course.
Sequencing This concerns itself with the problem of the sequence in which the items in the block are to be taught in relation to their usefulness and difficulty.
Two methods may have the same selection of structure, vocabulary and meaning, yet differ in the order in which they teach it.
They may have the same selection but a different gradation.
Gradation answers the questions "What goes with what?" 
What comes before what?"
(Adapted from Halliday, McIntost & Stevens 1964.)
principles of gradation
Systematic gradation reduces the difficulties of language learning by distributing the extensive material of a language into steps arranged in prepared texts in which everything progresses in an orderly, and not erratic, sequence.
The beginning should be slow and accurate, understood and immediately tested.
To encourage uniformity, related things should be taught together; opposites should also be taught together.
Larger units should be taught before smaller ones, the simpler before the complex, the regular before the irregular.
In fact it was only in the 1940s that principles of gradation began to be rigidly and systematically applied to beginners' courses in limited vocabularies.
This notion of breaking a repertoire of language behaviour into a  progressive series, moving from simple to complex stages, bore little resemblance to traditional theories of learning since it did not include rote-memorisation as an essential element.
Psychologists have also found that gradation facilitates the prevention of what they call retroactive inhibition, whereby new material is confused with old material in such a way that neither can be remembered.
In a good gradation, new material would strengthen the old by the process of facilitation.
Furthermore, a great number of items can be learnt in a fixed amount of time if these fit into established and interconnected patterns; and the smaller the difference between one step and the next, the better the learning.
All methods include:(a) grouping of material (b) an arrangement of it into some sort of sequence 
grammar
This may be defined as the study and description of the rules underlying the form of language in general.
categories of grammar
The category of structure applies to all units in the grammar of a language except the smallest, which by definition has no structure.
English has sentence structures, clause structures, group structures and word structures, whose elements have as their exponents respectively clauses, groups, words and morphemes.
The morpheme has no structure since there is nothing below it in grammar.
Thus the word gladness has a structure consisting of two elements whose exponents are the morphemes glad and ness, but these morphemes cannot be further analysed grammatically.
Note that at the level of phonology we can abstract smaller elements such as the phoneme /g/ in glad, but such segments have no formal meaning.
(Adapted from Halliday, McIntosh & Strevens 1964.)
differential grammar
This is a system of superimposing the grammatical patterns of one language upon those of another.
Differential grammar enables us to determine some of the main grammatical difficulties involved in learning the target language.
Thus, what is required is a special type of description which accounts for all types of differences and equivalents.
Firstly, we must distinguish what may be said and what must be said; and secondly, in what must be said we must distinguish the unique forms from alternative ones.
For example, the adverb well in He speaks well of you may be equivalent to an adverb in French Il a très bien parlé de vous or it may be the equivalent of a noun, Il a dit du bien de vous.
grammar and lexis, differential description of
Grammar, explain Halliday et al, is concerned with a small fixed number of possibilities and a clear line between what is possible and what is not.
For instance, the past tense of regular verbs is expressed by adding -d or -ed to the infinitive.
In lexis, on the other hand, there may be a limited choice too, as between positive or negative; but there may be a wide range of possibilities, as between He was sitting on the chair/bench/stool/seat…
These two types of choice are known respectively as "closed" and "open" ; the range of possibilities in a closed choice is called technically a "system" ; that in an open choice a "set" .
The closed system is thus characteristic of grammar, the open set of lexis.
A short statement of the definition would be this: grammar deals with closed system choices which may be between items (this, that, he, she, we) or between categories (singular, plural; past, present, future); lexis is concerned with open set choices, which are always between items (chair, bench, seat, stool).
(Adapted from Halliday, McIntosh & Strevens 1964 pp 21–23).
See also under class; set; system; structure.
presentation and learning of grammar
According to Rivers 1964, in the audio-lingual method, grammar is presented first through the drilling of structures, after which a simple generalisation is made about the grammatical principle involved.
This generalisation then describes what the student is doing, not what he ought to do.
Advocates of the audio-lingual method have been enthusiastic supporters of the language laboratory as a powerful aid in the automation of language responses.
theories and systems of grammar
British multi-level linguistic system See class structure grammar.
Category scale grammar See class structure grammar.
Class structure grammar See also class; set; system; structure.
One theory behind class structure grammar is that of a group of British linguists, in particular Halliday and Sinclair.
The theory has several distinctive aspects, the most important of which are these:(a) The insistence that units are ranked one above another in a definite order.
Sentences, for example, never consist directly of words, but only of clauses.
(b) The insistence that classes must be defined by their ro∘le in structure; the class NG is defined by its ro∘le as subject and complement of a clause: likewise the class VG by its ro∘le as predicator.
The form of a class (its morphology) is regarded as less significant.
(c) Some classes and structures are more "delicate" than others.
For instance, the non-finite clause is more "delicate" than the dependent clause.
This notion of delicacy is important as it draws attention to primary similarities before directing attention to secondary differences.
(d) The emphasis upon systems.
It is not enough for grammars to describe variations in classes or structures.
Those which vary in the use of a specific  feature must be brought together to show the range of choice possible.
What range of choice, for example, does English provide in the use of complements or for determiners?
These questions are answered by the complementation system and the system for determiners.
A practical English grammar based on the system just described is Scott, Bowley, Brockett, Brown & Goddard (1968).
Immediate constituent/Phrase-structure grammar This theory, formulated in America, is associated with the linguists Bloomfield, Fries and Bloch.
It differs from traditional grammar in its concentration on structural meanings which"are specifically signaled by a complex system of contrastive patterns’(Fries).
There is a rigid exclusion of considerations of meaning as a method of defining classes.
The most extensive use of this procedure may be found in Fries (1952).
He provided frames to enable anyone to derive four major word classes — noun, verb, adjective and adverb.
He referred to the major classes by number, the minor ones by letter.
As well as procedures, structural grammar developed the technique of immediate constituent analysis, a technique for cutting a sentence into its immediate constituents, which in turn were broken down into their immediate constituents and so on to the ultimate constituent.
The aim of this structural grammar approach was to be as concrete and as objective as possible.
An attempt was also made to devise a system whose purpose was to indicate all the phonetic clues to grammar.
formal grammar
An extreme grammatical approach which is based exclusively on phonetic and phonological form.
Palmer (1971) points out that"as linguists we must write our grammars in such a way that they relate to semantics as well as phonetics — our grammar must be sensitive to semantics'.
Nevertheless he says that formal grammar was certainly useful as a reaction against older, notional views of grammar.
Prescriptive grammar See traditional grammar.
Traditional grammar The teaching of grammar through analysis, as opposed to teaching it through analogy (compare the audio-lingual method and the grammar translation method).
Traditional grammar originated in Greece in the 5th century and has always been associated closely with philosophy and literary criticism.
Traditional grammarians were mainly concerned with the standard, literary language; they tended to condemn more informal and colloquial usage both in speech and writing as "incorrect" .
Furthermore, they often failed to realise that the standard language is, from an historical point of view, merely that regional or social dialect which has acquired prestige.
Traditional grammar was developed on the basis of Greek and Latin, and was subsequently applied, with few modifications and often uncritically, to the description of a large number of other languages.
(Adapted from Lyons 1970.)
Transformational grammar Chomsky's system of transformational grammar was developed in order to give a mathematically precise description of some of the most striking features of language.
Of particular importance in this connection is the ability children have to derive the structural regularities of their native language — its grammatical rules — from the utterances of their  parents and others around them, and then to make use of the same regularities in the construction of utterances they have never heard before.
Chomsky has claimed that the principles underlying the structure of language are so specific and so highly articulated that they must be regarded as being biologically determined; that is, as constituting part of what we call "human nature" and as being genetically transmitted from parents to children.
Chomsky claims that an understanding of transformational grammar is essential for any philosopher, psychologist or biologist who wishes to take account of man's capacity for language.
(Adapted from Lyons 1970.)
Transformational-generative grammar (T-grammar) A grammar in which transformations are included among the rules, by which the set of grammatical items are specified, is called a transformational-generative, transformation or T-G grammar.
This approach to grammatical analysis is largely the brainchild of Chomsky.
His first published book, Syntactic Structures (1957) has been the main source for ideas about this method of descriptions.
Its theory is both rigorous and self-consistent and has provided descriptions of many aspects which structural grammar did not touch upon.
There are good introductory grammars by Roberts (1964), Thomas (1965) and Jacobs & Rosenbaum (1970).
Chomsky states that grammar must be based on two things: observation of language ability to satisfy the native speaker's intuition about his language For example, it must be able to account for the native speaker's intuition that active or passive sentences are related to each other ; that some pairs of sentences, though alike on the surface, are different at a deeper level.
Thus, the following pair of sentences The man was eager to please and The man was easy to please are alike in their surface structure but are different in their deep structure.
Consider the rules required to form the sentence The headlights penetrated the darkness.
According to T-G analysis, it is a sentence (S) that consists of a noun phrase (NP) followed by a verb phrase (VP); in turn, the NP consists of a determiner (T) and a noun (N); the VP consists of a transitive verb (Vt) and a noun phrase (NP) and this last NP consists of a determiner and a noun.
This information can be represented in a tree diagram: Such an analysis becomes generative when it is expressed in the form of rules.
The analysis above could be expressed in the following rules: In these rules the arrow means written as.
Rules which allow for a single symbol at a time to be written or replaced by another symbol or string of symbols (eg T, N) are known as"phrase-structures rules'.
Because N may be either headlights or darkness they could also produce the sentence The darkness penetrated the headlights.
By adding further words to the right-hand side of rules 4,5 and 6, they could produce hundreds of sentences.
What makes T-G grammar different from other systems of grammatical analysis is that it is explicitly generative and its rules are ordered in a definite sequence.
T-G grammar has provided much new information about English grammar.
(Adapted from Scott, Bowley, Brockett, Brown & Goddard 1968.)
For a practical application of T-G grammar see Thomas & Kintgen (1974).
types of grammar
They may be historical, comparative or descriptive: Comparative This traces the movement by which the most primitive form of the language group develops into a number of different languages.
For example, Primitive Germanic branched out into such different languages as Gothic, Old Saxon, Old High German, Old Norse and Old English.
Descriptive Neither historical nor comparative grammar is a likely foundation for a modern language method.
It is on contemporary descriptive grammar that such methods are likely to be based.
The sort of descriptive grammar which is most relevant to modern language teaching is the one whose purpose is to describe the contemporary forms of language, such as those written by Poutsma (1905 — 28), Jespersen (1933), Kruisinga (1925–32), Zandvoort (1957) and Schisbye (1965).
Although most descriptive grammars have been based on written documents, a few, such as that by Palmer (1965), and that of the français fondamental, have been based on the spoken forms of the language.
(Adapted from Mackey 1965.)
Historical The purpose of an historical grammar is to trace the development of the structure of a language back to its origins, which can go back many centuries.
grammar translation method
See under method.
grandiloquent
Using, or full of, high-sounding, pompous words: a grandiloquent speaker, written in a grandiloquent style.
graph
In linguistics, a defined class of written marks or letters of the alphabet, standing in the same relationship to a grapheme as a phone does to a segmental phoneme.
grapheme
The single unit of writing.
Graphemes can be combined into strings to produce graphological representations of utterances (ie writing) but they are  not themselves divisible into smaller units; they are more abstract than graphs (units in a graphic representation).
They may be seen as clauses of allographs, as phonemes can be seen as classes of allophones.
graphetics
The study of the visible marks used in writing from the point of view of their shape and size rather than their use in a particular system, which is covered by graphology; this distinction parallels that of phonetics and phonology.
graphics
This is concerned with the ability to shape the letters of the alphabet in an acceptable way.
graphology
The study of systems of writing — for each system, graphology describes what graphemes are in its vocabulary and how they are used, as phonology does for phonemes.
great vowel shift
The set of changes by which during the last 700 years or so, for example: /ei: /became /i: /in words like see /i: /became/ai: /in words like time //became //in words like bone
group
closed group (of students)
A specialist group.
Students like to be exposed to texts which expand and reinforce their knowledge of their field of interest.
This is highly relevant to English for Special Purposes.
grouping of students or pupils
This may be necessary for reasons of motivation, innate intelligence, interests, time for study, time of arrival into class as well as the students' linguistic abilities.
linguistic group
A group of language items.
H
habit
See also under learning: theories of learning: habit formation and systematic drive reduction theory.
According to Lado (1964), this is the facility to use the units and patterns of a language at conversational speed with attention on the message and not on the language units or patterns as such.
To the psychologist Mowrer, habit is a response facilitation, and it is the secondary reinforcement (emotions of hope) which constitutes the habit.
This, he believes, is why the response occurs, not automatically but selectively when hope is around by the response-correlated and environmental stimuli.
Basic to the Skinnerian theory of habit formation (Skinner 1948 and 1957) reinforcement is essential if habits are to be strengthened and Politzer affirms that the skill of a teacher lies not in punishing and correcting wrong responses, but in producing situations where the student is induced to respond correctly.
habit strengthening
A strengthening of associations between stimulus and response.
habitual actions
The usual method of expressing habitual actions is by using the present simple tense: Water boils at 100 degrees Centigrade.
When used with always and never, the present continuous can also express habitual action: He's always forgetting to water the house plants.
In the past, habit is expressed by used to or, when a number of habits are referred to, would may be used: I used to walk three miles to school (every morning) when I was a child; He would wake up at about 6.30.
Then he would go downstairs and would put on the kettle; at 7.15 he would be ready to leave the house.
hackneyed phrase
Also cliché.
An overworked phrase.
hagiology
The literature of the lives and legends of the saints.
Halliday, M.A.K.
Professor of General Linguistics at University College, London.
He has published books and articles on the Chinese language, on general linguistic theory and on various aspects of contemporary English, and has directed a research project concerned with the teaching of English in schools.
hardware
Term taken from computing and used in media resources.
It refers to such resources as the overhead projector, tape-recorder, cineprojector, etc.
head
1 In a modification structure such as fresh fruit, fruit is the centre or head, fresh is an immediate constituent or attribute.
2 In phonology, the head is that part of a word group which either beings with the stressed syllable of the first accented word, not being the nucleus, and which ends with the syllable immediately preceding the nucleus; or it may be the pitch pattern associated with that part of a word group.
With the latter meaning, a head can be one of four types: low; high (when emphatic, called "stopping" );; falling (when emphatic, called "sliding" ) and rising (when emphatic called "climbing" ).
(Based on O'Connor & Arnold 1961.) heading The word or words at the top of a section of printed matter.
headline
A newspaper heading; title of an article or piece of news in a newspaper, journal, magazine, etc.
headphrase
A phrase used as a heading in heavy (bold) type, especially in a dictionary.
Similar to a headword.
Headphrase is the headword of this entry.
headword
1 A word that is indispensable to its linguistic group.
2 A noun qualified by the genitive, eg at a yard's distance.
3 The title word of a paragraph.
4 The word defined in a dictionary.
pre-head
1 The syllable(s) before the stressed syllable of the first accented work in a word group.
2 The pitch pattern associated with these syllables.
heteronomous languages
See under autonomous languages.
heuristic
Proceeding by trial and error; thus one might speak of a heuristic approach to teaching grammar.
anti-heuristic
The contrary of heuristic ie not proceeding by trial and error.
historical linguistics
See under linguistics.
holophrase
A single word which expresses a whole phrase or combination of ideas.
homework
Also assignment.
To ensure continuity and to give more necessary practice (further consolidation), appropriate homework or a task should be given at the end of each lesson, or at least once or twice a week, depending on the amount of time the student is able or prepared to give up to home study.
All homework should be corrected by the teacher, either in the classroom or outside classroom hours.
Uncorrected homework will create a negative attitude in the student, leading him eventually to believe that the teacher is not really interested in his progress.
Giving marks for written work can help the student to assess how well he is doing and can serve as reinforcement (either because good marks tell him he is making satisfactory progress or because poor marks will tell him he must make a grater effort).
1 Homework in language teaching should be: an additional practice on what has been done in class a test of what has been previously learnt an opportunity for written work 2 Before setting homework, consider: the free time the students have to do it in their level of attainment, their general level of ability, their purpose in learning the language.
3 Some homework routines: insist on regular and prompt homework — keep a check on work received encourage students to keep their work, make sure students know exactly what to do 4 Marking and giving back homework: mark and return it as soon as possible, devise an easily comprehensible marking scheme, be careful not to overmark, put encouraging brief comments at the end of the work whenever possible be prepared to explain your corrections, either collectively to the class as a whole or individually
homograph
A word spelt like another but with a different meaning, eg bow in a bow and arrow and tie one's hair with a bow.
homonym
A word that is the same in form as another word but different in meaning.
homophone
A word pronounced like another but different in spelling, meaning or origin, eg sum and some.
grammatical homophone
Jespersen (1933) calls words which belong to  more than one part of speech grammatical homophones.
homophora
A kind of exophoric reference which does not depend on the specific situation to distinguish it from the situationally specific type, for example The Cornish pasty is a well-known delicacy in south-west England (non-specific) contrasted with Wait!
The train's coming (specific).
homorganic phonemes
Phonemes which are uttered by the articulatory action of the same vocal organ.
humiliation
See linguistic anxiety.
hyperbole
An exaggerated statement not meant to be taken literally, usually made for effect, eg That story is as old as the hills!
hypermnesia
A term referring to an increase in memory powers.
Georgi Lozanov's work is particularly apposite to memory training; students learn a remarkable number of words at a session, with little or no forgetting over long periods of time.
Lozanov's view of learning is derived from three observations.
The first is that people are able to learn much more quickly than is commonly assumed.
The second observation is that learning is a "total" event in that is involves the entire person., The third and most characteristic observation is that a person is constantly responding to innumerable influences, a few of which are conscious and rational, but most of which are either non-conscious or non-rational, or both.
The science which Lozanov calls suggestology is concerned with the systematic study of these non-rational and/or non-conscious influences.
Suggestopaedia is the application of suggestological principles.
Lozanov attacks the problem of "anti-suggestive" barriers, which may interfere with learning in two directions and on two planes.
The two directions are first to "desuggest" the influences which have resulted from earlier suggestive influences and second to suggest various positive ideas.
The two planes are the conscious and rational plane and the non-conscious and non-rational plane.
Lozanov emphasises that inputs on the two planes should support each other, rather than partially cancel each other out.
The anti-suggestive barriers are to be circumvented, not destroyed.
When this has been achieved, the learner has reached a state of "infantilisation" , which is to say he retains all of his previously acquired knowledge but becomes more open, spontaneous, and creative.
In this state, hypermnesia becomes possible.
See Stevick (1976).
hyphen
The sign (-) used to join two words together, to join separated syllables of words broken at the end of a line of writing and to divide a word into parts or to represent hesitant speech, eg b-b-but.
hypnopaedia
Learning under a state of hypnosis, particularly when asleep.
One of the principles of hypnopaedia is that it transforms sleep into hypnosis.
hyponym
A member of a set of lexico-semantic words bearing an obvious systematic relationship to other members of the group; words related by complementarity, eg chair, table (hyponyms of furniture).
locative hyponym
noun which includes many places, for instance Is this your first visit to London?— Yes.
I've never been to England before.
Here England is a locative hyponym.
hypotaxis
In linguistics a clause dependent on another clause.
hypotactic (adj).
A hypotactic sentence is one containing subordinating conjunctions, such as if, because, although.
iambus (or iamb)
In poetry or prose, a disyllabic foot consisting of one short, followed by one long syllable (classical scansion) or with stress on the second syllable (English poetry).
For instance: I come/from haunts/of coot/and tern.
/iambic (adj)
ibidem
Usually abbreviated to ibid., a Latin word meaning in the same book, chapter, etc as previously quoted.
idem
A Latin word for the same author, word, book, authority, etc.
ideogram (or ideograph)
A written or printed character that symbolises the idea of a thing without indicating the sounds that make up the word(s).
Such symbols are used in Japanese and Chinese writing.
idiolect
The total form of a person's language that he knows and uses at any stage of his development.
idiom
1 The language of a people or a country.
2 A habitual collocation of two or more words whose combined meaning is not deducible from a knowledge of its component parts and of their grammatical relations to each other: He's a real pain in the neck, and I'm fed up to the teeth with the mess he's landed us in.
illustrative situation
A hypothetical situation or story used to illustrate the typical occurrence of a structural pattern.
immediate constituent
See also under grammar: theories of.
The immediate constituents of an item are its largest constituents on a given level; any other constituent is a mediate constituent of the item.
immutable
That which cannot be changed: History is immutable.
imperative
The form of the verb and sentence which express commands.
According to Jespersen (1933), the imperative is used in requests, which according to circumstances may range from brusque commands to humble entreaties, the tone generally serving as a key to the exact meaning.
When a request rather than a command is intended, please is often added: Shut the door!;
Hurry up, please.
inarticulate (adj)
Of a person not speaking distinctly or not being able to express himself clearly and fluently.
This speech defect may apply equally to native speakers as to foreign learners.
inchoate (or inchoative)
Expressing the beginning of an action or state; in grammar, inchoative verbs do this: get dark, fall ill.
incremental repetition
See under repetition.
indefinite article
See under article.
indicative
The form of a verb and sentence stating a thing as a fact, not as a conception, wish or command of a speaker: Apples grow on trees.
indirect question
See under question.
indirect speech
Also reported speech.
A report of what a speaker says, not necessarily using the speaker's exact words, and without the use of inverted commas.
individualised instruction
While contracts (see under contract teaching) can be used in full-class, teacher-centred situations, their full potential is realised when they are employed to break the "lock" step and free students to work at their own rates and in their own ways.
In this way, contracts can serve as a basis for individualised instruction.
It is well known that all students do not learn in the same way.
Some prefer oral explanations, while others choose written ones.
Certain students enjoy finding out information for themselves; other students prefer being spoon-fed.
While some students work best with their peers, their classmates might benefit more from the personal attention of their teacher.
These differences can be provided for if the teacher creates a classroom environment rich in supplementary books, tapes, cassettes, and so on.
In addition, the students should be allowed to choose the way they prefer to achieve mastery of the material of the unit.
Adapted from Valette and Disick (19).
induction
Learning by induction, the student experiences a mental process in which he observes many particular instances and then makes a general rule (a generalisation) incorporating the truth of the fact observed.
Every generalisation is arrived at, therefore, by induction.
The audio-lingual method is based largely on the inductive approach to learning.
Contrast with learning by deduction.
infer
To reach a conclusion or opinion from facts or reasoning.
if, during a dictation practice, the majority of students have an abnormally high number of spelling errors, one might infer that the teacher has either dictated too fast or chosen a passage too difficult for the level of that class.
infinitive
This may occur with or without to (the proclitive particle).
The plain infinitive (without to) is only used in a verbal, never in a nominal function.
It is used also with modals: can, may, must, etc, as in He can come tomorrow.
Other examples are had better go; would rather stay; let go.
Uses of infinitive with to.
1 With to be, to have, ought, used, sometimes with dare and need.
2 As an adjunct or object to the preceding verb which is usually transitive: She promised to write every day.
3 As an adjunct to a preceding noun: He made no attempt to deny his guilt.
4 As an adjunct to an adjective: I shall be pleased to come.
5 Nominally as the subject or object of a verb: To err is human"I want to go.
6 After the first, the second, the next, etc: He was the first to arrive.
7 As an adjunct expressing purpose: They've come here to work.
8 When preceded by an interrogative pronoun (I don't know what to do) or adverb (Tell me where to go), or by a conjunction (He looked at the clock, as if it was time to go), an infinitive with to is often equivalent to a dependent clause: What to do; What am I to do?
The infinitive may also be preceded by a relative pronoun (He didn't know who(m) to depend on).
For further examples see Zandvoort (1957).
infinitival (n)
A form of the infinitive.
For example I'd like to swim (infinitive with to): I saw him go (infinitive without to):: To have continued would have been a mistake (perfect infinitive); He wants to be told (passive infinitive).
qualifying infinitive
This is found as an adjunct to a verb (to express purpose), to an adjective or to a noun: He went to find his coat (verb); He is quick to see his mistakes (adj); There's a house to let in Pond St (noun).
split infinitive
The separation of to and the infinitive by introducing an adverb or phrase: I want you to gently pick up the box instead of I want you to pick up the box gently.
The use of the split infinitive is now generally acceptable, though some more traditional grammarians would probably still disapprove of it as incorrect English.
inflection
Words are used to inflect if they can be assigned to a number of grammatical classes, and the members of all these classes are distinguished from each other by their morphology (internal shape) and by their syntax (the rules of their use).
Thus any word belonging to an inflecting class has a stem which remains constant from class to class and affixes which differ from class to class.
information
Information as used in communication studies refers to the range of possible alternative words which could occur in a certain position in speech.
The amount of information a word conveys is therefore a function of possible alternatives which would be meaningful to us in that position.
The amount of information we can derive is increased by certain factors: the tendency of language to use certain sequences of sounds and not others, familiar sequences of words, systematic syntactic rules and the frame of expectation which surround an utterance.
Miller (1951) states that"the information we convey is coded into patterns of words.
The relations among the components of the patterns must be known before the individual components can be decoded."
infrastructure
A system which forms a basis for the whole.
inhibition
A feeling of restraint, negative tension state.
retroactive inhibition
This is a condition whereby new material is confused with old material in such a way that neither can be remembered.
This is a matter for good gradation of material, where new material would strengthen the material already learnt by a process of facilitation (Mackey 1965).
initial
This refers to the front of the mouth as opposed to the centre or back of the mouth; a term used when describing where sounds are made in the mouth.
innuendo
1 Insinuation, oblique hint.
2 A sly, allusive remark: He's got on well in the firm, but then, you know who the boss is (his father).
inscription (n)
1 Words written in, or on, stone or metal; for example on a monument or on a coin.
2 An informal dedication of a book.
institutional linguistics
See under linguistics.
instrumental conditioning
See under learning: operant conditioning.
instrumental learning
See under operant behaviour.
interference
In psychological terms, when a speaker of one language learns a second there is a tendency to generalise some of the rules of the first language to the second language; when these rules conflict with the correct rules for the second language there is interference, sometimes known as L1 interference or mother-tongue interference.
interjection
An exclamation or ejaculation.
Exclamations are usually expressions of surprise or worry: Look at the time!;
What a dirty face you've got!
An ejaculation is an utterance thrown out suddenly and is very short: Help!;
Mind out!
interlinguistic item
An item which occurs in two or more different languages.
interlocutor
A person taking part in a discussion or a dialogue.
internal behaviour
Behaviour that occurs within the learner.
Since it is not directly observable, it must be measured indirectly.
For , listening comprehension may be measured by circling true or false after each statement which is heard.In the area of language skills, internal behaviour refers to listening and reading.
internalise
to make an item of learning a part of oneself; achieve full control of it.
interpolate
To make additions to a book, which may sometimes be misleading.
interpreting
In the field of applied linguistics, the interpreter's use of language is very different from that of the translator.
The word "translation" may be used to denote the written or, in a lesser sense, the oral language as well.
Interpreting is limited to the oral skills and implies that the translation is being done by a professional linguist.
The interpreter operates at high speed: in simultaneous translation (strictly speaking, simultaneous interpreting), he keeps roughly a sentence behind the speaker; in consecutive translation (interpreting) the speaker waits for the interpreter to translate anything from a morpheme to a whole paragraph at a time.
Interpreting, particularly of the simultaneous kind, calls for a very high degree of skill.
The training of translators and  interpreters is a specialised branch of applied linguistics.
intervening variables
See also under learning: purposive behaviourism and systematic drive reduction theory.
A psychological term referring to appetite or physical behaviour, concepts which are not mentalistic; a term used in  Tolman's purposive behaviourism or expectancy theory (Rivers 1964).
interview
A meeting with somebody for discussion or conference, eg between an employer and an applicant for a post or a journalist meeting someone whose views are requested; if may be an oral examination where the candidate's conversational ability and cultural knowledge are tested (the scored interview).
See under testing.
intervocalic
Coming between two sounds.
In back /æ/; is intervocalic, coming between /b/ and /k/.
intonation
1 the rise and fall of the voice when speaking.
Intonation is comparable to melody in music.
English has two basic tunes:(a) ultimately falling:(b) ultimately rising:
2 A more detailed description gives seven tunes:
(a) low fall
The voice falls during the word(s) from a medium to a very low pitch.
(b) high fall
The voice falls during the word(s) from a high to a very low pitch.
(c) rise fall
The voice first rises from a fairly low to a high pitch and then quickly falls to a very low pitch.
(d) low rise
The voice rises during the word(s) from a medium to a high pitch.
(e) fall rise
The voice first falls from a fairly high to a fairly low pitch, and then, still within the word(s), rises to a medium pitch.
(f) mid-level
The voice maintains a level pitch between high and low, neither rising nor falling.
(g) high rise
The voice rises during the word(s) from a medium to a high pitch.
3 Intonation includes:
(a) stress
'present — pre'sent
(b) pitch
John has a headache (statement)— John as a headache?(question)
(c) juncture or pause
Put some ice on your head —, Put some mice on your head.
4 Since intonation is also used grammatically, the distinctions made by intonation carry meaning: He went (statement)— He went?(question = Did he go?).
Intonation carries meaning also through choices involving the dividing of an utterance into tone groups, one for each major information unit; the selection of one foot within the tone group to carry the tonic or main pitch movement.
5 Intonation is systematic.
No one chooses pitch patterns indiscriminately.
There is a limited number of pitch patterns in any one language, and they are  used to produce definite, meaningful effects; because of this it is possible to describe frequently recurring patterns of pitch and to give rules for their use.
6 Intonation is characteristic.
The tunes in English are not necessarily the same in form as those of other languages, nor do they necessarily produce the same effect.
The pitch patterns of a foreign language applied to English sound wrong and give rise to difficulties of communication.
7 One of the ro∘les of intonation is the division of utterances into relevant word groups.
In the sentence Even if he does come, he won't be able to stay long there is a clear grammatical division between the two clauses.
Even if he does come and he won't be able to stay long, even though the division is not marked in writing.
In speech, however, this division is marked by intonation as well as by a short pause.
The pattern of pitch which accompanies the first clause or group of words will be recognised by an English listener as in some way complete and it will hold it together as a separate unit and separate it from the following clause, which will also be held together by intonation.
The term word group is a term which refers to these groups of words which are grammatically related.
8 Another ro∘le of intonation is the use of different tunes and different patterns of pitch for grammatical purposes.
For example, it could appear that She washed, and dressed the baby means that she washed (herself) and then she dressed the baby, while She washed and dressed the baby would seem to suggest that she washed the baby and also dressed it.
9 A further ro∘le of intonation is attitude.
when one makes an utterance, the manner of making it may be casual, anxious, amused or annoyed.
Every utterance that a speaker makes will, in some way, contain some indication of the speaker's attitude.
See also under attitude.
intonation notation
The following graphic description is used by O'Connor & Arnold (1961).
They state that all tunes in English should end in one of the ways depicted below.
low fall I want to be absolutely sure about it.
high fall What on earth did you do that for, Peter? rise fall I quite agree with you, my dear chap.
low rise Would you like to come to the theatre with us? high rise It.s not fair, did you say? fall rise I doubt whether that would be any good.
Mid-level Immediately I told him the truth about it,(he relented.)
intonation phonemes
Sections of pitch sequence which function in intonation phrases.
Unlike tonemes, they do not function as parts of words or morphemes.
teaching intonation
This may be looked at from two points of view:
THE TEACHER To start, he should explain what the general shape of each tune is, what tone marks are used to symbolise the shape, and what attitude the tone group conveys.
He should make sure that the students can say the tune, and make necessary corrections.
The following is a suggested procedure for drilling:(a) The teacher says the context sentence with the given intonation, then one student will give a rendering of the drill sentence in reply.
Be sure the time is correctly said, and point out any errors.
(b) The teacher repeats the context sentence and the same student replies until the correct response is elicited.
(c) Then all the students repeat the sentence one by one, to fix the tune in their minds.
The teacher must always say the context sentence, so that the drill sentence will come in context, and never in isolation.
It is wise to vary the drilling order so that students cannot calculate when their turn will come and have a lot of time to prepare their next sentence.
Once the tune comes fairly accurately, the teacher can concentrate on meaning, bringing out the basic elements of the situation.
Context what sort of a day did you have?
Drill I had a very busy day.
THE STUDENT The student must make sure he understands what is required of him at every point — what the tone marks mean, what basic attitude the tone group reflects — and it is important that he always keeps this in mind.
He should be prepared to sound silly or funny at first, since foreign tunes sound even stranger than foreign sounds; this phase should soon pass.
The student should make notes of his errors and work on them.
He should try to think of himself in the kind of situations which the drill sentences suggest.
When speaking the drill sentence, equal attention should be paid to the verbal context and to the attitude expressed.
Repetition should be done aloud when possible.
The student should avoid breaking new ground on his own as this may result in the formation of bad habits rather than good ones.
But once a tune is correctly established, the more repetition the better (O'Connor & Arnold 1961).
intrinsic programming
See programmed instruction.
intrusive /p/
An intrusive /p/ is sometimes wrongly inserted between /m/ and another consonant, as in something/or warmth
intrusive /r/
In such phrases as India and Pakistan  or the idea of it , /r/ is likely to be pronounced wrongly between two vowels where no /r/ is present in the words themselves.
intuitions
Chomsky's terminology for"judgements of native speakers’(Chomsky 1957).
inversion
The usual word order in English is subject + verb + predicate, but inversion of the verb and subject can occur:
(a) After certain negative adverbs: Never have I seen such a storm!
(b) For emphasis: Down came the rain and up went the umbrellas.
inversion signal
A signal which is given in order to indicate a change in word order.
inverted commas
Also quotation marks.
Commas placed upside down, single or paired, above the line,( "" , "" ), at the beginning and end of a quoted passage, book title, etc.
irony
The expression of one's meaning by saying something which is the direct opposite of tone's thoughts, to make one's remarks forceful: If that robber gets 10 years this time, that'll give him something to laugh at!
isogloss
A line which is drawn on a map around the area where speakers live who use the same particular linguistic feature.
isolating
A language that has no morphology, for example, Chinese.
italics
Sloping letters, as in italic; used for emphasis or distinction.
item
In linguistics, any constituent on any level is an item; it may be formal, grammatical, lexical or phonological.
J
jargon
A mode of speech familiar only to a group or profession; unintelligible words.
journalese
1 The style of English composition full of clichés, common in some newspapers.
2 A humorous parody of this kind of journalism: Nut Bolts — Screws, Washer where the play is upon the fact that all four words are members of the same collocation.
(A translation could be: Escaped lunatic rapes girl in launderette.)
juncture
Also junction.
See also under syllabification.
An "interruption of normal transition between contiguous speech sound." 
Juncture is marked by a fading of the voice and an almost imperceptible pause and prevents the identical pronunciation of such similar phrases as pea stalks, where the juncture occurs after /i: /in /pi: +  /and peace talks, where the juncture occurs after /s/ in /pi:s +  /.