

Cover picture: The Great Orpheus Pavement is a 4th-century Roman mosaic which was discovered at Woodchester near Stroud in Gloucestershire.
About 60% of the pavement remains and now lies buried to preserve it.
It is only very rarely uncovered.
Dr Bob Woodward and his brother John became interested in the pavement when it was uncovered some years ago.
They set themselves the task of creating a full-scale replica of it using the original Roman techniques.
The replica will be on display in the University's Victoria Rooms from 16 April until 9 May.
The two other local mosaics, the Keynsham Villa mosaics, which were excavated in 1924 and last exhibited about three years ago, will also be on display.
The Great Orpheus Pavement exhibition will be open Monday-Saturday, 10 am-5 pm, and 11 am-5 pm on Sunday, with a last entry at 4 pm.
Dr Woodward will be giving talks about the replica and about how the Romans made mosaics.
Proceeds from the admission charges will go to assist the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust, which supports the University's research.
Dr Woodward is an honorary graduate of the University.
Above: Detail of the plasterwork of Royal Fort House (see p. 21).
The good news about the last edition of Nonesuch , as far as the editorial team was concerned, was that the readers liked it.
The readership survey showed that around 80% of those who responded rated the magazine satisfactory or good.
some (about 45%) liked it a lot and made useful suggestions.
Very few (less than 2%) hated it.
Some readers said that they would welcome four copies a year but most said they would like to receive Nonesuch twice a year.
So that is what we are going to do.
Because readers liked the mixture, the pattern of articles in this issue is much the same as last time but with more participation by graduates.
The editorial team would like to encourage this trend.
The University and, more importantly, other graduates would like to hear what you have got up to since you left Bristol.
You don't have to write a long article.
A brief letter or comment will do.
In return we in the editorial team will try to keep you up to date with what is going on in the University.
Newslines will present news in convenient-sized bites.
But we will commission other longer articles too.
We will let you know on a regular basis how the University's investment portfolio for the future, the Campaign for Resource , is progressing.
Readers who would like a more specialised or technical account of articles about research or other academic articles should also get in touch.
Write to the department concerned.
Off-prints of articles submitted to learned professional journals are often available.
Nonesuch will be able to do much with written material.
But one of the best ways of staying in touch is personal contact.
For that reason we include information about the activities of Convocation and the Association of Alumni.
You can receive invitations to concerts and other events which will bring you back to Bristol to meet old friends and to revisit old haunts.
Some graduates, particularly those of the 1950s who remember the Julian Slade musical Salad Days at the Old Vic, of course may not wish to let nostalgia blind them and begin retracing their track.
But even though nostalgia may not be what it used to be, even for these people there are good reasons for staying in touch.
There are still things which your University may be able to do for you.
There are, for example relevant updating courses which may help in your career.
We would like you still to feel involved in the University.
As the rugby people say, don't hang about on the side-lines, stay in touch.
Newslines
Newspaper accounts of the latest national round of university funding had welcome news for Bristol.
Journalists sought to divide universities into ‘premier league’ universities which would do research and teaching at a high level, and the others.
Bristol, according to the press, was in the ‘premier league’.
But the reality is more complex.
The Government's new way of funding higher education combines universities together with polytechnics and certain other colleges.
The way the funding mechanism works on the teaching side means that each student arriving in an institution brings with him or her less money than before.
Bristol, which had a large increase in students last year, like Oxford and Cambridge, did not seek this year to exceed its own previously announced planned expansion.
On the research side of funding a multiplier is used.
This multiplier, on a scale of 0 to 5, is based on the research selectivity exercise.
In the last exercise Bristol received a large number of 5 ratings (indicating world class research).
The Universities Funding Council (UFC) has therefore given Bristol a large increase in research funding (about 4% above the national average).
There is, however, a complication.
The UFC no longer gives universities this research money directly.
It is channelled through the Research Councils which will allocate it on the basis of the projects submitted to them.
Universities, polytechnics and colleges will all join in this competition.
Although journalists have placed Bristol in the premier league, there is no room for complacency.
Our academic staff will have to compete very hard for the research money to continue their activities, while at the same time maintaining the quality of the teaching they offer students.
Bristol is confident.
It has always done well in bids made to the Research Councils.
So, while the newspaper accounts do need some interpretation, it is nonetheless very welcome to have this further indication of the University's high standing.
UNIVERSITY FINANCE
The University has recovered well from the shock of a ‘trading loss’ in 1989–90.
It has now tightened up its financial procedures.
Council was able to report a small ‘trading profit’ this year to Court in December.
The University is not leaving the matter there.
It has been conducting an urgent review of the way it manages its affairs and  is embarking upon a further review of the number and function of its various committees.
The University has had four major reports on its management to consider.
Senate set up a working party under Professor Furmston, Council asked consultants Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte to look at the matter, convocation set up an ad hoc working group to respond to the first two reports, and the Vice-Chancellor produced a report for Council which drew together the common threads in all three.
As a result of the reports and the discussions upon them in Senate and Council, the University is revising the way it does its business.
On the Council side, the chief reform is the concentration of Council's work into a new Policy and Priorities Board.
On the Senate side, the role of the Committee of Deans has been strengthened.
The other major proposal which has attracted widespread support is the idea of giving the Vice-Chancellor a senior academic figure to assist him in his work.
The post, which might be called Deputy Vice-Chancellor, is to be advertised.
The University will first see if it can make an internal appointment.
If that proves not to be possible, the post will be advertised externally.
The reforms, taken together with the earlier tighter financial controls, mean that Bristol enters the '90s with its management and other structures in a new and improved state.
Matters, however, will not rest there.
The next major item on the University's agenda for reform is the establishment of a form of quality management and control.
This, like the other changes, is driven by the desire to keep Bristol as a place of excellence with a high and growing reputation in Europe and other parts of the world.
SPORT
University sport, these days, is as much concerned with ‘wellness’ as it is with competitive results.
Staff, students and employees make increasing use of the sports centre at Woodland Road to relive stress and other pressures of modern life by participating in sport or other forms of physical activity such as dancing.
But University teams continue to do well.
The fencers won the National Championship and the Rugby Team reached the semi-finals of the UAU championships, losing eventually to Durham.
Unconventional sports, such as hang-gliding and hot-air ballooning, also continue to attract large numbers of students.
PROFESSOR RICHARD GREGORY
Emeritus Professor Richard Gregory, founder of the famous Bristol Exploratory, has been elected to Fellowship of the Royal Society.
Professor Gregory is distinguished for his studies in experimental psychology, most notably in visual perception and the nature of visual illusions.
He has made a major contribution to public understanding of science through his books, lectures and broadcasts and through the Exploratory.
The University will be conferring the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws on Professor Gregory next February.
DISTINCTIONS
Two senior members of Senate have awarded rare distinctions.
Pro-Vice-Chancellor Professor Brian Pickering of the Department of Anatomy has been elected an Honorary Member of the Romanian Academy of Medical Sciences.
Professor Peter Warren of the Classics Department has been elected a Corresponding  Member of the Society for Cretan Historical Studies.
MS DIANA HENDRY
Diana Hendry, who studied as a mature student in the Department of English, won the Best Children's Novel category prize in the 1991 Whitbread Book of the Year Award for her tale of Harvey Angell, a ‘magical electrician’.
Diana is also a published poet; her poem Great Grandma and James Andrew won 3rd prize in the 1991 Peterloo Poetry Competition.
Diana lives in Bristol and teaches poetry courses and ‘Writing for Children’ in the University's Department of Continuing Education.
Home-Made Angels was inspired by the familiar sight of hot-air balloons in the skies above Bristol.
NEW DEGREES
The University is constantly developing and improving its degrees and other qualifications.
At the undergraduate level there has been a considerable growth in degrees which add a phrase such as‘with Study in Europe’ to an existing degree in science or engineering.
this does no mean that Bristol considers itself to be outside the Continent.
It is rather the reverse; it means an increased recognition of the importance of seeing oneself as part of the new Europe which is emerging.
Undergraduate on these courses expect to spend about a year pursuing their chosen discipline in a university elsewhere in Europe.
There are also some interesting new postgraduate degrees.
You can now pursue a PhD in Musical composition.
If you were talented or fortunate enough to write a much played work.
you might also wish to pursue, or hope that someone else had pursued, the new Postgraduate Diploma in Intellectual Property Law and Practice.
THE HAWTHORNS
Graduates returning to Bristol always find changes.
The two biggest changes for graduates who might return for the Convocation weekend in July will be the sale of the Refectory in Queen's Road and the acquisition of the Hawthorns Hotel in Woodland Road.
The Hawthorns Hotel — for many generations of Bristolians the centre of their social life — will enable the University to increase the stock of its student accommodation, centralise its catering services, and transfer the Senior Common Room from Senate House.
The space released in Senate House will provide some much-needed additional office accommodation.
The Refectory in Queen's Road has been sold to Brown's of Oxford.
As staff and students at Cambridge and Oxford know, Brown's is a continental-style restaurant/bistro.
It should therefore still be possible for graduates who have happy memories of meat and two veg in the Venetian Gothic building to revisit their old haunt.
Having done that, they might want to visit the Hawthorns to see how today's students are fed.
The Hawthorns, in its new refurbished state, will be, like other University buildings (such as Goldney), available for wedding receptions, company presentations, and other events.
Graduates organising such affairs always have a particularly warm welcome.
HOME-MADE ANGELS
He was right, the prophet in the park
saying, ‘The balloons are coming tonight!’
For here they are — rising up over the city
like a hallelujah!
Rising up
over house, church, office block, to appear
en masse in the sky as angels might
only gorgeous and gaudy and saucily transcendent,
uttering the message in a sudden rush, a roar of fire —
‘Hosanna in the highest!
This is us!’
Each dangles a picnic basket of people,
little puffed-up souls sailing the skies
as if they'd just discovered immortality to be
easy as riding a bike or walking the sea.
They make the night Arabian,
are a sign in the sky from us to us, as if ,
earthbound, we exhaled belief
as naturally as breath and dreamt them up,
these flights of fancy, our rough guess.
Diana Hendry
OBITUARIES LORD DULVERTON
Lord Dulverton, head of the Wills tobacco family and a Patron of the University's Campaign for Resource , died aged 76 on 17 February 1992.
Lord Dulverton was a leading wildlife campaigner and forester and had a lifelong dedication to forestry and to deer.
His arboretum at Batsford and forestry projects in Scotland were justifiably renowned.
He was formerly a trustee of the World Wide Fund for Nature and was also a founder and trustee of the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge.
He was a former President of the Bath and West and Southern Counties Agricultural Society and the British Deer Society.
MARION ZUNZ
Marion Zunz, a graduate of the University's Radio, Film and Television Studies postgraduate course, died on 5 January 1992 in a skiing accident in France.
Marion Zunz was a wildlife film-maker whose innovative ideas contributed to the BBC's Natural History Unit programmes such as Animal Magic ,Wildtrack and The Natural World .
Her most famous film,Meerkats United (1987), was made for Wildlife on One .
It won many awards, including a Wildscreen ‘Panda’, and is now a best-selling BBC video.
She had a great empathy with animals and vast enthusiasm for what she did.
There are plans to set up a fund in her name to assist up and coming wildlife film-makers.
ANGELA CARTER
The author Angela Carter (née Stalker) died on 16 February aged 51, from cancer.
She had been suffering from the disease for a year.
Angela Carter studied medieval literature at the University as a mature student in the 1960s in the English Department, where she developed her taste for folk stories that underpinned such works as The Magic Toyshop ,Nights at the Circus and The Company of Wolves .
She explored sexuality in her book of fairy tales The Bloody Chamber , and in polemical essays such as The Sadeian Woman and Nothing Sacred .
Her publisher and friend Carmen Calil described her as ‘the most original English writer of her generation’.
EMERITUS PROFESSOR P. M. V. McGRATH
Emeritus Professor Patrick Vincent (Paddy) McGrath was one of the University's longest serving members.
He was appointed in 1946 and officially retired in 1979, but continued to teach on a part-time voluntary basis right up until his death on 8 October 1991.
He was a historian of the Tudor and Stuart period but achieved his greatest fame as a historian of Bristol, particularly by his outstanding history of the Society of Merchant Venturers.
He also made a major  contribution to local history through his editorship of the series of pamphlets produced by the local branch of the Historical Association.
EMERITUS PROFESSOR R. WILSON
Emeritus Professor Roger Wilson was one of a number of Quakers who strongly influenced the development of the School of Education.
His experience and belief emphasised his strong sense of service to others.
His keen interest in overseas education and his practical encouragement of overseas students built on and developed traditions of his Quaker predecessors, Basil Fletcher and Helen Wodehouse.
After he retired form the University he was Clerk of London Yearly Meeting of the Society of Friends.
In the run-up to the General Election the University Library mounted an exhibition of election posters from bygone eras, including those shown above which date from 1929, 1906 and 1924 respectively.
Andrew Scott, a second-year student of Ancient Mediterranean Studies, has been awarded the title of University Malt Taster of the Year.
He won a national contest sponsored by The Macallan and Decanter magazine after successfully identifying five malts ‘nose blind’ and answering a 30-question exam on the production of malt whisky.
His prize includes a six-bottle case of 18-year-old The Macallan and an engraved quaich.
Children explore the Lighthouse at the Bristol Exploratory
University fencers in action
The University Balloon Club at take-off
A scene from Marion Zunz's Meerkats United
Letters
EARLY MUSIC
Sir ,
Many Bristol graduates will have been taught music by Professor Ray Warren but I wonder how many have been taught mathematics by him?
I suspect that the answer is ‘not many’ for I would guess that this phase of his distinguished career lasted for just one year.
It was in September 1953 that I arrived as a new boy at Woolverstone Hall School and it may be that Ray was also new to the school.
Woolverstone was a recently-founded boarding grammar school for boys, run by the London County Council and situated in beautiful Suffolk parkland on the banks of the river Orwell.
Form 1A were assigned to Mr R. J. ‘Bunny’ Warren for Mathematics and I still have the reports he wrote about me at the time.
Lessons took place in his Music Room which was the converted hay-loft of a former stable block, well away from the Georgian main building.
Access was gained via a flight of external wooden stairs.
The only aspect of the lessons which I can really remember was having to learn a substantial number of Euclid's theorems on geometry.
Bunny was a young, gentle teacher though he could put his foot down when needed.
He also taught us music and it was through him that I learned of its expressive nature.
He would play us a popular classical piece, explaining what the compose was trying to get across to the listener.
One incident that has stuck with me was when he played us the Queen of the Night's aria from The Magic Flute , telling us that it was notoriously difficult for singers as the top note reached ‘F in alt’.
One comic in the class chose to hear this as ‘f…ing alt’ which caused laughter to us boys and some embarrassment to Bunny.
Ray Warren left soon after and moved on to higher things, no doubt with some relief.
I have never met him since for I left Bristol before he was appointed to the Chair of Music but he was remembered with affection by many of my peers.
Yours faithfully,
Nick Vinall, BSc (1963), PhD (1968), Cranbrook, Kent.
A MERRY DANCE
Sir ,
I was very interested to receive the first edition of Nonesuch and to read that its name was derived from a flower connected with the City of Bristol — as a member of a 17th-century dance team, I had only previously come across Nonesuch as the name of a dance.
The dance Nonesuch is a dance for four couples in a longways set.
It was first published in 1650 in the first edition of dances collected by John Playford and would certainly have been danced at the court of King Charles II.
As far as I have been able to find out, it has no specific connection with Bristol but is named after Nonsuch Palace, which was built in Surrey near Hampton Court.
It was begun by Henry VIII as a hunting lodge and Queen Elizabeth I stayed there many times, finally buying the Palace because it was her favourite country seat towards the end of her reign.
It was, by all accounts, a fairytale building with towers, battlements, golden domes and heraldic beasts and was described as being like ‘an exuberant wedding cake’.
In 1670, Charles II gave the Palace to his mistress, Lady Castlemaine, and she was created Baroness Nonsuch.
She took a dislike to it, however, and in 1692 allowed it to be demolished so that the building materials could be sold.
I gather that nothing remains of the site today.
The group to which I belong is called The Ring of Eight — there were originally eight members, although over the ten years since its formation our numbers have doubled.
We specialise in the dances which would have been danced at the court of King Charles II and wear handmade costumes of brocade and crushed velvet.
The men also look very fine in their long curly wigs (even if it takes their partners a little while to get used to them).
The Ring of Eight was originally founded to dance at Christchurch Folk Festival but as well as dancing at festivals we also travel to craft fairs around the South of England and perform locally for the National Trust and other charities.
In addition to dancing, both my husband, Rod, and I are musicians for the team; I play the  recorder and he is a ‘cellist.
We also help to swell the singing when early madrigals are included in a performance.
I recently discovered that the team has another link with the University of Bristol in that two of its founder members, Ray and Val Cleaver, first met through the University Folk Club when Ray was its Publicity Secretary in 1967.
Ray was at that time a member of the Morris Side and would be very glad to hear from any of his contemporaries, although his style of dancing is rather different these days.
Yours faithfully,
Fran French (née Goodings)
I'm delighted to be back ‘in touch’ with Bristol.
Like most graduates, my student days were a very important part of my life and it's good to feel I ‘belong’ again.
A. L. Smith (née Pegrum), BSc (1974)
As a 1933 graduate of Bristol University, I would like to express my gratitude at being remembered in 1991.
Often during my varied and extremely active life, I have been overcome with acute nostalgia for Bristol and my University days — truly some of the happiest of my memories.
It is all the more heart-warming now to be in contact with you and to receive copies of Nonesuch .
I still have a copy of Spring 1931 Nonesuch — a much more lighthearted effort than your current issue.
E. B. Torbett (née Richards), BA (1933)
Excellent production — quality plus interesting articles.
Being a Cambridge graduate as well I also receive their equivalent publication.
Nonesuch was far better on all accounts.
P. E. Watkins, PhD (1987)
How lovely to feel part of a successful and enterprising University.
No wonder I'm returning to live closer to my alma mater .
C. E. Perkins (née Robertson), BA (1967)
Just one minor point: it would be nice if you gave the maiden name of any woman mentioned.
I've been racking my brain to remember what Sue Puffett used to be called.
Lisa Russell, BSc (1983)
(It was Sue Chubb.
Ed.)
Nonesuch is first-rate.
Actually read most of it…
My wife also read it and declared it superior to the equivalent magazine sent her by her old University — Oxford.
R. E. Osborne, BA (1965), MLitt (1968)
If entry of my name, etc, in the directory automatically means I get copies of Nonesuch then please forget it.
I am a ‘down-to-earth’ scientist and get my reading from scientific journals.
Nonesuch is too arty-crafty for me.
R. A. Setterington, BSc (1945)
I was delighted to receive Nonesuch , which is both entertaining and informative.
I particularly enjoyed the article about Basil Cottle, who once tutored me in speaking the lilting cadences of medieval verse.
G. M. Radcliffe (née Harvey), BA (1963)
…
What about the things that have crossover appeal?
Did anyone from Bristol ever become famous?
Obscenely rich?
Kidnapped by an Arab Sheik?
I WANT TO KNOW!
G. R. Colborne, BSc (1989)
Please can the average age of the Alumni body be better reflected by the membership of our Alumni Committee which, judging from their photograph, is well beyond 65+?
D. H. Barker, BSc (1965)
Nonsuch Palace, Surrey, from John Speed's Theatre of the Empire of Great Britain, 1611
I'm extremely pleased to see the University become more responsive to alumni…
About time!
This is great; keep it coming.
G. B Braithwaite, BVSc (1972)
An excellent start…
Nonesuch compares favourably with The Independent magazine.
G. H. Hall, BA (1955)
The Glory of the Garden
Eluned Price visits Professor Tom Hewer's garden in Henbury.
Over the past 46 years Professor Tom Hewer and his wife, Anne, have made a delightful garden in two acres in Henbury on the outskirts of Bristol.
‘It ought to be Gloucestershire, of course’, says Mrs Hewer.
‘Certainly, I never think of it as Avon.’
Filled with unusual trees and shrubs, dropping down to a stream the Professor created himself, the garden flows softly and naturally between their home, Vine House, built in 1725, and the 18th-century park of Blaise Castle, laid out by Repton, which lies adjacent.
Professor Hewer retired from the University as Professor of Pathology in 1968.
He is a Bristol graduate, too, having taken his MB and ChB in 1927.
Before returning to Bristol in 1938 to take up his Chair, he held a Harkness Fellowship at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Upon his return he introduced to the Pathology Department some of the practices he had enjoyed in America, such as weekly clinical-pathological conferences, attended by both staff and students.
Another of his innovations was inviting students to Sunday lunch, after which they would join the family in the garden and give ‘much valuable help’.
He and his wife remember with pleasure one young man who spent a particularly fine Sunday afternoon reclining in a deckchair with a straw hat over his eyes.
These gardening activities provoked a cryptic entry in the Medical students' magazine The Black Bag which read: ‘There are still many trees to be felled int his dark field.’
Professor Hewer's work in the garden bridges C.P. Snow's ‘two cultures’, embodying the eye of a landscape artist and a scientific approach.
When I arrived, the Hewers were entertaining two worthy ladies to coffee.
Mrs Hewer was explaining the Professor's eminently instructive practice of labelling all  the plants not only with their full names and varieties but also with the date of planting.
‘We started with lead labels but the squirrels ate them up.
I'll never know whether it was to sharpen their teeth or whether they liked the taste of lead.
But I can't think it was awfully good for them,’ she continued.
The visitors decided they would like to tour the garden.
A magnificent Daphne odora ‘Aureomarginata’, abundant with pink buds in January, stands outside the garden door.
A little farther on, the walls are clothed in pyracantha and Clematis orientalis .
The fern-leaved clematis,C. cirrhosa , which hangs up its cream bells this month, surrounds the windows of the drawing and dining rooms.
‘We planned the garden from the diningroom window,’ recalls Mrs Hewer.
‘The table was in the window and while we ate we thought non-stop about the garden.’
The visitors expressed a desire to see the farther end of the garden.
When the Hewers bought Vine House it had been used as a dormitory for an air Force course int he village during the war.
‘There were palliasses on the floor and brown paint and pin-up girls on the walls.’
Once it had had a lawn and trees and borders but except for a small area, testament to one chap's enthusiasm for vegetables, it was, says Mrs Hewer, ‘quite ungardened’.
The only things worth saving were a mulberry, a cherry plum and the Magnolia grandiflora which at the time came barely up to the window and is now heading for the roof.
‘It was dreadful when we came,’ says Professor Hewer.
‘Full of horrible ground elder.
We scrapped the lot.
I put down sodium chlorate and poisoned everything, reducing it to two acres of brown earth.’
It is a brave move to start afresh in a garden, and a sure test of one's design talents.
With a derelict garden it is sometimes the only way.
In the Hewers' hands, the results are worth every drop of sodium chlorate.
‘We ran about with bamboo canes and bits of paper planning where to plant,’ says Mrs Hewer.
They planted a Magnolia kobus as the focal point towards the high centre of the garden in 1946.
Throwing out a myriad fragrant white flowers int he middle of spring before its small, scented, dark-green leaves appear, it is now one of the biggest in the country.
‘A whopper,’ says the Professor.
Every plant and every tree has a tale to tell.
The fastigiate oak was an acorn in Innsbruck in 1950; the bottlebrush buckeye chestnut or, more elegantly,Aesculus parviflora , was a birthday present tree for Mrs Hewer, and is decorated with white candle-flowers in mid-summer; the nearby amelanchier, flowering in April, is the Professor's birthday tree.
The high beech hedge providing an arched entrance to the kitchen  garden was at one time 20 seedlings collected in the Savernake forest.
‘I know the age of everything in the garden,’ he says, ‘and it brings me great pleasure.’
The Hewers were very aware of their proximity to the Blaise estate.
For example, they decided to plant a Cornutus controversa rather than the light and elegant variegated form, which they felt would have looked too ‘gardeny’.
Instead, ordinary dogwood, wineberries and bamboo ramble down the steep bank to the side of the garden, providing a natural extension to the view of Blaise Park beyond.
The remnants of a rock garden, ‘with stones sticking out like almonds on a trifle’ provided a daunting challenge.
But the Professor prised them out and built up a bank on the opposite side, ‘with anything I could find, old bedsteads, the lot’.
Here he created a pond, making a point of issue and a channel to a further pond, and building a little bridge from water-worn stones so that it would look entirely natural.
In spring the garden is a feast of blossom and bulbs: snowflake or Loddon lilies clustered around the base of the trees, violet scillas scrambling down the banks and big, old-fashioned daffodils crowded around the mulberry tree.
‘They were saved with the mulberry,’ says Mrs Hewer, ‘and we added wild ones.’
Their four children, two sons and two daughters, grew up at Vine House: each in his or her own way has become a gardener.
‘They had their own little bits of garden but they were never made to help when they were young, which is probably why they liked it all the more.’
Where once their plants were collected from more exotic climes — euphorbia as a seedling from the Marquis de Sade's derelict castle in Provence, alliums from the Professor's botanical expeditions to Iran and Afghanistan for Flora Iranica ]— the Hewers now rely on a comprehensive collection nearer home.
Their daughter Charlotte is a landscape gardener and with her husband, Desmond Evans, runs the Waterwheel nursery at Shirenewtown near Chepstow, only 40 minutes away.
Vine House, Henbury, Bristol is open on 19–20 April and 24–25 May from 2–7pm and all year by appointment 
This article is adapted, by kind permission, from one published in Countryweek magazine.
Eluned Price is a freelance journalist based in Oxford and specialising in houses, gardens and their owners.
She is a regular contributor to The Times and Homes and Gardens .
Clive Nichols is a freelance photographer specialising in gardens.
His work appears regularly in House and Garden ,Country Homes & Interiors and Schöne Wohnen .
‘Our England is a garden, and such gardens are not made By singing ‘Oh, how beautiful!’ and sitting in the shade.’
‘Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God who made him sees That half a proper gardener's work is done upon his knees.’
Kipling, The Glory of the Garden
The leaves of Magnolia kobus carpet the lawn at Vine House
Scillas at Vine House
Marsh marigolds
A clump of Anemone hortensis
Swanning in New York
Life in New York, working for one of the world's greatest auction houses, may seem glamorous, but as Christopher Hartop explains, it can involve scholarship, tact, diplomacy and hard work.
Swanning around takes on a very different meaning in the American art and antiques market.
A friend once likened life in an auction house to a swan: it glides serenely through the water while below, unseen, its feet are thrashing wildly.
A typical day begins in the thrashing department.
9 am.
At my desk to tackle the mail.
One of the excitements of the auction business is never knowing what the post may bring; perhaps photographs of a Renaissance jewel in Alabama, or a Paul de Lamerie soup tureen in Iowa.
Most of the photographs I receive are of unsaleable objects, with a smattering from the lunatic fringe such as the lady from Virginia who wanted to sell the handcuffs used to detain Charles Manson when he was first arrested.
One never knows, however.
a few years ago, the mail revealed a photograph of an elaborately chased soup tureen engraved with the arms of the Duke of York, the second son of George III, who was immortalised in the nursery rhyme as the man who marched his men up the hill and marched them down again.
When the Duke died of dropsy in 1827, his financial affairs were in such a state that his executors took the unprecedented step of placing his chattels up at public auction, entrusting the sale to the young James Christie.
A look into the Christie archives showed that the catalogue listed four soup tureens, each selling for £68.
The reappearance of one of these tureens after so many years was exciting enough, but only a week later the mail produced a murky Polaroid snapshot of another tureen in South america and we were able to offer the two, reunited on the auction block after about 159 years.
The whereabouts of the other two tureens are still unknown and every time I open the mail I hold out some hope.
There are no Duke of York tureens today, but there is something, a Thomas Pitts épergne in Minnesota, possibly worth a trip to see it.
One major difference in the auction business between America and Britain is the amount of travelling that one does: in one week one may do an ‘appraisal day’(the equivalent of the British Antiques Road Show) in Pennsylvania and then go on to look at a dinner service in Baltimore.
10 am.
A lady arrives at the front counter with something to be looked at.
On my way down I pass through a forest of art deco bronze and ivory figures to be sold tomorrow.
The lady's piece is an Italian silver snuffer-stand: an intriguing object with an unidentifiable mark.
I take it in for further research.
If it turns out to be ‘right’(the trade term for ‘genuine’), it will be worth sending to Geneva for sale.
10.15 am.
A quick look around the silver sale on exhibition.
The London dealers have just been through and the carefully arranged display is now a scene of devastation.
Sets of dinner-plates have been muddled up, nozzles switched on candlesticks and there are thumb prints in the middle of each salver where the dealers have felt the thickness of the silver.
A salver that has been re-engraved will be ‘whippy’ in the centre and its value will be greatly reduced.
10.30 am.
The final proofs arrive for the catalogue of the next silver sale.
At any one time, one is taking goods in, cataloguing them and selling them.
My description of an amazing 18-light silver chandelier weighing over 2,500 ounces and made for the Duke of Abercorn in 1837 has, instead of a photograph of the Duke's dining room at Baronscourt, where the chandelier had originally hung, one of the entrance hall.
I had hoped to find the original bill for the chandelier in the Abercorn Papers, but a day's search for them in the Belfast Record Office revealed nothing: in true British fashion, all feed and stapling bills were meticulously preserved and carefully tied in small bundles, but bills for plate and jewels seem not to have been preserved.
10.45 am.
A hour call: an estate on Park Avenue.
A look into the kitchen drawers reveals a rare American silver baby-feeder by Joseph Lowndes of Philadelphia,c . 1780.
Even without its glass bottle it must be worth at least $1,500.
I have always been careful to leave no stone unturned, ever since a time in Philadelphia when a particularly uncomfortable sofa turned out to be hiding a pair of magnificent George III sideboard dishes, subsequently sold for $66,000.
12.30 pm.
Lunch, a sandwich, at my desk.
The telephone rings: a lady with a silver candlestick salvaged from the wreck of Nuestra Senora de Atocha , a Spanish treasure galleon wrecked off the Florida Keys in 1622.
Ever since our auction of Mel Fisher's discoveries from this wreck in 1988, we continue to get calls from people who have received pieces of the treasure in return for their investment in the salvage operation.
The Atocha was a true time capsule and I will never forget the thrill of handling pieces that had lain on the ocean floor for over 350 years.
2 pm.
I take an auction of Japanese works of art.
It is a brisk sale with some spirited bidding: 212 lots in just under two hours.
The American auctioneer's style differs slightly from that of his London counterpart — there is a greater element of showmanship — and it is interesting that most of the transplanted English auctioneers have developed a technique that combines elements of both styles.
The ways people bid, however, are pretty much the same the world over.
One man in the back row is waving his paddle as if he were directing a jumbo jet, while a lady in the front demurely flicks her pencil.
Herodotus described auctions held in ancient Babylon to sell young maidens of marriageable age.
Here, though, the procedure of the auctioneer was somewhat different, for at first the most attractive girls were auctioned to the highest bidders and then a sort of reverse auction took place in which the unattractive ones were distributed: instead of ascending, the bidding descended until the man prepared to accept the least payment got the girl.
I have sometimes been tempted to try this bidding technique with particularly unattractive paintings.
4 pm.
On the way back to my office through the gallery I see that the art deco figures have disappeared and have been replaced by enormous canvases of contemporary art.
One can chart the seasons by the changes in the paintings: the appearance of the first Impressionists on the walls in early November always tell me it's time to get out the winter overcoat.
4.30 pm.
Some quick research around the corner at the New York Genealogical Society.
The arms on a tea-tray we will be selling are those of the Duke of Northumberland and I am fascinated to read that his first wife was divorced by him in 1779.
She fled to New York and married a Prussian nobleman, but shortly afterwards eloped with one Stephen Sayre.
Anecdotes like this help to flesh out the inanimate objects we sell.
6 pm.
A reception in the main gallery: a chance to relax and try to coax some order bids from the guests for the silver on display.
After half an hour's dedicated sales pitch, I find I am talking to a devoted collector of Hummel figurines.
The waiters, reminiscent of the Rockettes of Radio City Music Hall, seem to be doing more business than I am.
The array of glittering jewels and beautifully arranged hors-doeuvres are themselves works of art.
The Abercorn Chandelier, sold for £1.15 million — in under three minutes
One of the Duke of York's tureens
Christopher Hartop (BA 1980) is Senior Vice-President and head of the Silver Department at Christie's, New York.
The Actor Manager
Olivia Abbott meets film and television star Tim Pigott Smith, who now seems happiest running his own touring theatre company.
When Tim Pigott Smith looks directly at you, it's like being given an electric shock.
The focus of his gaze has a startlingly piercing quality; an intensity that seems to strike at your very core.
Television viewers and theatregoers may be familiar with this look, but it is not an ac tor's trick.
It is an intensity that is reflected in his character and his commitment to his craft.
It is obvious that her cares very deeply about the theatre and acting, from the teaching of drama itself to the condition of theatre countrywide.
He came to University in the 1960s and chose Bristol because ‘it was the first of the Drama Departments.
There can't have been above half a dozen universities teaching drama and Bristol was the only one that was really reputed then.
I liked its academic slant.
It seems to me, and it's something that I would contend even now, that it's not actually the role of university Drama Departments to teach practical Drama.
If they are part of a university, they should offer an academic grounding.
They're not offering a degree in stage management or a pass for being a good actor or actress.
That is now what the department is for.’
Translating Drama into an academic subject is not easy, but Pigott Smith doesn't see that as any excuse.
He is firmly committed to the principle that Drama can stand on its own as an academic subject.
‘This was the problem that Glynne Wickham faced, but the only way he could get it past the Faculty at that time was to convince them that it was a separate package.
When you study a play as part of an English Literature course, you're not looking at the staging of it; you're not looking at how it works when it stands up.
The realisation of it, the working of it,that is the study of Drama, with the history of the theatre, which is as old as literature itself.
I support Glynne's case for Drama being a completely independent ethic that isn't fully explored, nor should it be, by an English Department.
Drama is a piece of literature that only works when it's given threedimensional form.
That's not true of a poem or a novel.
It's only true of a play.
I think Drama appeals to a different area of the psyche.
Its appeal to the spirit and the imagination is more direct than novels or poems.’
Drama had, from the word go, a very definite appeal for the young Pigott Smith.
When he came to Bristol it was the time of a developing awareness among young people.
Politics, he remembers, was ‘just beginning when I was at Bristol.
There was the odd student sit-in and the National Union of Students was beginning to find a voice.
It was very mild, though, and times were really very good and very optimistic.
The '60s was a wonderful time.
The sexual revolution was beginning and it was very exciting to get away from home and enjoy yourself in a relatively guilt-free way.’
The '60s, of course, was also the era of drugs.
Pigott Smith, however, couldn't smoke (he suffers from hayfever) and he tried ‘eating some once’, but he has what he describes as ‘a high moral resistance’ to drugs.
He found he didn't really need drugs anyway.
‘For me, having a wild time was doing plays.
In my second year I didn't do very much work, but I did lots of acting and directing.
I took it terribly seriously.
We did a production of The Caretaker , which I designed, directed and in which I played on for the characters.’
He grins in recollection and there's mischief in his eyes.
‘Hardly ambitious, is it?’
He sits, one leg thrown across the arm of his chair, relaxed and humorous  as he talks matter-of-factly about the drug he did become addicted to: the theatre.
The addiction is still strong.
As well as acting he has moved also to take on Artistic Directorship of his own company, Compass.
Quite a step, to take such responsibility in succession to Anthony Quayle.
But he was very definite ideas about what he is doing.
He is obviously disappointed with the way many such companies seem, to him, to be squandering opportunities,.
‘My time at the RSC was very productive for me.
I was promoted through the ranks.
That's what I joined the company for!
That's how I believe the best work is produced.
But I disliked the way the company was run enormously.
So I run Compass the opposite way to how the RSC was run at that particular time.
And certainly from the point or view of relationships with the actors, it works.
In compass we very rarely have problems with actors, whereas if you go to Stratford it's very hard to find anyone who's really happy.
I think the big national companies are badly run.
They're certainly not run with any notion of an actor's potential and actors get unhappy because they spend an awful lot of time feeling creatively unused.
‘I've just been asked to take over a leading role in a production that's been playing in Stratford which they're taking to the Barbican.
There must surely be somebody already in it who could do it.
I've never seen the play, I have no experience of the production.
There is somebody in that company, who's probably been with it for nine months, who knows it backwards and who's capable of playing the role.
‘People come off a Compass tour completely knackered!
We did our last tour of Amadeus with a company of 14.
Two of the company worked, at the same time, on an educational project, funded by the Hamlyn Foundation, which was called the Rock Me Amadeus Roadshow.
In some weeks they would take in five schools in addition to eight performances of Amadeus .
In the meantime, other members of the cast were involved with projects for the deaf and for prisoners.
Piggott Smith seems genuinely still surprised at the sort of commitment and hard work he won from his cast.
‘It's remarkable that, in addition to playing 11 cities around the country, the educational programme played to over 5,000 kids and brought many of them to the main theatre in their local cities for the first time in their lives, on subsidised tickets.
The point was to create first-time theatre-goers, so we tried to target poorer areas on the whole.’
Plans for the next show, however, are not running so smoothly and Pigott Smith doesn't hide his frustration at a system which seems to be hindering his every move.
‘The problem is the Arts Council.
They were constantly critical, when Tony Quayle was running Compass, of his choice of directors.
They have an absurd notion that what is successful is successful people.
The chap who directed Amadeus did a marvellous job.
He's a young, inexperienced director: how else does he get a start?
I've worked with him now over the course of four years, I know him backwards.
I wouldn't trust him with a play like Amadeus , playing a part like Salieri, if I didn't have belief in his talent.
But the Arts Council want a ‘name’.
‘We put in front of them a project to do The Servant of Two Masters in the coming autumn.
They had the proposal in July ‘91; they're still saying ‘maybe’.
In the meantime, the director who would have done it, who is a name director, has asked me to go and work at the RSC because she's now busy for exactly that period of time.
What the Arts Council will turn around and say is ‘You haven't got a good enough director.’
Well of course we haven't!
Because they've pissed around with the decision for so long.’
His zeal doesn't make him unreasonable, however, and he appreciates that things are not easy on the other side of the fence.
‘The Arts Council have problems, too: I don't see them as the enemy, but they create a situation which gives rise to the criticisms they make.’
He is not optimistic about the future of theatre.
‘Things probably won't get any better.
The situation in relation to sponsorship is, I think, quite good: I like a mixed economy.
It avoids complacency and abuse of subsidy, but it will never be a substitute for properly funded arts.
If you look at a pie chart of how public money is spent in this country, it's difficult to find the slice that is the arts.
It's absolutely minute and yet what we're talking about is the quality of people's lives.
I simply cannot understand the short-sightedness.’
He says this last in a tone of frustrated anguish: it's almost an appeal for somebody to enlighten him.
But he doesn't remain despairing for long: anger soon reasserts itself, and I'm certain I wouldn't like to be on the receiving end of a truly hostile glare from those eyes.
‘The worst thing that  this Government has introduced is the notion that everything can be measured.
You cannot measure an idea.
How many charter marks do I get for the notion that The Servant of Two Masters is worth doing?
It doesn't work that way and you can't measure it.
One problem for the theatre is this wretched notion of parity funding.
Because the Arts Council are working on the parity funding principle, local theatres, who are dependent on local government subsidy, are now losing out doubly because local funding has dropped; therefore the parity funding drops.
It's a catch 22.
The local theatre becomes a political football.’
He is not optimistic, either, about the quality of theatre and the arts under the present circumstances.
‘The collapse of repertory causes a big problem in the training of actors.
Acting is a very complex job with a deceptive amount to learn.
With funding as it is, being part of a repertory company — which is an incredible training ground — and churning out X number of plays per year will go.
So in ten or 15 years’ time, when audiences are less capable of watching complex and difficult plays of language, the actors will also be less capable of doing them.
It's happened already.
Go to Stratford: the quality of the voice work is abysmal.’
Held by his gaze, you know Tim Pigott Smith is not going to give up without a fight, however.
‘While I'm here in Bristol I hope to talk to Andy Hay, the new Director of the Old Vic, to see if there's some way that we can combine our forces.’
Tim does come back to Bristol frequently and remembers it with great affection.
‘I come whenever I can: I love Bristol.
I just wish it was nearer London!
He grins and there's mischief in those eyes again as he describes one of his greatest pleasures: ‘I often come back to Bristol to do Poetry Please .
That's a great treat for an actor: being paid to sit in front of a microphone and read wonderful poetry!’
University Rococo: an Accidental Inheritance
Timothy Mowl explains how the houses acquired for the University by the Wills family have preserved some of Bristol's most interesting architecture.
Eighteenth-century Bristol was an environmental disaster area with problems of atmospheric pollution that would make present-day Mexico City seem like a health resort.
In its enclosed valley basin the fume and grime from the cheap coal of its suburban collieries with iron works, brass foundries and glass works was already driving the wealthier merchants up into the healthy heights of Clifton by the 1720s.
A little later Alexander Pope described the city as ‘very unpleasant…‘tis as if Wapping and Southwark were ten times bigger’, while Horace Walpole called it ‘the dirtiest great shop I ever saw.
One age's misfortune is another's good luck and a result of this flight from urban squalor and an exceptionally turbulent working class was that, in the early 20th century, when the new Bristol University was looking to expand, there was a whole chain of classical villas with their attendant small parks all waiting to be picked up at knock-down prices.
The best of these, and the University's prime bargains, were Goldney House, clifton Hill House and the Royal Fort, of 1723, 1746 and 1759 respectively.
They have a link that all three share in Bristol's sturdy stylistic isolationism.
When Thomas Goldney, a Quaker, one of that splendidly self-righteous religious oligarchy that forged so much of Bristol's prosperity, was choosing an architect for his new villa on Clifton Hill, he acted with typically Bristolian conservative caution.
Bristol was so satisfied by what it had achieved in Queen Square after 1701 — a series of dull brick houses in a style that can be charitably described as Quaker's Baroque — that the city's builders virtually ignored the Palladian classicism that was sweeping the rest of England.
So Thomas Goldney selected as his architect George Tully, a fellow Quaker who had learnt his trade working as a carpenter on Queen Square for another carpenter turned contractor, John Price.
What Tully built for Goldney was predictably a piece of safe, oldfashioned Baroque.
Its garden front just manages to survive, intact on its eastern bays, sensitively refaced on the western, beneath the mound of Italianate jumble that Alfred Waterhouse piled on top of it in the 19th century.
It has the Baroque horror of vacant spaces with every element of its façade nervously connected by stone panels to its neighbour but with oh powerful rhythm ever being allowed to develop.
There is, of course, a stunning panelled room of the period behind those windows on the east wing, but here again is an instance of Bristol's almost pathological conservatism.
The carving is a superb piece of craftsmanship but most of its fruit, flower and dead animal motifs are straight copies of a section of bought-in 17th-century carving, doubtfully by Grinling Gibbons, which had been in the city form some years and now lies behind lock plate glass doors in the Public Library on College Green.
No one would want to underpraise the gardens of Goldney House.
They are a prodigious survival in the heart of a large city and one that can hardly weather a further intrusion of hostels.
But here again there is an engaging strain of amateurism.
After Palladianism came the Rococo; examples of the style are rare nationally but Bristol in general and the University in particular are generously endowed.
It is possible, with the eye of faith, to describe Goldney garden as Rococo in design, a remote cousin to Painswick in the Cotswolds.
its Rococo character is, however, accidental, though none the less charming for that.
Rococo gardens tend to be bijou in scale, cluttered with frivolous and unrelated pleasure buildings and threaded by sinuously curving paths, avenues and connecting features.
Goldney garden, which appears to have developed to the whims and fancies of the women in the family, has the first two characteristics but not the last.
An orangery, a formal canal, a Gothick tower, one of Britain's most fantastic grottoes, a Gothick garden house and a mock fortified bastion are all crammed into its limited acreage along with a statue of Hercules being toppled by the weight of his own club.
It is an endearing place, indeterminate in the true Bristol fashion: its Gothick garden house once boasted an enclosing frill of classical columns.
If Paul Fisher, another rich escapee from the  smog, was hoping to drag his native city into the line of 1746 fashion, he chose the wrong architect when he asked Isaac Ware to design Clifton Hill House for him on an awkward shelf of eastward-facing garden.
Ware was a strict Palladian by upbringing but a stylistic schizoid by force of circumstances.
Pressure from avant-garde patrons like Lord Chesterfield and, by the look of Clifton Hill's garden front, Paul Fisher, often forced him into Rococo compromises with his Palladian inclinations.
The illustration of Clifton Hill with its icy reserve and its windows cut directly into the ashlar without surrounds is easily the most stylistically advanced in The Complete Body of Architecture that Ware published in 1756 to celebrate his life's work.
It is not always realised that by some, perhaps Puritanical, compensatory instinct a true Rococo house enshrines its riotous and self-indulgent interior within a particularly severe exterior masonry of canted bays and minimal decorative devices.
That is a fair description of the east elevation of Clifton Hill House, surely the most chastely elegant student hostel in Britain.
In his prose Isaac Ware writes with deep suspicion of true Rococo plasterwork, those ‘wild leaves’ as he nervously describes them.
Perhaps Paul Fisher became aware of this because he paid Thomas Paty, a Bristol carver and contractor, £2,000 to build for him what Ware had designed.
Somewhere in the tensions between patron, architect, contractor and craftsmen three fine schemes of interior decoration emerged in Clifton Hill's dining room, drawing room and stair hall.
Paty's current plasterer was Joseph Thomas whose own little house, No 5 Guinea Street, was an authentic riot, with ceilings of squirrels and birds perched precariously on plaster curlicues and ‘C’ scrolls.
The whole strength of Rococo decoration was its movement away from the formal motifs of Palladian classicism towards a humorous appreciation of the natural world and of storybook fantasy.
On Clifton Hill's dining room ceiling, presently the student ‘drawing room’, Ware has managed to keep Joseph Thomas confined to solid geometrical compartments but within these Thomas has set a stiff breeze blowing to animate the acanthus leaves and there is a saucy tilt to the fruit baskets that perch on the heads of his goddesses.
Bristol was poised here on a cusp between two styles, and a few years later (1754–55) in the sadly lost Assembly Rooms on Prince Street, Thomas was able to press his Rococo leanings even further.
The climax was, however, still to come, with the Royal Fort House built by a mysterious, but again very Bristolian, consortium between 1759 and 1761.
This time the flood tide of ‘forward and backward Cs in which the French so much delight’ was flowing inexplicably at a time when we and the French were fighting the Seven Years War and French fashions, like French bottle makers and garlic, were desperately unpopular.
But the Royal Fort as a house, or to be more precise a suite of reception rooms added to an older complex, has something of much greater imaginative reach than a mere froth of writhing plaster feather-work and gilding such as London's lost Chesterfield House once displayed.
In the Royal Fort a Bristol merchant, Thomas Tyndall, deep dyed in the infamous triangular slave-trade, together with his young wife Alicia, projected Rococo design into high art.
Bristol is only half aware that in the entrance hall and staircase hall of the Royal Fort it has a masterwork of European significance that ranks easily alongside Frederick the Great's interiors at Sans Souci.
There are few spatial experiences in this country to rank beside that sudden sideways shift from the masculine world of military triumphs and smiling shepherdesses on the Doric frieze of the Royal Fort's entrance hall into the amazing feminine world of  willow-pattern fantasy that swirls up at an angle in the great stairwell.
Frustrated foxes, singing birds, enchanted islands and smiling Chinamen are scattered in a splendid excess of modelling up the trailing vines of inspired invention.
Then capping it all is a ceiling of absolute if intricate formality, a prelude and preparation to the first floor rooms that were never to be worked.
Alicia died only four years after the Royal Fort was ‘completed’ and Thomas seems never to hade have the heart to complete a work that breathes an air of happy domesticity.
Even so there is enough in these spaces and in the ‘Eating Room’ and the Drawing Room, the one with its amazing Chinoiserie woodwork, the other with its airy flight of hoho birds and pheasants, to provide one of the 18th century's most satisfying interior sequences, one where discipline and imagination are almost perfectly balanced.
Who then was responsible?
The answer is complex.
The house has three show façades, each one isolated from its fellow around the corner, each one with different window surrounds.
It is hard to believe that one architect created all three: the dour, round-arched entrance front, the blandly conventional west front and the garden front serenely composed about its canted bay with female heads, heraldic complexities and subtle drapes of rustication.
A contemporary poem suggests that three men, Wallis, Bridges and Thomas Paty, were all involved.
Probably Tyndall took a design from each and employed Bridges to make the model that bound them all fairly convincingly together as they now stand, each fine in its way but inconsequential.
There is firm evidence in the Scottish Record Office that Thomas Paty's team was, once again, responsible for the actual building and decoration.
Paty's own hand is apparent in the doorcase of the ‘Eating Room’.
The best plasterwork tends, without a scrap of evidence, to be attributed to Thomas Stocking.
His attested work at Stoke Park and Corsham Court is completely different to that one the Royal Fort's staircase.
More than 20 plasterers were resident in Bristol in these years and what seems to have happened was that the two Tyndalls brooded over rolls of Chinese wallpaper and popular books of decorative devices like The Modern Builder's Assistant (1757), picking up and choosing the themes and the motifs that pleased them.
Thomas Paty then, with a whole sooty city teeming with skilled craftsmen to choose from, realised in wood and plaster his patrons' commands.
The work was completed, the Tyndalls eventually passed away and now the University has a music Department housed in pure poetry.
A copy of a painting by Soldi of the architect of Clifton Hill House, Isaac Ware, and his daughter, funded by the CHH Old Students' Association
Timothy Mowl is a local architectural historian.
His book To Build the Second City, published by Redcliffe Press last October (price £19.95), has a chapter on Rococo and Gothick design and building in Bristol.
It deals with the three villas of this article in more detail.
Investing in Bristol
Alisdaire Lockhart presents a progress report on the first six months of the University's Campaign for Resource.
At mid-day on Tuesday 15 October last year a small group of friends met in Michael Parry's office to celebrate the Secretary's 25 years' service to the University.
In reply to the Vice-Chancellor's words of thanks, Michael coupled his toast to the future prosperity of the University with his wish for a successful launch of the Campaign for Resource .
It was a propitious toast.
That evening, some 400 guests and members of the University gathered in the Great Hall of the Wills Memorial Building to hear the Vice-Chancellor and the Chairman of Council, Mrs Stella Clarke, introduce the Campaign for Resource to the Bristol community and to listen to Sir Michael Angus explain why he supported the University and had agreed to lead the Campaign.
Sir Michael spoke enthusiastically of the University Plan and its clear goals for the end of the decade.
He was committed to helping the University secure the funds necessary to meet these goals.
Many of the Patrons of the Campaign were present, including the Duchess of Beaufort, Sir John Wills, Dr Bob Woodward and Dr Derek Zutshi.
A highlight of the evening was the presentation of a cheque for £25,000 from the Master of the Merchant Venturers to support the Campaign for Resource , although those in the know nearly had heart failure when the Master could not be found in the crowded room as the time for the presentation approached.
: With the Bristol launch over, the scene moved to London on the following day for a special conference at the Royal Society.
The Campaign for Resource is not a development campaign.
It is rather the development of a portfolio of projects at Bristol which merit investment on sound practical grounds.
But investment at Bristol cannot be isolated from the wider national context and large questions such as what is the role of higher education in national life, how may it be expanded, who should pay and how?
The Campaign therefore has two strands, the promotion of a specific portfolio for investment at Bristol and a robust Bristol contribution to the national debate on these fundamental issues.
At the Royal Society launch therefore we convened an impressive group of people who might initiate and carry forward the discussion.
A distinguished panel of speakers considered the role os of Government, industry and academia before an audience of leading industrialists, Patrons and the Directors of the major national charitable trusts.
The Chancellor had shortened his stay in Bangkok, where he was attending a meeting of the International Monetary Fund, to open the conference, and speakers included Patrick Coldstream, the Director of the Council for Industry and Higher Education, Tim Eggar, one of the Department of Education and Science Ministers, Sir Michael Angus, the Vice-Chancellor and Dr Celia Russo from the Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chausées.
Dr Russo stole the show with her opening remark: ‘In France the Department of Education has  the largest budget and is considered to be the most prestigious Ministry of Government.’
Unfortunately, by the time she spoke, Tim Eggar had departed, but the point was well taken by another Government Minister, William Waldegrave, who was in the audience.
On the following Monday, around 80 members of the Wills family, including Sir John Wills, Lord Dulverton and Sir David Wills, gathered over lunch at Wills Hall to launch the publication of Sidney Watson's comprehensive history of the Wills family.
The event brought together many members of the Wills family with friends from the wide range of organisations which have benefited from Wills family generosity over the decades.
The support from the Wills family is impressive and highlights the contribution to national higher education that enlightened individuals and companies have made: a founding donation of £100,000, endowed Chairs in Botany, English, Geology, Greek, Mathematics, Modern History, Physics and Physiology, and many buildings, including the Wills Memorial Building, the Victoria Rooms, Downside estate, Wills Hall, the Physics building, Canynge Hall and Burwalls.
This is an impressive donation which has spread over some 50 years and continues today through the support of the Dulverton Trust.
(Readers will be saddened to hear of the recent death of Lord Dulverton.)
The next event in the public launch calendar was the Alumni Foundation Concert in the Great Hall on 11 November, which Lord Armstrong hosted in his capacity as a Patron of the Campaign for Resource .
The Music Department provided a lively concert of Baroque music.
Two graduates of the Department, Paul Beniston (trumpet) and Craig Nathan (organ), were the soloists.
The following week Brian Redhead, a presenter of Radio 4's Today programme, visited the University with Radio 4 goes to College , a roadshow for students including a science/media debate, student light entertainment and a national broadcast debate on the future of higher education led by speakers (including the President of the Union) from Bristol.
On three evenings in November, the Department of English organised the Faculty of Arts Poetry Festival at the Watershed.
Professor Tim Webb and Pippa Bagguley had recruited a number of leading national poets to read their own works, culminating in an evening with Tony Harrison when he read his poems to an enthusiastic audience from the city and University.
Later that month the Union's largest society, AIESEC, the international organisation for students of all subjects who are interested in business and management, organised a debate on the motion that ‘This House believes that a university degree is more of a hindrance than a help to a career in British industry’.
The debate was chaired by the Chancellor; the motion was proposed by Professor Sir Douglas Hague, who took as his debating point the similarity between the University and prison systems.
He was opposed by Sir Michael Angus, supported by the Vice-Chancellor.
There was no need for election rigging.
Eloquence alone was sufficient to defeat the motion.
The debate was followed by a dinner for industrialists involved with graduate recruitment and members of AIESEC, together with senior members of the University.
Professor Paul Grout spoke after dinner and reminded all present of one of the essential purposes of a university: to provide bright young graduates for future employment.
The event provided a forum for graduate recruiters, members of the University and students, which AIESEC is keen to perpetuate.
The evening was judged by the national committee of AIESEC as the best project in the United Kingdom for 1991, sustaining Bristol's place as Britain's leading AIESEC group.
The following evening, Sir Michael hosted a reception at Unilever House for Law Alumni, when the Dean was able to announce sponsorship from Watson, Farley, Williams for a new Chair in Banking Law at the University Lord Justice Griffiths, Chairman of the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct, spoke about the future development of legal education in this country, and the closer involvement of the universities in the professional preparation of lawyers.
In early December, Marjorie, Lady Lewis opened the Lewis Wing of the Law Faculty in the Wills Memorial Building, which was refurbished using funds raised form the local law practices to commemorate professor Martin Lewis, the first Professor of Law at the University, and his son Judge Sir Ian, Lady Lewis's late husband, who had been elected a Pro-Chancellor the University shortly before his untimely death.
The Colston Research Society, thanks to its President, Moger Woolley, has generously decided to use some of its funds to support the Campaign for Resource .
It was agreed that this might best be achieved by a series of dinners to launch development projects of the University.
The Master of the Merchant Venturers graciously made Merchants Hall available for these dinners, the first of which  was organised for the Faculty of Medicine.
A local MP, the Secretary of State for Health, William Waldegrave, agreed to be our guest speaker at the dinner.
After a marvellous speech from the Secretary of State, the Dean thanked Mr Waldegrave and introduced the work of the Faculty.
He highlighted the projects for investment.
Guests included Bridget Ogilvie of the Wellcome Foundation, Sir Rex Richards of the Leverhulme Trust, Professor Gordon McVie of the Cancer Research Campaign and Dr Renny Leach of Action Research, together with old friends of the Faculty such as Bob Woodward, George Poste, Bob Baxter and Arnold Denman.
The public launch came to a climax on the day of the Annual Meeting of Court, when Lord Flowers gave the Inaugural Lecture of the Campaign for Resource series, an address on the future of higher education in the UK.
He discussed the present funding arrangements, the legislation before Parliament, the consequences of the abolition of the binary line and the present preoccupation with management rather than academic leadership.
The University published the address as a special supplement to the Newsletter and the text was circulated to members of the Universities Funding Council and to the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals.
Apparently even the Prime Minister has now seen a copy.
The Lecture was followed by the Annual Meeting of Court, at which the Chancellor, in a novel ceremony, invited three members of Court to sign the Roll of Benefactors of the University in recognition of their outstanding support of the work of the University.
The three founding members of the Roll of Benefactors Roll of Benefactors were Dr Bob Woodward, on behalf of the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust, Mr Andrew Reid, for the Society of Merchant Venturers, and Mr Haydn Harrison on behalf of the Special Trustees of the United Bristol Hospitals.
As the first six months of the Campaign end, we can ask ourselves: what have we achieved and at what cost?
First, it is important to record our gratitude to the Esmée Fairbairn Charitable Trust, Unilever PLC, the Society of Merchant Venturers and the Colston Research Society which carried all the direct costs of the public launch.
Second, it is important to thank Sir Michael Angus, Dr Derek Zutshi and many of the Patrons of the Campaign for Resource who attended so many of the events to ensure a good launch for the Campaign.
We are grateful also to Lord Flowers and all the speakers at various events and to the many members of the University who contributed to the public launch of the Campaign for Resource .
An infrastructure has been established for campaigning in the years to come: a Leader and some 30 distinguished Patrons have agreed to support the Campaign; an initial portfolio of investment projects has been drawn up; and the Alumni database, with an active list of some 25% of the graduate body, is now operational.
But what of the benefits?
Bristol's ambitious plans have been presented to a wideranging audience: the leaders of many of the largest companies in this country, including, for example, BT, Sainsbury's, IBM and Hewlett Packard, Booker and United Biscuits, Smith Kline Beecham and ICI; the Directors of the major charitable trusts, such as the Wellcome Foundation, the Leverhulme Trust, CRC and Action Research, and the Rayne and Nuffield Foundations; Government and learned institutions including the Royal Society, the Advisory Board for the Research Councils, MRC and MAFF; and the press and media such as The Economist ,The Director and Nature , together with leading journalists (not least Bristol graduates Sue Lawley, Rosemary Hartill and Liz Howells).
There are notable achievements.
The real justification for the launch must, however, lie in the number of projects in the Investment Prospectus which gained funding, such as the Research Dowry for the Chair of Medicine, new accommodation for the Department of Surgery, the Chair in Banking Law, new laboratories for Biochemistry and initial funding for the preparation of the University for the reception of deaf students.
At the launch events we received a number of encouraging offers of investment, and we will report on these as we progress.
Others will follow.
We have made a good start.
In the coming months there will be more Colston Research dinners and more presentations to targeted groups of graduates.
We will be taking the Campaign abroad.
Within the University we shall be actively seeking new projects and refining and developing the current list.
Outside the University we will continue to promote the wider public debate we seek on the future of higher education and the pursuit of excellence.
And in all of this, we will welcome the ideas and suggestions of our graduates.
Chairman of Convocation: Dr Derek Zutshi talks to Michael and Estelle Morgan at the reception after the concert
Concert host and Campaign patron Lord Armstrong (left) and Chairman of Council Mrs Stella Clarke talk to Professor Eglinton
The Possibility of Mastery
Engineers and ceremonial officers are usually thought to be solemn people.
Don Carleton describes how Bill Larnach, Bristol's retiring University Marshal, brought the wit and tough wisdom of his birthplace, and some more operatic splendours, to generations of Engineering students.
Bill Larnach was born in Durham and his roots go deep in the North-East.
Indeed, if you go back to his grandfather's generation, they go right underground, for Bill Larnach comes from the solid traditions of the Durham miners.
His grandfather worked the coalface and his father was a Miners' Union official.
A man is strongly shaped by such an inheritance.
When Bill was growing up in the Durham of the 1930s, memories of the Great Strike of 1926 were still sharp and vivid among the mining community.
Miners also remembered bitterly and deeply the Great Depression from which the country was only just emerging.
They were saddened by what they saw as the betrayal of the Labour Party by its leader Ramsay MacDonald, who had joined the National Government.
Miners saw their employers, the mine owners, as wicked and morally corrupt.
National politicians, they believed, were not to be trusted.
It is difficult now for many people to grasp, let along appreciate, the depth and strength of the feelings of loss, defeat, and outrage which mining communities felt at the time.
It left miners, and all who lived and worked with them, scarred and embittered.
But there were positive outcomes of the Great Strike and the Depression too.
The miners might have lost a political battle, but they had not lost a war.
They knew their weapon for the future.
It was to be education.
The General Strike of 1926 made the Durham mining community tough, self-reliant, and committed to educating their young people.
Bill Larnach's father was typical.
Although he himself had not had much formal education, he was literate, well read and articulate.
Bill's mother was tough and hospitable.
Despite the harsh economic problems, like most women of her community and generation, she always had the traditional tin of salmon in her cupboard ‘in case anyone should drop in’.
She delighted in visitors and she was moved by all their woes and troubles.
Bill admits that her involvement may sometimes have been initiated by curiosity but her concern was always genuine.
He remembers, ‘she would have done anything for anyone.’
His parents were delighted when Bill won the equivalent of an 11-plus place at the local grammar school.
By the standards of today it was not much of a school.
Bill claims now that it was the architectural equivalent of Dotheboys Hall, draughty, cold, its desks and other equipment scarcely changed from the Victorian era.
But the small grammar schools of the North-East had something which modern schools often lack.
They had well-qualified, determined teachers.
They shared the community's commitment to education and saw themselves as the vanguard of it.
They aimed at mastery of a subject.
If they taught Shakespeare, for example, it was acted in class, discussed and argued about until even the tough little Durham miners' sons knew all about Titania's motivations in A Midsummer Night's Dream .
His teachers did well by Bill Larnach.
He confesses that, although he was outstanding at school (he was usually top academically and became Assistant Head Boy —‘power without privilege’ he says), the young Bill was always anxious about examinations and aware of the pressure to succeed.
Not much good at games at school, he nonetheless gained at least three great loves there: Physics, English and German.
In those days such interests rarely grew from the pupils' enthusiasm or choice.
Bill remembers that German was foisted upon him.
‘We came to that point in our school career when we had to study a foreign language.
We  were divided arbitrarily into sheep and goats: the sheep did French, the goats German.
It was as simple as that.’
There was not much choice about universities either.
With today's level of careers advice, a young man like Bill Larnach almost certainly would have applied to Cambridge.
In Durham, as the Second World War drew to an end with the severe competition from returning ex-servicemen, there was only one choice: Durham University.
In Engineering, the choice which Bill Larnach did make, that paradoxically meant Newcastle-upon-Tyne, a 30-mile round trip every day.
In the economic circumstances of the time, most students had to live at home.
But Durham students did not miss out too much on communal university life.
The 8.20 to Newcastle became for Bill and others a kind of mobile JCR.
It was there that he met medical, humanities and other science students and shared ideas with them.
It was there, in lulls in the conversation, that he became a crossword addict and began to develop the concern for correct English, the wide vocabulary, the delight in the niceties of syntax, that have made him both a witty and a hard task master for generations of Bristol students.
At Kings' College, Newcastle, Bill Larnach found another strong influence.
Under Professor W. Fisher Cassie, he began to develop his life-long interest in soil mechanics.
After taking his first degree, he stayed on a further two years to do an MSc.
Then he had to face the curse and the blessing of his generation: he had to do his National Service.
For many young men, National Service gave what their universities didn't — access to foreign travel, the opportunity to meet people very different from themselves, and to exercise responsibility for real jobs at a young age.
Bill Larnach joined the RAF.
He did his basic training at Warrington and was then posted to officer training school at Grantham.
He missed that town's  most eligible blonde.
The very year he arrived in Grantham (1951), Margaret Roberts (no camp follower she) married Dennis Thatcher.
Early in 1952 the young Flying Officer Larnach, unaware of the great chance that he had missed, was sent to serve his sovereign abroad.
For once, those who commanded His Majesty's armed forces made a sensible decision.
Faced with a young man with two Engineering degrees and A-level German, they sent him to Germany to build and to test experimental airfields, to join the Officers' Mess at Cologne, and to sample continental culture.
The airfield experiments gave Bill Larnach his taste for research linked to empirical fieldwork.
Runways were constructed and a squadron of jet fighters pounded them to destruction.
Flying Officer Larnach also had to try to find new sites for airfields.
He enjoys still the odd distinction of being the first person to take a soil sample at what later became the NATO headquarters at Mönchen Gladbach.
In the Officers' Mess Bill made his first acquaintance of a kind of Senior Common Room.
It gave him a taste for a civilised life-style.
In the city of Cologne he visited his first night club.
It was not, it seems, by the classical standards of German decadence set in the 1920, very shocking.
But to a young man, fresh from the quiet charm of the cathedral city of Durham, it was a cultural shock.
He sums it up as ‘wine, titillation, beer and sausages’.
Bill Larnach emerged from his National Service with a love of German wine, a liking for German cities and a host of German friends.
On his release from the services, he tried living and working in London.
It was, he admits, a mistake.
Urban life for him demanded a more human scale, a city like Durham or Bristol, a place that one can comprehend as a city.
He returned to the North to work on the problems of reinforced concrete for a commercial company.
But he chafed a bit as a member of a commercial office team.
He wanted to recapture the feeling of being his own man, addressing his own problems, working as a member of a wider team that he had found in the RAF.
In 1955 he saw a job advertised at Bristol University.
At that time, he know nothing very much about Bristol, but he applied.
When he arrived in Bristol he was put up in the old Bright's (temperance) Hotel at the rear of the present Dingle's store.
At interview, he faced a formidable interrogation: Sir Philip Morris, Roderick Collar, Gordon Rawcliffe and Alfred Pugsley.
The interviewing panel liked what they saw and heard.
He got the job.
Bill remembers that in those days lecturers learned the job slowly.
In his first two years he taught only bits of course but later, when the well-remembered Stuart Armstrong left to take up a post in Australia, he became responsible for teaching Soil Mechanics, although he continued to teach ‘everything but hydraulics’.
Bill Larnach has written well over 40 published papers including a book.
His particular research interest has been the subtle interplay of structure and soil, the total behaviour of the designed building and the soil on which it rests.
His insights and skill have made him much in demand as a consultant.
Almost from the start he has been a university teacher who has, so to speak, a ‘hard hat and a pair of stout wellington boots constantly in his car’.
But Bristol students will remember him most for his teaching.
Bill Larnach always took great pains with his lectures and, although he is an accomplished speaker, they never became monologues.
He demanded that his students worked too.
The lazy and the inattentive were the object of his acerbic wit; the careless (especially with language) the subject of his scorn.
The discussion he demanded from his students was usually fun.
Inspired perhaps by the example of the tough Northern school masters of his youth, Bill sought to reveal to his students the excitement that comes with the realisation of the possibility of mastery — the sheer pleasure of conquering a difficult topic.
In Bill Larnach's view, too many students came (and perhaps still come) to university to seek, as it were, a badge, a qualification that would enable them to be accepted for a job.
But Bill believed, and still believes, that the ‘shelf life’ of an engineer is only about five years.
For success in the profession, an engineer must be constantly ‘rebuilt’, updated, made new.
That can only happen properly if the fundamental, unshakeable understanding of Engineering is soundly built.
It was this understanding that Bill Larnach's humorous, bantering, interactive style of teaching was designed to achieve.
Bill's students knew that here was no blind theory; his teaching, because of his extensive consultancy practice, was rooted in real Engineering experience performed in real time.
For about 20 years at Bristol Bill Larnach remained a good Engineering teacher.
He was  respected by his students and valued by his colleagues.
But he was perhaps not completely remarkable (except for his wit which frequently enlivened Engineering Board discussion).
But then there came an event which changed his life and made him a very unusual engineer indeed.
On 12 October 1974 an industrial friend at Unilever invited him to share the company's box at Covent Garden to see an opera.
Bill, who had heard with great pleasure many of the greats including Menuhin, Beecham, Barbirolli during his Newcastle days, went.
He emerged from the opera house a changed man.
He had seen the Götz Friedrich production of Die Walküre .
He went in an engineer with wide interests in orchestral music; he emerged a committed Wagnerian, fascinated by Wagner's very special approach by music theatre.
In the years that followed fascination became a passion.
Bill now has books, records, photographs all of which relate to Wagner and his works.
He travels, gives talks and lecturers about Wagnerian opera and Wagner the man.
His passion has only just stopped short of writing a structural critique of the civil engineering faults at Valhalla.
It is now not easy to talk to Bill Larnach for very long before becoming aware of the depth of his knowledge and the way in which, following the traditions of his birthplace, he has achieved a mastery of this very difficult subject.
We are all perhaps very much formed by our inheritance.
Bill Larnach's roots are in the North-East.
It was the interest of his parents which sustained him in his early school career.
It was the excellence of his teachers which gave him his interest in Physics, English and German.
It was the Physics which led him to Engineering, and the Engineering which took him as a National Serviceman to Germany and the experimental air fields.
It was the experimental air fields which gave him a taste for exploring ideas which he later satisfied by joining a university; it was the German language which brought him his wife Mary (they met through a German class in Bristol).
Their daughter Catherine became a Bristol Law graduate and son Richard works for the Bristol transputer firm INMOS.
It was all of these factors and experiences which made him an outstanding teacher and a distinguished consultant (perhaps the only person to be Chairman of the local association of the ICE and IStructE in successive years).
But it was chance alone which took him to Covent Garden.
Bristol's Engineering students will be indebted to Bill Larnach for the challenges he presented and his insistence on good communication.
(He still thinks that universities accept too low a standard of written English communication from their students.)
But a wider public, both inside and outside the University, are grateful to him for the windows he has opened up to them, through his recent chairmanship of the Friends of the Welsh National Opera, through his talks and articles, and above all through his learned, wise and witty discourses on Wagner.
Bill Larnach is not, and does not claim to be, ‘a Renaissance man’.
He cannot and does not do everything.
His tennis, for example, remains social rather than competitive.
But he makes a mockery of the idea of ‘two cultures’, of a tension between technology and the humanities.
He shows that it is possible to make soundly constructed bridges between industry and academia, between the world of soil mechanics and that of Wagner.
He exhibits in himself what he has always taught students was the true excitement of learning: the possibility of mastery.
‘In the first year we were frightened of him, in the second year we got used to him, and in the third year we really liked him.’
A Bristol student
Wotan and the Valkyries from the Götz Friedrich production of Die Walküre at Covent Garden, 1974
Blue Skies and other Horizons
Genevieve Hawks describes how researcher Beverley Randle became an awardwinning businesswoman.
‘In an ideal world, I would just do research, teach…and rest.’
For someone doing something she'd sometimes rather not, Dr Beverley Randle does it remarkably well.
Since joining the University's Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology as a New Blood Lecturer in 1984, she has successfully divided her time between teaching and research, and establishing not only a national charity but two commercial companies as well.
In 1989, with the future of basic science funding in turmoil, Beverley feared that her research was in jeopardy.
‘I was utterly miserable,’ she recalls, ‘I was in the position where I could actually get work to a standard that was good enough to attract support but there weren't any funds.’
She started looking at ways of securing financial support other than grant-funding.
The two that immediately came to mind were running a charity and looking at whether any of her work was commercially viable which, since it is biotechnology-based, there was a good chance it would be.
Three years later her efforts have not gone unrewarded: both companies have been awarded the Small Firms Merit Award for Research and Technology (SMART) by the Department of Trade and Industry and the charity, Research in Cancer Immunology, has built up a capital base of £35,000.
Beverley's achievements made the headlines last year when she was named outright winner and Science and Technology Section winner in the Cosmopolitan /Clairol Achievement Awards, a competition which aims to highlight women who have attained excellence in their professions.
For one so accomplished, Beverley is delightfully down-to-earth.
Is it true, I enquire, as Bristol's Western Daily Press reported, that Beverley ‘pioneered the use of magic bullets’?
I learnt about magic bullets as an undergraduate in Australia in 1984 and I am impressed to think that I am in the company of their pioneer.
She's amused by the idea and keen to put the record straight.
‘I think that they got a bit carried away,’ she laughs, ‘I'm not sure why they went for that word exactly.
Magic bullets were first invented by Professor Milstein at Cambridge but, yes, virtually my entire scientific career has been based around that technology.’
Magic bullets are antibodies — proteins that are produced naturally in the body to defend against disease.
They have been called magic bullets because of their use in the treatment of cancer.
A protein magic bullet can be linked to a toxic agent and, when introduced into the body, it will act as a ‘homing missile’ that can recognise and destroy the tumour with the toxic agent it carries.
In effect, the antibody is acting as a bullet, shooting out the cancer.
Antibody production occurs naturally when the body's immune system combats disease.
In cancer, however, the immune response can be suppressed and the body is unable to generate the antibodies it needs to fight the disease.
Brain and nervous systems tumours are the most common solid cancers of children.
In a project funded by the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust  (CLIC), Beverley and her team have developed a procedure for cloning the cell factories that produce antibodies which are proving effective as magic bullets in identifying and destroying brain tumours.
The aim of introducing these magic bullets into the sick body is that they will help do the work that the body itself would do if it were well.
There is some hope that the research will come up with a treatment for AIDS.
Beverley, however, is cautious in her optimism.
‘The problem with AIDS is that there is complete immuno-suppression.
Even if you can actually design antibodies which will fight the disease for the patient, it's still very much trying to hold back the disease progress.
As an absolute treatment for the advanced disease, it's very difficult to see how well it could work.’
Over the years Beverley has taught nearly a hundred people how to make monoclonal antibodies in their laboratories.
Seeing that there was commercial potential in what they were doing, in March 1989 she and a colleague set up Immune Systems Ltd, a biotechnology company that develops and markets applications of monoclonal antibodies.
Now they offer a contracting service for magic bullet production and are selling DIY kits that make the technology available to any laboratory.
Beverley spends two days a week running the company — an arrangement that she negotiated with the University.
The University, for its part, has a small shareholding in the company.
Though she speaks wistfully of the luxury of ‘blue sky research’, Beverley sees advantages in having to adopt a commercial perspective as well as a purely scientific one.
‘Working for industry makes you intensely more accountable than just working for a university ever does.
Your thinking becomes much tighter.
I believe that there's an awful lot to be learnt from taking the much more targeted industrial point of view because the research becomes tidier.
The downside is that if you channel your thought too much, you might never see the blue sky.
So it's swings and roundabouts.’
The application of monoclonal antibody research in medicine is more widespread than just in the treatment of cancer.
Currently Beverley is working on developing a test to predict accurately the risk of Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) in premature babies.
Foetal lung maturation takes place in the last three months of pregnancy.
Babies born preterm are likely to lack surfactant — a material that covers the surface of the lung, lowering surface tension in the alveolus and thereby preventing lung collapse on breathing out.
RDS is the most common cause of death in the first week of life, yet the outlook for babies at risk is better if they can be quickly transferred to suitable intensive care units.
Beverley has set about the task of designing monoclonals that can recognise the surfactant material and therefore indicate its presence or absence in the lungs of newborn babies.
In March 1991, Beverley and her colleague Dr Katherine Howe formed another company, Surface Active Ltd, to look at a very high-risk idea, based on monoclonal antibody diagnostics.
‘What we're trying to do is have a piece of research that is so novel and is so placeable within industry that they can't really say no.
Industry will be carrying our costs and we will bring the research to a point from which they can then take it on to the market.’
Their idea is to examine the feasibility of a one-step diagnostic to indicate the presence of a particular molecule, such as might be used to test for the presence of surfactant.
They have already patented the idea.
If it works out, then it's use of that patent they will be selling to industry.
‘In fact it's quite a good position to be in,’ she says, ‘in that you do have a lot of control over your future.
At the same time, if you don't get the guess right then you don't have a future.’
In November 1990, her colleague Katherine Howe nominated Beverley for the Cosmopolitan /Clairol Achievement Awards.
In the event, Beverley won not only the Science and Technology Section but was named outright winner, receiving a prize of £5,000.
No doubt Cosmopolitan 's young woman readers will be impressed by Beverley's achievements and she is happy to fulfil that role.
‘I'm not one to fuss about women's rights.
Mine's a pragmatic view.
I subscribe to having as much information as possible available at any given time.
If what the Award achieves is that women know that these options are open to them, then it's a good thing.
‘I was lucky.
I won a scholarship to one of the Day School Trust schools and we were able to study what we wanted.
It was a girls’ school so there was no ‘the boys are going to do this, the girls are going to do that’.
For others, I know it's not so easy.
It's the old game of girls get dolls to play with, boys get Meccano sets.’
For her own part, there was never any question of her not studying science and she is the best sort of role model because of her enthusiasm: ‘Just finding out what  makes things work.
Why they are as they are.
It's a great life.
I just can't imagine doing anything else.’
Robotic Surgeons
Liz Lee reveals how progress in robotic engineering can potentially help ENT surgeons do safer and more accurate operations.
About one person in two can expect to find themselves on an operating table at some time in their lives.
Most people approach the event with some trepidation, but trust in the skill and dedication of the nursing staff and, of course, the surgeon.
They are confident that, highly skilled and dedicated and absolutely tireless, the surgeon will treat each operation — no matter how many operations he or she carries out that day…that week…that year — as unique and fascinating, that he or she will be in top form — for them.
But in an average week, an Ear, Nose and Throat surgeon, for example, can expect to spend 30 hours actually in an operating theatre, bent over his patient.
Many of the operations will be straightforward, uncomplicated and almost identical.
The operation, unique to the patient, is routine to the surgeon.
But the surgeon can suffer from tiredness and stress.
No matter how many dedicated hours he toils, he faces an ever lengthening queue awaiting his services.
He must devote some of his time to administrative, consultative or post-operative duties too.
It is not uncommon for young surgeons in our hospitals to work an 80-hour week.
It is little wonder that surgeons themselves develop medical conditions: bad backs are common.
Surgeon, heal thyself, comes the thought.
And that's exactly what Bristol surgeons, working with colleagues in the Robotics Group in the Faculty of Engineering, are doing.
The surgeons and robotic engineers hope to replace part of the surgeons activity with a robot.
They are not trying to replace the skill and judgement that comes with years of training and practice, but to enhance and prolong the surgeon's own capabilities.
The team seeks a device that never tires of long and repetitious work, poised in awkward positions, that can cope automatically and speedily with any variation in a complex working environment, that can be kept, if anything, more sterile than any human, and that can operate with an accuracy and steadiness that are impossible for a living hand to attain.
Surgery is not a role many people associate with robots.
But we're not talking about the robots of the popular image, the machines which glide about putting cars together or spraying paints to order.
Nor are they some kind of Dalek.
We're talking about the year 2000, intelligent robots, the nearest thing to the human mind and human handling ability yet devised.
How does it work, this robot surgeon, this marvel of technology?
In simple terms, the surgeon supervises and controls the robot from a computer terminal, using information that he receives from sensors at the tool-end of the robot, known as the end-effector.
These sensors can provide information that the surgeon would find it difficult to ascertain for himself.
For him, it's like having an eye at the end of his fingertips.
The sensors show the surgeon what the end-effector is looking at.
Sight is not the only facility the robot offers.
Touch is also replicated.
It can calibrate how much force is being used and with what speed, and react automatically and  swiftly to changes that it finds.
Above all, the robotic surgeon must be safe if it is to inspire the confidence of the surgeon and of the patient.
The list of medical applications for robotic technology is ever lengthening.
A robot can be used to sense the difference between tumour tissue and healthy tissue, or differences in bone and dental density.
With ultra delicate end-effectors it could be used in microsurgery where veins or arteries have to be connected.
a robotic surgeon can help to make a prosthesis fit exactly.
It can provide a third or fourth hand wherever needed, and no matter for how long.
There are other advantages too.
Infection in surgery, whether from within or outside the patient, is a constant worry.
Theatre staff know that no protective clothing yet devised will guard them 100% against exposure to HIV or Hepatitis B infection from the patient.
In orthopaedic surgery, even the air within the theatre is cleansed to protect the patient against infection and possible rejection of a prosthesis.
There could be significant advantages in the use of sterile end-effectors for implement handling.
The Bristol team, working under the umbrella of the Advanced Manufacturing and Automation Research Centre (AMARC), one of the University Research Centres, has already had some success with its robotic ear surgeon.
Operations in the middle ear, particularly the operation to replace the stapes (one of the three bones which transmit sound waves to the inner ear), are performed with a microscope and demand a great deal of precision and concentration on the part of the surgeon.
The operation has to be performed within limits of 1 mm and any deviation from this may have disastrous consequences, resulting in total loss of hearing in the ear being operated upon.
The use of a robot for some parts of the operation ensures precision every time the operation is performed.
The procedure becomes less dependent on human error — though the surgeon has overall control and the robot is provided with an over-riding fail-safe mechanism.
Robotic aids which perform like this are now being developed and are already being used under laboratory conditions in Bristol.
Mr Mansell Griffiths, a consultant ENT surgeon, says: ‘Robotic surgery will be considered by a large body of practising surgeons as unacceptable, wholly impractical and perhaps even unethical.
But 100 years ago, I am sure than many an older mechanical engineer would not have cared to contemplate the day when robots would be able to manufacture engine components to much higher tolerances than could be achieved then.
Whether we as surgeons like it or not, our engineering colleagues at the University now have the knowledge and expertise to revolutionise many of the surgical procedures performed across all specialities and make our current methods appear extremely crude.’
Mr Koorosh Khodabandehloo, the Director of AMARC, believes that research in this area will not only provide the technology for more successful and precise operations, but is also making a direct contribution to medical science.
‘The future potential is enormous and the work to date is only a fraction of what could be achieved.
Bristol is in a unique position to expand in this field through the formation of inter-disciplinary centres like AMARC, and could advance further through a new, focused research unit combining the medical and engineering skills that already exist here.’
AMARC's current research group is constantly looking for specific applications within the world of medicine which would benefit from automation.
It is planning an informal workshop in Spain in October 1992, the First International Workshop on Mechatronics in Medicine (New Potential Applications, Devices and Systems, User Interfaces ).
The aim will be to encourage discussion between leading professionals from medical and technical disciplines to identify related needs, technological achievements and scope for future exploration in this field.
If you would like to know more about their work or would like to be included in the workshop, write to either Dr Peter Brett or Liz Lee .
But even if you would rather not know, in the next century you have at least a  chance of benefiting from some of the advances the team are suggesting in surgical techniques.
Bad backs are common among surgeons
A robotic device for performing surgery
Caring for equine athletes
Jeremy Cherfas discusses Bristol's contribution to the training of racehorses.
Poor Carvill's Hill.
This giant of a racehorse set off in last month's Cheltenham Gold Cup — one of National Hunt racing's blue riband events — with a heavy burden.
His jockey, Peter Scudamore, has ridden more winners than any rider in history, but has never won the Gold Cup.
His trainer, Martin Pipe, has saddled more winners than any other trainer, but he hasn't won a Gold Cup either.
Carvill's Hill carried their hopes — and those of Bristol University's School of Veterinary Science.
In the event, it wasn't to be.
The horse hurt himself on the first jump and despite leading for much of the way round never really mastered the race.
Ironically, it was a severe injury that first brought Carvill's Hill to Martin Pipe's stables in Somerset where, working closely with the Bristol vets, he has established an enviable reputation not only for helping horses to recover but also for avoiding the injuries that plague racehorses, especially jumpers.
‘A third of the horses in training develop tendon injuries, and that's almost certainly a gross underestimate,’ explains Professor Allen Goodship, head of the Comparative Orthopaedic Research Unit at Bristol.
The main tendon involved in these injuries in the UK is called the superficial digital flexor.
The horse has evolved to walk on the tip of the equivalent of the third finger in the human hand: the other ‘fingers’ have been lost in evolution.
The tendon which flexes this digit runs just beneath the skin on the back of the horse's lower leg.
‘Most often the injury is a partial rupture of the tendon, but occasionally the complete tendon is ruptured.
Interestingly, a similar injury is seen in the Achilles tendon of middle-aged human athletes, particularly squash players,’ Professor Goodship continues.
One of the traditional remedies of racehorse trainers was firing.
This involved either burning the skin over the tendon, or inserting red hot iron pins into the tendon itself.
That is supposed to create scar tissue which helps the tendon to heal.
But a major research project at the University of Bristol, led by Professor Ian Silver of the Department of Pathology and funded by the Horserace Betting Levy Board in the late 1970s, was unable to find any scientific evidence for the efficacy of this bizarre treatment.
Subsequent research, aided by the Home of Rest for Horses, has enabled the Bristol team to understand the structure and function of these tendons, together with the mechanisms involved in their injury and repair.
The investigation of firing showed that it certainly didn't help healing, causing the horse considerable distress for no good reason.
As a result the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons decided, in February 1991, that firing was an ‘unethical procedure’, which vets in the UK are no longer allowed to perform.
Some traditionalists still send horses to Eire or mainland Europe for this barbarous treatment, but the Bristol research  suggests that they're wasting owners' money.
More recent research by the Bristol team suggests that a more effective treatment would be a combination of the new drugs they are currently working on, together with a carefully planned exercise programme.
Exercise helps to align the fibres of the tendon as they regrow, making the repair ropelike and strong, rather than a weak ‘darned sock’.
The Vet School is also collaborating with pharmaceutical companies to develop drugs that speed tendon healing, and although the results are promising it is too early to say anything specific.
Better, though, to prevent injury in the first place.
That is where Bristol's link with Martin Pipe started.
Pipe is a different kind of trainer, one who is prepared to use some of the recent discoveries of human sports medicine to improve his equine athletes.
It shows, too.
Going into Cheltenham, Pipe was second in the trainers' league this season, with 149 winners from his 550 runners, the high numbers of winners and runners testifying to the soundness of his methods and his horses.
He says: ‘I have worked very closely with the University of Bristol for many years.
Their treatment and advice have contributed towards the welfare of the horses and helped them to achieve their full potential on the racecourse.
I owe many of my successes to them.’
A key component of Bristol's research with Martin Pipe's horses is a device called a forceplate.
It consists of a metal plate, securely bolted to a cubic metre of concrete buried below ground, which measures the forces on it very accurately.
The forceplate is sensitive enough to pick up forces from the heartbeat of someone standing on it, and robust enough to measure up to five tons of horse trotting past.
What you get from it is a graph showing a complex pattern of forces.
The patterns reflect what is going on in the horse's foot, and especially in its tendons.
If you record enough of them, from enough horses on enough occasions, you can start to ask interesting questions.
What constitutes an average healthy pattern?
How does the pattern change when the horse becomes injured?
While the details of the analysis are complex, the conclusion is clear.
The forceplate can pick up damage while a horse still looks normal even to a trainer's practised eye.
To begin with, the vets had to wait until a horse had broken down, and then sift through their collection of its graphs to see if and when they could first detect a change.
Now they can use it to predict — and thus forestall — more serious damage.
And the forceplate can monitor a horse's recovery, showing that it is back to normal or that recovery has stopped.
‘That saves money and, more important, it improves the horse's welfare,’ says Goodship.
But there is even more he has to offer the racing fraternity.
Take bone.
Horse experts talk knowingly about an animal having ‘a lot of bone,’ and judge that to be a good thing.
The Bristol research has shown that bone responds to its working environment.
‘The serving arm of a pro tennis player has 30% more bone than the other arm,’ Goodship points out.
A few cycles of high intensity exercise are needed to trigger the growth of bone.
But stamina and muscle tissue need the opposite, many repetitions of rather low intensity.
And building up muscle demands something else again, several repetitions of medium intensity.
The ‘exercise recipe’ for strengthening tendon is a current area of interest of the Bristol team.
Professor Goodship says: ‘We may be able to recommend training régimes to reduce these devastating injuries.
With a proper programme of training, based on what we know from human athletes and extended by our own work, it should be possible to increase the performance of young horses much more than the empirical methods most trainers use.’
The University is trying to raise support for an Equine Sports Medicine Centre, both to pursue research into these ‘optimal training régimes’ and to offer a service for judging the fitness of equine athletes.
Coupled to a small training yard, such a centre could provide the chance to prove academic principles in practice.
It could also provide a dead cert for some future Gold Cup.
Of course Carvill's Hill started off a dead cert, yet he limped home badly beaten.
But without Bristol's research, and Martin Pipe's attention, he might never have started at all.
Jeremy Cherfas is a biologist, broadcaster and writer.
Martin Pipe's horses at their morning exercise
Just deserts?
Do prisoners have a right to complain about bad conditions or is their predicament a symptom of a wider social problem?
Rod Morgan explains.
Why do prisoners repeatedly risk the dire consequences — weeks or months segregated in punishment blocks, if not further sentences of imprisonment — which their participation in prison disturbances generally leads to?
The answer, I think, goes beyond the well known shortcomings of prison conditions.
Most of Britain's national prisons are not, contrary to popular opinion, Victorian.
Most are recently converted or purpose-built institutions erected in the last 35 years.
Nor are most of our prisons overcrowded and some of our training prisons and young offender institutions match the best systems in Europe.
There is a dark side, however.
Our local prisons are, with one exception, Victorian, overcrowded, generally insanitary, and universally ill-resourced in terms of facilities for prisoners.
In 1990 the Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) looked at five British prisons.
They liked some things; they were impressed by Holloway Prison's schemes for contact between prisoners and their families.
But other local prisons which they examined they condemned as imposing ‘inhuman and degrading’ punishment upon their inmates.
In formulating its view, the CPT adopted a cumulative view of bad prison conditions.
Thus conditions not in themselves inhuman or degrading became so when they were combined with other bad conditions.
There is general agreement, shared even by the Government in its White Paper response to Lord Justice Woolf's Report on the recent riots at Strangeways and elsewhere, that British prisons ‘should sustain prisoners…not degrade them’.
There is also general recognition that for many years prisons have failed to meet these objectives.
As long ago as 1910, for example, the future Chancellor of this University, Winston Churchill, then briefly Home Secretary, argued in the House of Commons that ‘the mood and temper of the public in regard to the treatment of crime and criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilisation of any country’.
Seventy years later the Director General of the Prison Service was able to describe prison conditions arising from a population well in excess of the available accommodation as an ‘affront to civilised society’.
Today, regrettably, Churchillian honesty in high places is less fashionable.
But those who are familiar with local prisons and remand centres know that currently we fail Churchill's test.
The issues involved go beyond the treatment of prisoners.
Squalid prison conditions brutalise those who work in them as well as those who live in them.
The brutalising environment that ferments prison disorder also stimulates industrial unrest among prison officers.
But in what sense can the conditions in prisons be said to be unjust?
In his report, Lord Justice Woolf argues that degrading prison conditions are unjust because they contravene the immediate intentions of sentencers and the broader functions of the criminal justice system.
The prison system, Woolf says, is part of the criminal justice system.
Since the purpose of the criminal justice system is to deter or prevent crime, inhumane prison conditions must be inconsistent with the broader aims because they seem likely to lead to further crime.
Woolf argues for improvements in prisons, not for their own sake, but because ‘to treat prisoners in a way which is likely to leave them in an embittered and disaffected state on their release’ will naturally lead to ‘a deterioration in the ability of the prisoner to operate effectively and lawfully in society’.
There is now new realism in sentencing.
Prisoners are now sent to prison as a punishment, not for punishment.
The use of imprisonment is no longer justified by the aim of rehabilitation.
There is broad recognition that that is best done in the community rather than in prison.
When Lord Justice Woolf argues that improved conditions should not be provided ‘for their own sake’, I think he is mistaken.
Prisons might very well be more orderly if  conditions were improved.
But there is no evidence that prisons would become more effective in the sense that fewer prisoners would be reconvicted on release.
Woolf's rational for improvement will not hold.
Some other justification must be sought.
I believe there is such a justification.
It lies in prisoners' peculiar vulnerability.
It is precisely because prisoners are shut away, lacking legal, moral and political respectability, held at the mercy of, and dependent on the goodwill of, the State, that a case can be made for vesting special positive rights in prisoners.
Prisoners face many unfair situations.
They are required to work and it is an offence to refuse to work.
The work which convicted prisoners are required to do is often meaningless and degrading.
In the case of remand prisoners there is often no opportunity to work, even if they wish to do so.
They live in an enforced and enfeebling idleness.
What kind of redress does either kind of prisoner have against these conditions?
Prisoners may complain to the prison authorities or they may complain to the Board of Visitors.
Recent reforms have made the complaints system more straightforward.
But, as prisoners see it, the new system means only that they receive negative replies to their complaints more quickly.
What prospect has the prisoner of redress if he abandons the complaints procedure and applies to the courts?
Imprisonment in Britain is governed by the Prison Act of 1952.
The Act does little more than authorise the Secretary of State to issue rules for the regulation of prisons and the Prison Rules 1964, though subsequently amended, can be shown to be very out of date.
For example, they allow prison authorities to require male, but not female, prisoners to have their hair cut.
How able or willing have the courts been to safeguard prisoners' interests when conditions under the Act become intolerable?
The answer is: almost not at all.
The courts have ruled that breach of the Prison Rules do not provide a basis for an action of breach of statutory duty.
The House of Lords has recently ruled that an action of false imprisonment cannot be brought by prisoners challenging the conditions of their custody.
The inhumane and degrading conditions which so many prisoners routinely suffer have not bee judged sufficient grounds.
The courts have also been reluctant to find a breach of a duty of care on the part of the Prison Department, even when the health of a prisoner is at issue.
Some prisoners have been paid compensation — for example when the prison authorities have failed to protect them adequately from fellow prisoners — but it seems unlikely that any actions based on generally bad conditions will ever succeed in the courts.
Lord Justice Woolf places great emphasis on justice as procedural fairness.
He proposes that  conditions and facilities which prisoners are given routinely should be described as ‘normal expectations’, not ‘privileges’.
He also recommends that the ‘contracts’ setting out prison régimes drawn up annually between prison governors and their area managers should become more detailed.
The ‘contract’ should be published and made the basis of further ‘contracts’between prisoners and management.
But Woolf does not favour much legal intervention in prison life.
He makes it clear in his Report that these ‘prisoner contracts’ should not be drawn up in a way which would give the prisoner private rights (that is the right to damages).
He believes, however, that the ‘contracts’ should establish prisoners' ‘legitimate expectations’and could provide a platform for an application for judicial review in cases where conditions became intolerable.
Woolf's proposals for ‘prisoner contracts’ have been cautiously welcomed by the Government.
‘Contracts’ may prove to be an important tool for improving the accountability of management and, if resources permit, for the gradual raising of standards in prisons.
However, Woolf does not see the new ‘contracts’ vesting rights in prisoners.
His new ‘contracts’ would only, he suggests, be enforceable by judicial review.
It seems unlikely that judicial review would decide that a legitimate expectation of some activity — such as being allowed out of your cell — is an absolute right and must be enforced.
Legal intervention, therefore, is unlikely to create the impetus for change.
Prison administrators are beginning to invoke the concept of ‘the responsible prisoner’.
In Scotland, for example, prisoners are beginning to be referred to as ‘customers’.
Prisoners are given some choice as to which prison they go to; what work they do; what training or education courses they undertake.
The Prison Department in England is moving tentatively in the same direction.
But the prospects for greater justice and peace in prisons depend on the next Government's willingness and ability to control the size of the prison population.
The impression is sometimes given by Ministers and judges that the size of the prison population is in some sense a product of forces of nature beyond political or judicial control.
Like the weather moving in from the Atlantic, we can at best track its course and make reasonable preparations for its coming.
The analogy is entirely false.
It is true that the level of crime is not readily amenable to control by Government.
But there is no mechanical relationship between the level of crime and the size of the prison population.
There is no objective formula for deciding what tariff of punishment should be attached to a particular offence.
Nor, to put the issue the other way round, is the safety of the public greatly affected by the number of offenders in prison.
The size of the prison population is politically determined, whether by Government action or inaction.
It follows that the prisons debate is not just about prisons.
It concerns criminal justice policy generally.
Three issues in the debate are likely to continue to rub salt in the wounds of a prison system kept under continued pressure.
First, the continuing scandal of Home Office prisoners in police cells.
These are prisoners locked out of the prisons where they should be held.
Their presence in totally inadequate police accommodation is authorised by the Prisons (Temporary Provisions) Act 1980, a statute passed as an emergency measure to cope with an industrial dispute with prison officers and used almost continuously ever since.
As I write there are probably about 1,600 such prisoners in police cells.
This is a scandal not merely because police stations are not equipped to hold prisoners for more than a day or two — everyone from Lord Justice Woolf to the Inspectorate Constabulary has condemned the present arrangement — but because police cells are now being used as a convenience to enable the Prison Department and the Home Secretary to claim that overcrowding in prisons is diminished.
This is an injustice which prisoners see all too clearly.
Second, there is the contracting-out to commercial management of two new prisons, the Wolds and Blakenhurst.
The Wolds is to open this month, Blakenhurst early next year.
The contract with Group 4, the security company that is to run the Wolds, requires that the régime to be provided is infinitely superior to anything that the local prisons run by the Prison Department currently deliver.
Indeed, the Wolds contract is being used by the Prison Department as the basis of a model régime specification for State-run remand establishments.
The Home Secretary has indicated that State-run prisons of this standard may take about 20–25 years to achieve.
This is an injustice not lost on either prison officers or prisoners.
Third, the injustices against which prisoners struggle are not merely to do with the way in which we run our prisons.
They have as much to do with the defects of our  criminal justice system.
All of us are familiar with the major miscarriages of justice which led to the appointment of the Royal Commission into the Criminal Justice System.
The public is less familiar with the consequences for prison management of the battles in which those former prisoners had to engage in order to establish their innocence.
Prisons, particularly long-term high-security prisons, are not made easier to manage if they contain prisoners passionately proclaiming their innocence and who fellow prisoners and staff believe to be innocent.
Such protestations ferment a running sore which breeds contempt for the authorities.
The National Association of Probation Officers believe there may be some 350–700 sentenced prisoners who either are innocent or may be innocent and whose cases warrant attention.
Let me cite just one example of the consequences of this phenomenon.
Very shortly the Court of Appeal is to hear for the second time the cases of James Robinson, Michael Hickey and Vincent Hickey, found guilty in November 1979 of the murder in 1978 of Carl Bridgewater, the newspaper boy, in Staffordshire.
I know nothing about this case other than the reports which I, like everybody else, have read in the press.
But it is quite clear that a large number of people believe these three, who have now been in prison for 13 years, to be innocent of the crime for which they stand convicted.
What is absolutely clear is that the three prisoners have themselves vehemently protested their innocence from day one.
If the Court of Appeal orders their release it will not surprise many prison staff.
They have already been persuaded that an injustice has been done, and they have had to cope with the consequences.
In November 1983, for example, Michael Hickey pulled on five jumpers, five pairs of trousers, four pairs of socks, several bin liners and a blanket, too a sheet on which he had written ‘We are innocent’ and took to the roof of Gartree maximum security prison.
He stayed on the roof, alone, in terrible freezing weather, for 89 days, the longest roof-top protest ever recorded.
During those three months food and other materials were passed to him, at the cost of their own punishment, by many prisoners.
When he eventually came down, he was punished with two months in solitary confinement.
Whatever the outcome of the Bridgewater case, the miscarriages of justice already brought to light have had serious consequences for disorder in prisons and will continue to ferment disorder until a more effective appeals system is devised.
We need to remind ourselves that prisons reflect social currents far beyond the criminal justice system.
I do not believe, for example, that it was a matter of chance that the Strangeways riot erupted on the day following the Trafalgar Square demonstration against the poll tax.
Demonstrations against the poll tax also took place in Manchester and those events were continuously reported on the local radio stations to which prisoners habitually listen.
When I visited Pucklechurch, the remand centre outside Bristol which was virtually destroyed during the riots, I noted that among the graffiti painted by prisoners during the riot there were slogans promising solidarity, not merely with Bristol and Strangeways prisoners as one might have expected, but also with protesters against the poll tax.
Many will dismiss these connections as spurious.
But the more one looks at the character of the prison population the more one is struck by the magnifying mirror that it holds up to the inequalities of our society.
16% of the prison population is black and the population is rising rapidly.
One third of all prisoners suffer from a psychiatric disorder.
Nearly a quarter of all adult prisoners and 38% of young prisoners have experienced local authority care during their childhood or adolescence.
17% of remand prisoners report having been homeless before their incarceration. 44% of unconvicted prisoners and 31% of convicted prisoners were unemployed.
43% of all prisoners have absolutely no educational qualifications or job skills.
We should not pursue better conditions for prisoners in the mistaken belief that improved conditions will alone produce more orderly prisons.
They almost certainly will not.
The disorders that prevail in prisons have deep roots in injustices both within the criminal justice system and more widely.
The question of justice in prisons is therefore not just about prisons.
It concerns the fabric of our society.
Protesting prisoners at Horfield
Police at the Horfield Prison riot
A rooftop protest at Pucklechurch
Professor Rod Morgan is Professor of Criminal Justice in the Faculty of Law.
This article is an abridged version of his Inaugural Lecture, given at the University on 2 March.
The full text of his lecture is available from the Law Faculty Office, price £2.50.
A View of Bristol
The Clifton Gorge is one of the most enduring images of Bristol.
David Cross talks about how it has been portrayed over the centuries.
For most visitors to Bristol, and therefore for most Bristol students, the most memorable aspect of the city is the Clifton Gorge.
The first verbal description we have of this scene of Wagnerian grandeur dates from 1481 when William of Worcester (despite his name a Bristolian born and bred) described the camp on the Clifton side as ‘founded before the time of William the Conqueror by Saracens or Jews or by one Ghyst a giant in the land.’
John Aubrey, the famous diarist, described the great stones which then lay around the scene ‘scattered as the sower does his seed’.
Throughout the period between William of Worcester and John Aubrey, and indeed for about a century afterwards, the Gorge changed in appearance.
The scattered globular rocks which both remarked were steadily gathered up and used for making limestone.
The ford in the river was blown up to make navigation easier and from time to time there appear to have been spectacular rock falls, one of which carried away the last vestiges of St Vincent's Chapel which gave its name to St Vincent's Rocks.
But the most dramatic change came in 1836 when the ladies and gentlemen assembled in Bristol for a meeting of the British Association gathered at 7.00 am to witness the laying of the foundation of the Clifton Suspension Bridge.
When the bridge was completed 28 years later, it was the elegance of Brunel's bridge rather than the sublime scenery which came to symbolise the Gorge for visitors.
It is difficult now to recapture what the Gorge may have looked like in Worcester's or Aubrey's day.
The first visual representations of it are not earlier than the middle of the 18th century.
They are largely monotone engravings but around the beginning of the 19th century a  series of itinerant Irish artists recorded the Gorge in all its glory and colour.
When George Holmes, for example, arrived here in 1798, he was following in the wake of other artists travelling by boat from Ireland to pursue their fortune in England.
In the 18th century Welsh and Irish painters and poets of note on their way to London stayed in the Port of Bristol.
George Holmes stayed for some time.
He preceded Francis Danby in the extraordinary sensitivity with which he and his more famous countrymen recorded the Bristolian landscape in drawings and paintings.
There were English artists too.
By the time Holmes arrived in Bristol Nicholas Pocock had spent some 20 years describing views on the River Avon.
As a merchant sea captain in the employ of Robert Campion, trading his porcelains and goods to the West Indies, Pocock had learnt how to draw a ship and a landfall.
He retired from the sea at the age of 36, having taken up a career with the brush.
He earned his living producing readily saleable views of shipping observed in the harbour along the Avon and the coast of the Bristol Channel.
Such was this sailor's quality of draughtsmanship that he had to develop a technique of etching and aquatinting to multiply the number of views required to satisfy the demand.
He developed something of a studio to produce his most popular views.
Everything that is labelled Pocock may not be Pocock, albeit in his style.
Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries landscape artists were attracted to Bristol and found the perspectives in drawing the natural wonders of the Avon Gorge a considerable challenge.
The proximity of such natural beauty to a thriving merchant city also gave rise to a native school of Bristol artists initially  closely related to the Romantic poets.
The Jacksons, the Mullers, the Branwhites, and the Fripps all worked together to create a body of work that now stands among the best of British landscape painting.
Prints of the Gorge can be obtained for as little as £50–£70 and can sometimes be found in boot-sales and small auctions cheaper than that.
For George Holmes the price is greater (around £2,000).
The better quality of Danby and the other famous names of the Bristol School take them into an even higher price range.
Danby and the other great Gorge masters rarely come to auction or are found for sale in galleries.
In 1969, as a young arts graduate, I started a gallery in Boyce's Avenue (remember the short street through the archway by the chemist's shop at the end of the path across Victoria Square?).
I may not always be able to offer a Danby or a Holmes (Holmes is available as I write), but I should be considerably embarrassed if I couldn't find a good view of the Gorge for a departing new graduate or a returning old one.
Interest need not be confined to the Gorge.
Nothing could give us more pleasure than the sharing of a discovery in art and the process of seeing it transformed by my adjoining restoration studio and framing workshop into its full beauty.
And the modern art in my cellar areas is chiefly given over to the discovery of fresh talent and new Bristol artists, some of whom still attempt the famous perspectives of the Gorge and the Bridge.
George Holmes preceded Francis Danby in the extraordinary sensitivity with which he and his more famous countrymen recorded the Bristolian landscape.
David Cross is the proprietor of the David Cross Gallery in Clifton.
Invitation
All graduates of the University are invited to the Annual General Meeting of Convocation.
The AGM this year will be held on Saturday 18 July at 11 am.
The AGM will be the centrepiece of a whole weekend devoted to a reunion of graduates.
On Friday 17 July there will be an opportunity for graduates to visit the Social Sciences Faculty's new building in Woodland Road and to hear presentations by some of the Faculty's leading researchers.
There will also be a ‘menu’ of six visits from which visitors can choose before going on to a buffet supper with members of the Faculty.
The Faculty visit begins at 16.45 on Friday 17 July with a welcome by the Dean, Professor Murray Stewart, over tea and biscuits.
At 17.10 Michael Beveridge, Professor of Education, will talk about The local management of schools —does it make a difference ?
He will be followed at 17.30 by Bencie Woll, the University's Deaf Studies Initiative Co-ordinator.
She will talk about how we can give better support to people with hearing disabilities.
At 17.50 Paul Grout, Professor of Economics, will address the question How does British Telecom set its prices ?
He will be followed at 18.10 by Professor Richard Hodder-Williams of Politics, who will briefly discuss the question:Is the United States Supreme Court more important than the President ?
The brief research addresses will be followed by a sherry reception at 18.30.
At 19.00 there will be an opportunity to choose a visit.
The Departments offering visits are the School for Advanced Urban Studies; the Department of Geography; the School of Education and Department of Psychology; the School of Applied Social Studies; the Departments of Economics and Accounting, Politics and Sociology; and the Norah Fry Centre and the Centre for Socio-Legal Family Studies.
After the visits, guests and Faculty members will join together for a buffet supper.
The aim of the evening is to enable members of Convocation to learn more about the interests of the Faculty of Social Sciences and to become aware of its plans and proposals for the future.
Alumni in Concert
Petra Armitage-Smith talks about a successful social and musical event.
Two of our alumni returned to Bristol in their professional capacity as musicians on 9 November last year, when Paul Beniston (trumpet) and Craig Nathan (organ) performed the solo parts in a most enjoyable and successful fund-raising concert in aid of the Alumni Foundation.
Paul Beniston, who obtained his BA in Music in 1987, was one of the members of Royal Fort Brass, a brass quintet formed in 1985, who entertained many audiences with their wide-ranging repertoire, both serious and humorous.
Since leaving Bristol Paul has obtained an MMus from the Royal College of Music and is now Principal Trumpet with English National Opera.
As a soloist Paul has played in the Queen Elizabeth Hall, the Wigmore Hall and St John's Smith Square, as well as overseas in Europe and the USA.
He also plays regularly with various brass ensembles and has worked with many London orchestras.
Craig Nathan graduated from the Department of Music one year later than paul in 1988.
During his time at Bristol he held one of the University's Organ Scholarships based at St Paul's Church, Clifton, and distinguished himself by winning most of the important prizes offered by the Royal College of Organists.
After leaving Bristol he went on to do postgraduate work at Reading University and is now organist of Dunstable Priory.
The concert required considerable stamina from both players, as they were on the platform virtually throughout the concert, with Craig alternating between the organ and harpsichord continuo parts and Paul playing orchestral parts when he was not playing solo.
They were ably supported by the Corradini Ensemble and the University Singers, two groups made up of current students.
The programme included Baroque pieces by Purcell, Torelli, Bach and Handel, and began with Professor Raymond Warren's Ceremonial Fanfare for trumpet and organ, which was first performed at the University's Centenary Degree Congregation in the Colston Hall in 1976 and subsequently, in a revised form, at the installation of the present Chancellor, Sir Jeremy Morse, in 1989.
The concert and the reception which followed it generated considerable interest in, as well as funds for, the Alumni Foundation.
As many readers will know, this body has since 1982 been raising funds from graduates and others to support a wide range of University activities, both academic and non-academic, from library improvements and new teaching initiatives to sports facilities and student travel grants and scholarships.
Leaflets giving details of the Alumni Foundation's work and how to support it are enclosed with this magazine or can be obtained from the Alumni Foundation Office in Senate House .
To those readers who have already contributed to it, the Foundation again expresses its gratitude.
Concerts such as this, at which distinguished alumni return to Bristol to perform as soloists, are set to become a regular feature of University life.
The next concert will be given on Saturday 6 February 1993 by Piers Adams, a graduate of the Physics Department, who is now one of Britain's leading recorder virtuosi.
A Scientific Dinner Party
Sue Pringle invites you to take a more scientific approach to cookery.
Why do we knead bread?
Why, when we have made it, does it go stale?
Why do we generally make wine from grapes rather than any other fruit?
These are all important questions.
And there are others which can take on theological dimensions.
Have you ever been tempted to swear when a sauce refuses to thicken, your home makes wine taste awful, or the joint is impossible to carve?
Is there no science that can tell us how these common evils of mankind can be avoided?
The answer is yes.
The exploration of these and other everyday questions was the basis of an unusual dinner party held in the University last term: a Scientific Dinner Party organised by the Department of Continuing Education as one of its extensive programme of Day Schools.
People with no previous knowledge of science can readily perceive the kitchen as a laboratory and, being encouraged to ask questions, quickly begin to understand the role of scientists and the purposes of research.
The one-day course, held at Brunel Technical College and attended by 25 people, began with lecture demonstrations explaining the scientific principles of cooking and ended with a gourmet meal in the company of tutors and guests, which provided an opportunity to discuss science in general.
For centuries the science of cooking has intrigued and occupied the minds of philosophers to kings.
In 1863 Napoleon asked Pasteur to study the ‘maladies’ of wine.
He also offered a prize for the formulation of a synthetic edible fat (later to be called margarine).
The great scientist Francis Bacon even died in the pursuit of food science.
In very cold weather he went out to stuff a chicken with snow to study the preservative effects of freezing, caught a chill and died weeks later of bronchitis.
No such sacrifices were demanded of the participants at the Day School.
Instead they enjoyed succulent fillet of beef with stilton stuffing (prepared by Brunel Technical College's HND students), a full-bodied claret and a convivial atmosphere.
All too often the preparation and enjoyment of food is considered to be a mysterious art; but when has understanding not enriched an event?
Why is contemplating black holes any different from wanting to understand why you can whip cream but not milk?
At the Day School the science tutors left behind their spectrometers, computers and chemicals and equipped themselves with whisks, wine and tantalising samples of their edible ‘experiments’.
I began the day ‘delving below the surface of visible reality to the world of molecules’, explaining how an understanding of molecular structure can be used to explain, among other things, why sugar tastes sweet, why fats are fattening and how to avoid yucky green-grey slushy cabbage.
As early as the mid-19th century it was recognised that the common practice of boiling greens with bicarbonate of soda was wrong: ‘Never, under any circumstances, unless you wish entirely to destroy all flavour and reduce your peas to pulp, boil them with soda.
This favourite atrocity of the English kitchen cannot be too strongly condemned’(The Dinner Question , 1860).
The reason why this happens is that hemicelluloses, a structural component of vegetables, are soluble in alkaline solutions (such as bicarbonate of soda).
Vegetables will remain firm in neutral or acidic solutions, so you should add lemon juice or vinegar to the cooking water rather than soda.
This is also the reason why baked beans will never go soft, no matter how long you cook them: the tomato sauce is acidic.
Why cream can be whipped, but not milk
Milk, and cream, are suspensions of small, solid, spherical fat particles in water.
When we whip cream the forces applied to the fat particles by the flowing liquid can be large enough to deform them and make them ellipsoidal (shaped like rugby balls).
As the fat particles become longer and thinner so they begin to come into contact with one another.
Once a continuous network of such elongated particles has been formed, the ‘whipped’ cream will start to behave like a solid.
Clearly, the more fat there is in the cream, the easier it will be to achieve this network, as it can form with less elongated particles.
In practice there is a limit to how far we can elongate a fat particle; this places a lower limit (c. 25%) on the fat content of a cream which can be whipped.
Milk and single cream contain too little fat to be whipped; whipping cream contains just enough (c. 30%) but needs the vigorous beating of a power whisk; double cream contains a lot of fat (c. 40%) and is easily whipped by hand.
Cooking time is not proportional to weight
A piece of meat, or a cake, or any other baked dish, is ‘cooked’ when the temperature in the centre has reached some particular level.
The actual temperature depends both on what is being cooked and on one's own taste.
For example, when cooking beef, a lower temperature (c. 50°C) is needed for rare meat than for ‘well done’ meat (c. 80°C).
Heat diffuses into the meat from the outside and the time, t, taken for the centre to reach a particular temperature depends on the smallest dimension, d, of the piece of meat (in fact t  d²).
The weight of a rolled joint, such as topside, is proportional to its length, and its smallest dimension is its diameter.
In this case the cooking time is independent of the weight.
Food can excite before it even enters our mouth.
Dr George Dodd, an international authority on the chemistry of smells, explored how molecules can act as messengers between the external world and the internal universe of consciousness within our heads.
In a session entitled Sensuous Food he demonstrated that odour is plugged directly into our emotions.
He explained how aphrodisiac truffles, the sweat of humans and that of boars contain the same pheromenal odorant, which is actually a steroid.
Not many people can cook a three-course meal and lecture at the same time, but Dr Peter Barham can and he does it brilliantly.
Dr Barham is a polymer scientist in the Department of Physics but is fast becoming more famous for his public lecture on The Physics of a Black Forest Gateau .
At the Day School, he turned his attention to the physics of baking, boiling, mashing, sautéing and roasting potatoes — with examples to taste.
He prepared fillet of beef, explaining what gives meat its colour, what makes meat tough, and totally destroying the recipe book idea that time for cooking meat is determined by weight.
He effortlessly produced a bavarois whips and showing that it is possible to make meringue from egg white when some yolk is present.
The final session was given by Dr David Hill from the Department for Continuing Education, who proved that ‘the science of wine is not just an art’.
Samples of wine were tasted to demonstrate what made a ‘good’ wine.
The main constituents of wine are acid, tannin, alcohol and sugar.
In red wine the basis constituent is tannin, whereas in white wine it is acid.
However, different grape varieties produce wines of widely different character.
Compare for example the dry woody flavour of a chardonnay with the sweet flowery taste of a Gewürztraminer.
These distinctive characteristics come from differences in minute quantities of flavouring constituents whose concentrations are at the threshold of human sensory perception.
Finally, after the audience's taste buds had been thoroughly excited, we sat down to a gourmet meal with invited guests, Professor Andrew Keller of the Physics Department and Professor Richard Gregory from the Brain and Perception Unit.
The day was thoroughly enjoyed by both the tutors and students, one of whom commented: ‘An excellent experience, loved the demonstrations — can you make it a weekend course?’
The course will be repeated in December, when you will again be ‘cordially invited to attend our Scientific Dinner Party’.
Details are available from Dr Susan Pringle  
Peter Barham demonstrates
‘Bad cooks — and the utter lack of reason in the kitchen — have delayed human development longest and impaired it the most’.
Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil
‘A knowledge of protein coagulation [need not]diminish the pleasure we feel in consuming a well-made roast or meringue.
In fact, it may enhance our pleasure if it has helped us to snatch success from the jaws of failure!
‘An understanding of what food is and how cooking works does no violence to the art of cuisine.
Instead, the mystery expands from matters of expertise and taste to encompass the hidden patterns and wonderful coincidences of nature’.
Harold McGee, On Food and Cooking, The Science and Lore of the Kitchen
Festival of Europe
The University has been developing ever stronger links with Europe, such as the European Credit Transfer system in Medicine (the symbol for which is shown above).
This spring the University is collaborating with other groups and institutions in the city and county to organise a Festival of Europe.
A selection of Festival events with which the University is involved is shown below.