

Section 2 — Computerised Personnel Information Systems — Practical Issues for the Personnel Specialist
2.1 Uses of a Computerised Personnel System in a Company
by Bruce Nichol Head of Personnel Division
and Tony Atkin Manpower Planning Manager
TSB Group Central Executive
Each organisation takes a different route in deciding whether it needs computer help in personnel management.
Some decide that computers have no place whatsoever, some regard computers as cheap and reliable "clerical" labour fit for nothing other than "payroll crunching" , others find a niche for computing in the successful management of the business.
The TSB falls primarily into the third category; while taking advantage of the ability of computers to process its payroll, the benefits of computerization extend far beyond, into the heart of the bank's planning and policy making decisions.
While this paper pretends to be nothing other than an account of an approach which is unique to the TSB, the principles described by Bruce Nichol and Tony Atkin may well be capable of transfer to other organizations in other industries.
For over 150 years the TSB has given customers a safe and secure place to keep their money.
The two passbooks — for a Savings Account and an Investment Account — have been the basis for the savings habit of millions of people throughout the United Kingdom.
In recent years more services have been introduced — cheque books, Unit Trust, a TSB credit card, personal loans, mortgages, all the services our customers need and want.
Behind the scenes the characteristics of the work have changed.
Tellers find themselves using on line real time systems to interrogate accounts.
Managers find themselves involved in new areas of expertise as our services multiply.
The structure of the Group has altered radically to accommodate its changing operational requirements.
This then is the current position.
Following a stately early development, the TSB Group is now undergoing rapid change — new products, new services, new technology, even new companies such as United Dominions Trust, the instalment credit company which we took over last year.
Impact of Change on Personnel Policy
On the personnel front the changes in the TSB have had some marked effects:
The size of the group has grown from 16,000 to 28,000 staff as its operations have expanded.
The introduction of new services and new technology has revolutionized skill requirements, particularly within branches.
The administration of the business has been rationalised and the need for specialists in a range of disciplines has become apparent.
The workload of senior managers has broadened in terms of organisation, administration and business development.
One has only to stand back and survey the scope of changes and the timescales involved to appreciate the problems encountered by senior management.
In a rapidly changing business, how can crucial decisions on manpower be taken with the necessary speed and on a basis of fact?
Before answering this problem, it is necessary to examine the decisions being made.
There are three main "crunch" questions:
1.
What will be the resultant changes in demand for staff from a proposed course of action — for example, new services, changes of business mix, new methods, new technology?
2.
How well are we likely to be able to satisfy our requirements for staff —for example, in terms of numbers, skills, grades, location?
3 How can differences between desirable and practical courses of business and staff development be reconciled?
Practical Implications — the Systems
Although at first sight these three points apply only to overall policy development, in practice they apply at all levels, including individual branch development.
Two information needs clearly emerge: quantification of workload generated by business volumes and operational systems; rapid access to reliable personnel records in both individual and aggregated form.
As a result of these information needs, the TSB set up two separate but linked projects.
1.
The Branch Establishments Scheme, to measure workload 2.
The Manpower Planning Information System, to hold staff records By means of direct work measurement using a stop watch, a database of standard times for branch activities has been assembled.
Branch Establishments Scheme
Each year, using information on the business activity in each branch, an analysis is made of workloads and manning requirements.
By taking account of business and other operational plans, such as changes in working practices, projections are made over a five-year period to provide base information against which to evaluate alternative strategies on staffing requirements and costs.
Using an on line real time system, the Branch Establishments Scheme also offers a database including business volumes, standard times, establishment levels, and relief requirements.
The data are held on a branch-by-branch basis, and are accessible to regional banks and TSB Group Central Executive.
Where possible, data are collected direct from banking computer systems.
Manpower Planning Information System
The complexity of drawing together accurate personnel data in a dispersed  organisation — some elements of which have autonomous powers — is a major deterrent to basing decisions on facts.
Although the penalties in financial terms may be great, there is always a temptation to cut corners when time is short and "take a view" on the probable situation.
To try to counter these problems, a system of storage and retrieval of personnel records has been established, accessible on demand at both the Group's Central Executive and in the 16 Regional Bank Head Offices.
Any changes in deployment, recruitment, promotion and grading can be quantified, tested and checked by reference to a library of analysis routines and projection models.
The Manpower Planning Information System operates on an on line real time basis and is accessible both by regional bank head offices and centrally at TSB Group Central Executive.
Data are captured partly through the computerized payroll system, and partly by terminal input at regional banks.
Using the Systems Together
The two systems have been carefully designed to enable their joint use both for local issues, such as individual branch manning, and for broader events such as participation in production of projections and sensitivity analysis during the banks' annual corporate planning and budget cycles.
Interactive modelling and analysis facilities are provided on both systems although an option is given in some cases to run jobs in batch mode.
All this represents a considerable investment for the TSB.
An early decision was made that use of the system must not be left to chance.
An extensive training programme was designed to put the new techniques into practice.
The programme included: Appreciation courses for top management Operative courses in maintaining the computer systems Technical courses in extracting, analysing and interpreting data At each stage of development we have had detailed discussions with the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union.
We find that our systems are used in four main activities: 1.
Filing and retrieval 2.
Calculator 3.
Computer 4.
Modelling aid Retrieval from a conventional filing system relies on either alphabetic or numeric indexation but the use of a computer enables data to be retrieved on a range of factors, either individually or simultaneously.
For example, under a clerical system, producing a short list of candidates with suitable qualifications for a particular job may mean searching through personal files, and consulting various lists.
In the face of such a task some personnel officers may prefer to rely almost entirely on memory.
A computer-based personnel system allows factors such as qualification, job location, home location, mobility and promotability to be included simply in a list of criteria on which the retrieval of records should be made.
If a satisfactory candidate fails to emerge, the  criteria can be changed and a new selection made.
1.
Filing and retrieval
Production of lists for specific purposes, such as registers of staff in each location, becomes straightforward and requires little effort to extract the data.
Since titles, footnotes and other adjustments to the presentation of the report may be made when requesting the information, the need to type the resulting report is also avoided.
2.
Calculator
In both the Branch Establishments Scheme and the Manpower Planning Information System, considerable use is made of the ability of computers to perform large volumes of calculations with consistent accuracy.
Once properly programmed, human error is almost entirely eradicated.
Examples of calculations which can be speedily and economically performed are: Branch work loads Wastage rates Cost information in relation to salaries This function can be combined with retrieval to enable reports with numerical information and analysis such as hours of work and salary to be produced.
3.
Comparator
As well as a prodigious ability to perform calculations, computing power can make rapid comparisons between sets of data.
This can be used to highlight changes from year to year or compare actual and required staffing levels.
4.
Modelling Aid
Before discussing this use, which is arguably the most significant benefit of using computing power in the personnel field, it may be worthwhile to answer the question "What is a model?" 
Models enable complex relationships to be set up on the computer in numerical form rather than in the form of subjective statements.
This means that the likely effect of a variety of circumstances can be tested easily and quickly using a consistent method of calculation by merely adjusting the input information.
Within the TSB system, models are available to help managers: test the effect on manpower of changes in systems and working methods; evaluate the effects of changes such as alteration in hours of work, holiday entitlement, sickness patterns and incidence of training; test the effect of changes in personnel policies such as recruitment, promotion, retirement, grading, career development; analyse wastage and evaluate its likely effect on staffing: plan recruitment and training in the most cost effective way.
In general, the aim of these facilities is to ensure that managers can explore options and their consequences before taking decisions which are crucial to the profitable operation of the business.
But again, it is up to each manager to  make the final decision, basing it on the best available advice.
The Future
Personnel Management will always mean making decisions based on judgement, and this will always ensure that the business must take a degree of risk in such areas.
It is the TSB's intention to continue to develop techniques which permit decisions to be made with the minimum of risk.
This will mean providing managers with easy access to high-quality data and ensuring that facilities are available for these data to be reported, analysed and evaluated.
Risks must also be controlled by offering decision makers the ability to test the effect of their options.
However, this process must be rapid, accurate and straightforward.
With these objectives in mind, the TSB is embarking on second generation development of both its systems, and is looking forward to their continuing to make a positive contribution to the successful operation of the business.
The British Airports Authority is currently an organization employing about 7000 staff based at seven separate physical locations, three in the South East and four in Scotland.
It was set up by Act of Parliament in 1966 to manage the airports at Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted and Prestwick.
At that time the total number of staff employed amounted to about 3400 including those at the Head Office in London.
Since then a number of factors have influenced the size of the organization.
A further three airports in Scotland have been acquired (Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow) and a Head Office to cover the Scottish Airports has been set up and based at Glasgow.
The vulnerability of airports to terrorist activity, particularly in the later seventies, has resulted in the creation of a large security force to undertake passenger searching and access control.
In addition, the volume of air traffic has increased considerably over the last 16 years although the growth experienced in the late seventies has not been maintained more recently.
Consequently, the number of directly employed staff rose to more than 7600 by 1980 but is now down to about 7000 as the airline industry, in common with many other industries, feels the effect of the recession.
2.2 The Development of a CPIS in a Company by Rod Kitchin Assistant Manager, Manpower British Airports Authority
In this paper, Rod Kitchin describes how, with IMS and computer bureau guidance, BAA set about computerising their personnel information systems.
He describes how the basic system has been tested and extended throughout the Authority, location by location and application by application.
Further development has included preparation for Head Office relocation at Gatwick, setting up a sub system covering senior staff, and making the switch from bureau to in-house application.
Of key importance has been the involvement of staff from the various sections of the Personnel Department.
The BAA owns and administers many of the facilities provided at the airports, ranging from runways and air jetties to terminal buildings and information services.
We employ a wide range of staff whose skills range from electronic communication engineers to porters.
The groups of staff which make up the bulk of the Authority are engineering staff, passenger and apron services staff and security staff.
The engineers plan and supervise the construction of new facilities as well as maintaining the electrical, electronic, mechanical and civil parts of our operation.
The passenger and apron services staff are responsible for some cargo handling, ensuring that standards of safety on the airfield can be maintained and providing portering facilities to the travelling public.
The security force undertakes passenger searching as well as controlling access between airside and landside.
Why Computerise?
In the early years of the BAA's existence a satisfactory clerical records service relating to employees was maintained and operated manually.
Various personnel sections both at Head Office and the airports provided information to a central point in the Manpower and Organization Branch at Head Office.
Here, reports were prepared and distributed at regular intervals and the occasional request for ad hoc information was dealt with as the need arose.
As the organization has expanded, the demand for manpower related information has increased in terms of volume, range and depth.
Information is  now provided for various Government departments and senior and middle management throughout the organisation.
A comprehensive range of manual records and files is maintained by the various personnel sections in the organisation.
These include: employees: personal files career development files pay files posts: job descriptions training files travel and subsistence files etc Usually, separate files under the above headings are maintained for each employee.
The information held (for example, an employee's date of birth) is often duplicated by the various sections.
Basic information relating to changes affecting employees is obtained from the Personnel Advice Note (PAN), raised and distributed by the section responsible for recruitment and placement.
Other information originates at different sources; for example, travel and subsistence claims are submitted by the employee, and checked against information kept by the finance section responsible for this function, prior to their approval for payment.
The summarising or listing of information extracted from any of these manual systems can be a lengthy procedure.
Moreover there is no real guarantee on the accuracy of the information supplied.
Problems have been encountered in supplying a satisfactory manual manpower information service relating to the BAA as a whole.
The ability to summarize information originating from a number of locations in the required period is always dependent on the timely receipt of that information from all the various sources.
Inevitably, the functions of recruitment, training and payment of employees take priority over the provision of statistical information.
There are also difficulties associated with the incompatibility of information provided by the various locations.
As a consequence, there have been occasions when reports produced at the central point have either been suspect in content or alternatively have failed to meet their deadline.
Attempts to allow individual locations to reply directly to the appropriate Government department have also been fraught with similar difficulties.
During the early years of the organization's existence, these problems were foreseen and a discussion paper which proposed a simple computer based manpower information system was written in 1971.
This envisaged collecting and processing relevant information contained on the payroll tape held by the Data Processing Branch.
However, as the need for this particular type of system was not believed to be acute, it was not pursued further at the time.
In 1976 the Institute of Manpower Studies (IMS) held a seminar on "Personnel Management Information Systems (PMIS)" at the BAA training centre at Hayes.
This was attended by the Personnel Director and senior representatives from the various personnel branches.
As a result the IMS was asked to carry out an initial study and advise on the feasibility of setting up a suitable PMIS for the BAA.
The IMS advised that, initially, a fairly simple system relating to one location and containing a limited amount of data should be set up.
This would give the staff involved in the creation, updating and processing of a data  base (the basic information to be stored in the computer).
It would also mean that any changes to the system at this stage could be rectified without high costs being incurred.
Once the basic approach had been decided and successfully implemented, the system could then easily be extended to cover all BAA employees.
It was made clear that attempts to include every piece of information imaginable would not succeed.
Further, this type of approach would soon bring the concept of a computer based system into disrepute.
Large sums of money could easily be spent on data collection and maintenance with a very limited visible return.
The advice of the IMS was accepted and their advisers were retained during the early stages of planning and development to provide guidance.
In the event, they were also retained to act as consultants for an additional period in order to ensure the continued success of the system.
The Computer Facility
It was decided to set up the PMIS as part of an "on-line" system (directly connected to the computer) using a computer terminal for input and output.
This allowed immediate access to the data base so that reports could be produced rapidly and questions could be answered quickly, thus providing a stimulus to further analysis.
The BAA computer held a large amount of information relating to employees.
This was in the form of the Payroll Master File.
An examination of the individual employee records maintained on this file showed that ten out of some 108 items or fields of pay-related information would be of use in the PMIS system.
This formed an initial"persons' data base for the selected location, to which further fields of information could easily be added.
As the BAA computer in use in September 1977 was not capable of supporting an on-line system, it was decided to use a computer bureau.
On the recommendation of the IMS, an outside bureau offering computer sharing was chosen which was able to provide the facilities and support required.
Moreover, the computer language involved was readily usable by staff with limited computer experience.
Promotion of the System
A central personnel team from the Manpower and Organisation Branch of the Authority was made responsible, on a part-time basis, for the development of the system.
This team was provided with the part-time support of a clerk/typist to operate the computer terminal for updating the data base as necessary.
From the outset a policy was adopted which aimed at eliminating unnecessary jargon and the mystique normally associated with computers.
A simple, straightforward approach was therefore used in everyday contacts with the staff in the other personnel sections in order to cultivate their interest and co-operation.
Initially, presentations were given to personnel sections both at Head Office and at the airports.
The aims of the PMIS were outlined and the type of service which could be provided was described and discussed.
The intention was to attempt to educate staff at an early stage in the benefits which could be obtained from a computerized system.
These included the elimination and/or simplification of existing manual systems with subsequent savings in staff effort and the more tedious tasks such as producing an alphabetical listing (nominal roll) of employees or identifying those employees  coming up for retirement.
It was made clear that such tasks could be carried out very quickly and easily using the computer.
Developing the System
At the request of the central personnel team, the Data Processing Branch produced a listing from the Payroll Master File.
This gave the following information about BAA staff employed at Gatwick Airport: NAME (surname and initials) TITLE (Mr, Mrs, Miss or Ms) PAY NUMBER DATE OF BIRTH DATE OF JOINING BAA DATE OF LEAVING BAA RESPONSIBILITY CODE (costcode) PRESENT GRADE LOCATION AT WHICH EMPLOYED CATEGORY OF EMPLOYEE (Non-industrial, industrial, fire service etc) A sample validation check showed that there were two suspect fields of information.
These were the dates of birth and dates of joining BAA.
It was, therefore, necessary to carry out a complete validation check of the listing against the manual records kept by the Personnel Branch at Gatwick Airport.
The aim was to ensure that the information used in the creation of the initial data base was both accurate and complete.
The amended listing was then sent to an outside data preparation bureau where data were recorded on punch cards.
These cards were then used to input the data into the chosen bureau's system to produce a "person" data base for Gatwick Airport.
In order to produce the majority of regular returns directly from the computer, each employee record was extended by adding the following fields of information.
Grade on joining BAA Date of present grade Reason for leaving BAA (retirement, resignation etc) ATTITB occupational code Registered disabled marker Ex civil servant marker In order to collect this information a computer listing was produced from the Gatwick"persons' data base.
This was double spaced and contained the employee's name, pay number and appropriate headings for the fields of information needed.
A manual exercise was mounted and the required information was entered in the appropriate spaces on the listing.
As soon as this task had been completed a similar procedure to that of setting up the initial data base was adopted.
Punched cards were produced and the data were again fed into the bureau's system.
A simple programming instruction was then written by the team which used the pay number as a cross reference to the original data.
This instructed the computer to add the new data to each employee's record, thus extending the data base.
Initially, an attempt was made to use existing paperwork in the form of the Personnel Advice Note (PAN) as a means of updating the PMIS data base.
This proved impractical as the PAN contained far more data than were required to update the PMIS.
The ideal data input document is one where only  the required information appears and appears in sequence from left to right.
A single (ie common) set of documents is best for updating both personnel and payroll records.
However, in BAA, there were difficulties which prevented this happening.
The payroll was updated at weekly intervals for employees paid weekly wages and mid-monthly for employees paid at the end of each month.
Reports and returns relating to manpower were based on the position as it stood on the last day of the relevant month.
Further information was contained on and used by the payroll system which was not contained on or used by the PMIS and vice versa It was therefore decided that the updating procedures for the Payroll Master File and the PMIS should be kept separate at this stage.
Nevertheless, at some future data an exercise would be undertaken by the Organization and Methods section to examine the feasibility of using one document to produce the updating information required by both the Payroll Master File and the PMIS.
Early experience indicated that there were five main types of movement which affected an employee's record on the PMIS data base.
Certain specific fields of information may change in each type of movement.
These movements were: new appointments transfers to a different location resignations promotion or transfers within the same location change of name Computer input forms were therefore designed to cover each type of movement indicated above.
A manual was also produced which explained how to complete these documents.
Input forms and a manual were supplied to the personnel section at Gatwick Airport and the procedure was explained to the staff who would be required to complete the documents.
Where possible, information was coded to cut down on computer storage and processing costs.
The manual contained an explanation of these codes, an example of which is given below.
CATEGORY OF EMPLOYEE CODE Non industrial 1 Industrial 2 Fire Service 3 Temporary 4 Seasonal 5 Short term contract 6 Trainee 7 The team then tested the"persons' system using the Gatwick file over a six month trial period.
During this time updating and regular reporting procedures were developed and the necessary programs written.
Useful Lessons We Learned
During this trial period a number of useful lessons were learned, not least of which was that we were correct in attempting to take on only one medium sized location and only progress after this had been successfully completed.
The other major lesson was that as much information as it is possible to validate should be validated.
It is extremely easy to mistype codes or numbers even when one is thoroughly familiar with the type of information which is being entered.
The old adage that you only get out what you put in becomes very meaningful and it is only too easy to miss an employee out of a list because a code has been entered incorrectly or because information is inconsistent.
On satisfactory completion of the trial period, the "persons" system was extended one location at a time until the system covered all BAA.
Regular reports required by individual locations are obtained by using standard or specially written programs produced by the team.
These programs will be stored by the computer in readiness for use by the specific location.
The updating of all"persons' files will remain a central responsibility to ensure they are kept at the same point in time.
Updating will be carried out at monthly intervals, usually between the 5th and 10th of the following month.
Reports covering the organisation as a whole could then be produced by the team as required.
This method of operation will hopefully give the team overall control.
At the same time it will result in the spread of knowledge and involve the participation of most of the staff employed on the information aspect of the personnel function.
At the present time, the development stage of the "persons" system has been completed and a number of reports and listings are produced for each location; these include: strength return (report) nominal roll (listing) retirement lists (listing) etc The number of regular reports has deliberately been kept to a minimum to prevent managers from being besieged with information.
The system is best at coping with ad hoc requests and these are usually processed within a 24 hour period at the maximum, usually a much shorter period.
Pay and Grading Review
As a result of the successful implementation of the"persons' system, requests were received to extend the PMIS to cover new areas of work.
A pay and grading review, which formed part of an earlier pay agreement, was reaching its final stages in late 1978.
This exercise involved the evaluation and grading of all posts within BAA based on the system of evaluation developed by the management consultants HAY/MSL.
At this late stage, the PMIS team was asked to assist by creating a relevant computer data base so that information associated with the scheme could be processed.
This meant the immediate computerization of existing manual systems.
A considerable amount of work was involved in both setting up and updating the data base.
Initially, difficulties were encountered in accessing information on this newly created"posts' data base.
Two post reference numbers had been inherited from the manual system, neither of which proved suitable for reference to individual records on the data base.
Eventually it became necessary to create a further simple, numeric identifier for use in accessing information relating to specific posts.
A number of errors was found in the manual system and these required amending.
In addition, once"posts' had been evaluated by the evaluation  committee, the various scores and codes allocated to the job elements had to be associated with the relevant post on the data base.
A set pattern of updating similar to that used in the "persons" system could not be adopted.
Often, a number of fields of information was involved and these were usually random in nature.
In consequence, it was often easier to overwrite (superimpose) parts of records with the same information, which is not good updating practice as errors can be introduced into the system.
Because of these problems it was some time before satisfactory reporting procedures were developed.
Computer listings were then produced which ranked jobs in score order.
Other analyses were also undertaken; for example, similar posts throughout the organization were grouped together and then slotted appropriately into the overall order.
After an excessive amount of effort, most of the difficulties met in the application have now been overcome.
A much smoother implementation of this system would have been possible if the team had been involved much earlier and/or more forward planning for computerisation had been possible.
The "posts" system is now operating satisfactorily.
The Staff Audit and Grading sections of the Personnel Department are now responsible for updating the data base and producing reports.
The staff from both these sections have been trained to operate the computer terminal and use programs designed by the team.
Up-to-date information on "posts" is now circulated regularly to all locations within the organisation.
In connection with the pay and grading review, the team were also required to cost various methods of assimilating staff on to new pay rates.
Existing basic pay information was obtained from the BAA computer and associated with the appropriate person's record.
An assimilation exercise on to the proposed pay scales was then undertaken based on the employee's grade and length of service in that grade.
The resulting analysis gave detailed information on the costs of implementing the review and provided a sound basis for negotiations with the staff associations and trades unions.
Head Office Relocation Project
More recently it was decided that the BAA Head Office in London should be relocated at Gatwick Airport.
The personnel sections involved in planning the move recognised the need for a large amount of basic data in order to obtain a smooth transition.
They surveyed the staff concerned using a self-completion type questionnaire which was circulated in June 1978.
The questionnaire requested a maximum of 27 replies under the following five major headings: personal details move to Gatwick travel housing other information and with three of the replies calling for explanations.
There was a response rate of over 80 per cent from the staff.
It was then decided to analyse this information with the use of a computer and so, once again, the team were asked to undertake a further project.
Wherever possible, replies were coded on the questionnaire in order to simplify the computer reporting system.
The information contained on the questionnaires was then copied to computer input forms specially designed for  this purpose.
The forms were sent to the Data Preparation Bureau and punched cards produced.
These were fed into the system in the usual manner to create the required data base.
Once this had been done, the necessary reporting programs were written.
These listed or summarised the information collected from the questionnaires together with any relevant data stored on the "persons" data base, under the required headings.
Listings of information were supplied on a restricted basis to branches or sections on request.
These listings related, for example, to staff who would be over a certain age in 1981.
A wide range of summarised information was also circulated to all the personnel sections involved in planning the move to Gatwick.
Senior Staff
An extension of the "persons" system was developed to cover some 300 senior staff in the BAA.
This involved adding further fields of information relating to these staff to the "persons" data base, including job titles, pay and allowances and the date the person took up his/her present post.
This sub system was set up and developed by the team who have retained responsibility for writing and testing programs for any new reporting requirement.
Staff from the Pay and Conditions branch of the Personnel Department have the responsibility for updating the data base and producing standard reports.
Access to the system is now restricted to authorized staff by the use of security passwords.
A variety of details relating to senior staff, including length of service both in the present job and in the BAA and date of retirement, can be shown on a computer report and copies are sent to both the Chairman and Managing Director at regular intervals.
Evaluation
In the opinion of the IMS, the bureau and the customer sections, the systems relating to "persons" and senior staff have been set up successfully.
Information relating to employees is now compatible throughout the organisation.
All regular reports processed through the PMIS system are produced to the schedules and timetables laid down.
This is of particular importance where reports to Central Government are concerned and the image of the BAA is involved.
Information is also readily available to aid senior management in decision making.
The system relating to the Head Office relocation has been reasonably successful.
The main difficulties to be overcome in this type of exercise relate to timing the issue of the questionnaire, its content and the response from staff.
The information contained in the questionnaire was processed within the space-of a month, providing all the listings and summaries of information requested.
The personnel sections involved expressed satisfaction with the information provided by the system.
Surprise was also expressed at the speed with which the results of the exercise were available.
The same measure of success was not enjoyed with the "posts" system.
This was developed without assistance from the bureau or the IMS.
While the system is now operational, difficulties and setbacks were encountered.
These would have been largely overcome had a similar approach to that used in setting up the "persons" system been adopted.
Staff in other personnel sections at Head Office have also been instructed in operating computer terminals to access and update their specific data base  files and, within limits, to process information.
Some of these staff have attended programming and appreciation courses.
In addition, personnel staff at all locations have been involved in collecting input data for the system and in receiving results in the form of computer listings or summaries.
Thus they have gained an appreciation of the system and a knowledge of the range of information now available.
A number of returns which were prepared manually at various locations are now produced by the computer, resulting in saving of staff time and effort.
Moving In-house From the outset it has been the intention to switch the PMIS from the bureau to the internal BAA's data processing branch computer.
We have now reached the stage where the planning and programming stages have been completed and four locations have been successfully implemented.
The remaining locations should be using the new system by October this year which will then see the completion of a major personnel and data processing project which will have taken two and a half years to plan and implement.
The in-house system is an integrated personnel and payroll system and contains current as well as historical absence and employment information.
It is much more geared to the administration of personnel records than was the bureau system but the experience we gained using the bureau has stood us in good stead for our own system.
Some Concluding Remarks
The PMIS started off on a sound basis under the guidance and the professional advice of the IMS.
The speed and relatively smooth manner in which the systems were developed, and the associated programming progressed, was largely due to the ready support and encouragement provided by both the Institute and the bureau.
The lesson to be learned here is that there are considerable advantages (in particular with regard to time and money) to be gained from using the knowledge and experience of firms who have been particularly successful in a specific area of work.
The alternative was to develop the required system using internal resources.
This approach would have involved solving problems and duplicating work which in all probability had been done many times before in other organizations.
In the areas of work associated with "persons" , "senior staff" and "pay assimilation" , thorough preparation was applied.
The step-by-step approach was adopted and the high degree of success achieved can be largely attributed to this strategy.
In contrast, considerable difficulties were experienced in setting up the "posts" system.
There was an urgent requirement by management to incorporate this application within the PMIS.
The time scale involved did not allow the adoption of the methods and proven practice used in setting up the "persons" system.
Eventually this exercise proved to be a typical case of more haste less speed, involving a heavy and, with hindsight, largely unnecessary workload before success was achieved.
In general, and in addition to the contribution of the outside agencies mentioned earlier, the keys to the successful implementation of the project so far have been simplicity, communication and the involvement of staff from other sections within the Personnel Department at all stages of the development.
These are useful lessons which should be equally applicable to future attempts at securing organisational improvements through computerisation.
Section 3 Computerised Personnel Information Systems
Section Chairman: Dr Clive Purkiss Director, Institute of Manpower Studies
Member, National Committee for Organisation and Manpower Planning, Institute of Personnel Management
3.1 The Potential of Real Time Applications: A Computer Man's View
by Jeremy Rivers Branch Manager, Home Counties Branch IBM United Kingdom Limited
In this presentation, Jeremy Rivers reviews the traditional use of computers in enterprises where they have tended to be used for large weekly or monthly batched jobs, such as stock control, invoicing or payroll.
He discusses the problems which occur in getting the user department and the computer department to agree upon a specification and the prolonged timescales often involved.
He then contrasts this with an ideal world, where users with their own computer display can access any information at the touch of a button.
This concept is then expanded by looking at specific areas within the personnel function which can benefit from this approach, and the various computer solutions to these requirements are reviewed.
It is stressed that the main concern should be the information needs of the personnel function, rather than concentrating too early upon computer solutions.
He also reviews the starting point options open to the personnel department depending upon the current status of payroll and personnel information with the organisation.
Jeremy Rivers concludes by describing some of the key issues facing personnel management, including his views on costs and benefits of a CPIS.
His final message is "Can you really afford not to do it?" 
Although I have been billed as a "computer man" — I have been employed in the computer marketing and services side of IBM for 17 years — for over half this time I have been a line manager.
And as you may know, within IBM the line manager is also the personnel manager for the people reporting to him.
Another advantage of the IBM environment is that we have had the benefits of a comprehensive and integrated payroll and personnel information system for a number of years.
For a change, the cobbler's shoes are without holes!
The following presentation is divided into: 1 A short review of the traditional use of computers in enterprises.
2 An insight into the use of computers as a decision support tool for management.
3 A more specific look at the need for information in the personnel function.
4.
The options open to personnel management in choosing the right kind of system for their organization, and some key issues which have to be faced.
1 A Short Review of the Traditional Use of Computers in Enterprises
Throughout my presentation (and hopefully other presentations at this conference) I hope that you will be applying what I like to call the "so what test" .
So many computer people, just like professionals from other professions, tend to get over excited by their subject, and finish up concentrating upon "gee whizz" things, such as how many megaglob of chips your £1 buys and how extraordinarily clever computers are.
Most of such talk just does not pass the "so what test" .
It is only relevant to you if it actually speeds up, improves, or reduces the cost of your computerized personnel information system.
As an illustration of what I mean, two years ago I was a member of an IBM audience listening to just such a presentation from an "expert" from another well known company in the electronics industry.
He told us that "if only the car industry had achieved the same improvements in price performance since the war as the electronics industry, a 1980 Rolls Royce would only cost 2 pence." 
At this point a wag from the back of the large audience called out "the only trouble is that it would only be 2½″ long!" 
The statement did not pass the "so what test" .
I trust that I will not fall into the same trap!
Many of you will have experienced what I call, the traditional use of computers, outlined in figure 1.
At some stage someone, either in the computer department, or in the user department, will think of using the computer to assist in the operation of their department.
Contact is then set up between these groups and eventually a member of the computer department, called, usually, a systems analyst, will be assigned to assess the feasibility of such a system, and a communication or dialogue is begun between the systems analyst and members of the user department.
Now the systems analyst has a pretty good knowledge of the capability of the computer, and the user has a fairly good idea of the problem in his department.
Unfortunately, initially at least, there is very little common ground.
The dialogue thus commenced is what I call the "what do I want, what is possible loop" .
It starts with the systems analyst asking for the detailed requirements of the user.
The user often replies with a question about what the computer is capable of doing, and so on until common ground begins to be established.
A specification for the computer system which will satisfy the user's requirements begins to evolve.
Eventually the specification will be completed and signed off by the user department.
At this stage the specification is passed to another computer man, called a programmer, who converts the specification into code which is readable by the computer.
The system is thoroughly tested and eventually handed over to the user.
The first issue is timescale.
How long does this process take from initial request through to hand over of the system?
Well, the range in companies in the UK today is about six months to five years, with an average at about three years, and it is getting longer.
This is what is known euphemistically in the industry as the "application development backlog" .
There is a second issue which I will again illustrate with a true story.
I was making a presentation to the management of a well known UK manufacturing company.
On the left hand side of the room were the user management, from senior managers through to the factory controllers, and on the right hand side of the room were the computer management team.
I asked whether, in their experience, the user got, at the end of the loop in figure 1, the system he wanted/expected.
The unanimous answer was NO!
Why not?
The users were clear.
The computer people never understood their requirements!
The computer men said, rubbish.
The real cause was that the users were always changing their minds!
I hope to be able to illustrate to you that they were  both right.
How can you expect a computer man to understand in detail all aspects of a user's requirements?
While if a user is really looking for a system to support management decisions, how can he be expected to know in advance all the decisions which he will have to take?
It is also interesting that the loop in figure 1 has not introduced the real world"element, that of change in the environment, affecting the nature of the systems requirements.
Naturally, if the system takes three years to implement, substantial change is inevitable!
So we need to take into account the element of change in figure 2.
Causes of change are many — the government, the unions, OPEC, the Argentines, company mergers, new brooms, technological change, recession, unemployment, legislation, EEC — you name it, you've experienced it in the last few years.
What then is the cause of this application backlog, with personnel systems usually at or near the bottom of the queue?
A recent survey of computer managers in the UK gave the rather obvious answer that they kept missing project deadlines because of shortcomings in the following areas: CAUSE RANKING Program Maintenance 1 Estimating 2 Staff Shortage 3 Project Management 4 Planning 5 What was not considered in the results of the survey were the following further considerations, which in my experience are at least as significant.
Capacity Software Facilities Staff Quality Budget User Commitment One of the key elements in this backlog crisis in many enterprises today is undoubtedly lack of experienced and skilled staff, a shortcoming made more critical by the sheer complexity of computer systems.
This means that the benefits of computerization are being delayed in many areas, particularly in personnel.
It may interest you to be reminded that around 1911 a rather similar crisis was facing the newly emerging car industry.
The marketeers and production people were planning dramatic growth in car sales in the next 20 years, but the corporate planners were pointing to a problem which would severely limit car sales — a worldwide shortage of trained chauffeurs!
Today it seems incredible that such a restriction should have occurred.
It is, of course, history that what happened was not a crash programme of chauffeur training, but the lateral thought of do-it-yourself driving — the owner driver with the cheaper and more simple car such as the Model T. 
2 An Insight into How Computers Should Be Used as a Decision Support Tool for Management
Why not do the same today with computers?
Why wait for the expert from  the computer department?
Do it yourself.
Implement your own personnel system.
The current buzzword is personal computing do-it-yourself computing.
Now what I am talking about is a very simple concept illustrated in figure 3.
A computer terminal, these days usually a Visual Display Unit, can be compared with a window through which you can scan your data or information.
This VDU is connected to a computer of some kind, either locally with, usually, a length of co-ax — like a TV aerial or remotely, via a telephone line connection.
Connected to the computer is some form of storage device which enables information to be accessed and updated quickly.
What is still missing is your ability as a potential user to use this terminal.
To be a success, personal computing needs to be done without detailed computer knowledge.
The current computer industry buzzword for this capability is "user friendliness" .
Sadly, very few systems are yet available which really fit the bill.
As a rule of thumb, if the training programme for a so called user friendly system is longer than a working week, steer clear of it!
Ideally, you should be able to go to your VDU terminal, pass through the necessary security controls, input information, have the computer check it for you, enquire on particular elements or records of information, produce ad hoc or regular print outs and produce graphical output with simple commands.
All of this should be done using simple instructions to the computer which are as close to normal English as possible.
Is it feasible to imagine using personal computing for all aspects of a computerised personnel information system?
In my experience computer systems can be divided into three categories:(i) Operational systems, the area where computers have traditionally been used to process large volumes of information on a regular basis.
Typically these systems involve "bread and butter" operations within an enterprise, often processing large batches of transact ions at a time.
In the personnel area, payroll is such a system.
(ii) Decision support systems, where the computer is used as a management tool, accessing information at the touch of a button, when the provision of this information, quickly and accurately, is needed to allow management to make informed decisions, rather then manage by hunch.
An on-line computerized personnel records system falls into this category.
Now the major difference between these two categories is that with operational systems it is relatively easy for the user to define his requirements, in detail, in advance, for a specialist to program into the computer, whereas decision support systems, by their very nature, can only be defined in advance in global terms.
What is needed on a continuing basis is the ability to access any information stored, in a completely flexible manner.
Today the main task may be matching key people to skills to vacancies available.
Tomorrow the need might be to monitor and assess the success of a new approach to solving absenteeism and lateness.
By the end of the week the concern may be to assess a new approach to the pay round in response to a union proposal.
Throughout this time the department will need, as a matter of routine, to respond to the information requests in several flavours, from government, the unions, the employers' confederation or from individual managers or employees.
(iii) Planning systems use the computer to analyse trends, set and monitor budgets, try different approaches to future needs.
Summary information is all that is required, rather than completely up-to-date information on a minute-by-minute basis.
Once again, flexibility is paramount with tools to model, analyse, simulate and report.
From this description of the three categories, it should be clear that personal computing, where the user himself uses the system directly as a tool of the trade, is essential for categories (ii) and (iii).
Some users also adopt this approach for category (i), but the more usual approach is to adopt a pre-written package, or use conventional skilled computer professionals to produce a tailored solution, provided changes are allowable and ad hoc reporting is also permitted.
What are the benefits to the user of the personal computing approach?
First, the user, by this approach, can short- cut the application backlog, which almost certainly exists in his organisation.
Secondly, decisions about which particular application is completed first lie within the user department.
Thirdly, because there is no involvement with a computer professional, there will be no interpersonal communication problem to overcome.
Next, and perhaps most importantly, the user has a flexible easy to use system, so when inevitably his requirements change, he can change the system or his use of the system.
Which means that the computer is being used, as it should be, as a user management tool which can vastly improve personnel management effectiveness.
3 A More Specific Look at the Need for Information in the Personnel Function
I find it very depressing that personnel directors and personnel managers are still, in some companies, questioning the importance and effectiveness of a computerised personnel information system.
Most enterprises have been controlling stock on their computers for years!
Yet in all but a very few, it is people that are the organisation's most costly and most valuable asset.
If you recruit a graduate today, you will pay him in excess of £1 million before he retires!
Have you costed out how much it costs to recruit a key employee?
How much it costs to train him?
How much it costs to replace him if you cannot manage him and his career in an informed way?
In 1982, salaries, benefits and expenses are all under attack.
Are you still arguing with your finance function about whose numbers are accurate, rather than discussing the real issues of motivation, development, and cost effectiveness?
Headcount control is essential, at all levels, if budgets are to be met, while maintaining standards in people management.
Qualitative measurement of skill mix within departments is usually of equal importance.
The main benefit areas in enterprises which have embarked upon computerised payroll and personnel information are:(i) Better personnel management/career planning/training Reduced attrition in key skill areas  Matching of people requirements and availability Reduced recruiting costs Reduced training costs (ii) Ability to set headcount targets and control to monthly control numbers Reduced cost of people Productivity gains (iii) Ability to create computerised model of company payroll including job levels, skill levels, merit targets, headcounts, promotions, overtime, bonuses, shift allowance etc. etc. for use in wage budgeting/bargaining.
Accurate forecasting of pay costs Ability to try flexible alternatives with considerable accuracy Fast response to change Decisions based upon business need (iv) Ability to install efficient monitoring systems for lateness and absence (particularly important in view of recent Government legislation).
Avoid costly overkill schemes Try out different approaches and monitor effect Implement most cost effective solution Reduce cost of lateness and absence Implement Government requirements (v) Improve company image in market place.
4 The Option Open to Personnel Management in Choosing the Right Kind of System for their Organisation, and Some Key Issues which have to be faced
Coming from IBM, I am in a position to give a reasonably objective view as to the pros and cons of the various ways in which you can implement a Computerised Personnel Information System.
IBM manufactures, sells and supports a complete range of computer products from the IBM Personal Computer to the largest of main frame computers via minis and small main frames.
IBM also runs a very successful bureau service here in the UK and in many other countries throughout the world.
Micro or personal computer
The micro is currently much in vogue, and indeed my presentation is followed by a presentation specifically on the subject of micro computers.
A basic micro has a number of advantages.
It is convenient, self contained, fairly simple to use, and cheap and has a wide range of applications available.
However, in my experience very few of the problems facing management are self contained.
In your enterprises you need to share information within departments and across department borders.
Information collected within operational systems, such as payroll, can feed into decision support systems such as are provided by a personnel data base, which in turn can be summarised for use in planning and modelling systems.
Shared information systems
Managers should therefore concentrate upon the type and nature of information to be held, and how this information will be used in the process of managing  the personnel function.
The type of computer system used is very much a secondary consideration, and will depend upon such considerations as: enterprise size/number of employees number of physical locations range of personnel applications to be attempted whether enterprise is growing, contracting, static supply of computer professionals available budget available What is certain is that the personnel function needs a shared information system.
Once a micro computer is connected into a shared data base, it becomes an intelligent terminal, capable of carrying out some functions, such as data entry standalone, but thereafter used to interrogate the shared information, alongside conventional visual displays.
Key technical issues are: whether the operational systems such as payroll can be developed quickly, despite application backlogs, and changed easily as requirements inevitably change; whether personal computing software is available to set up your Personnel Information System quickly and flexibly without direct recourse to computer professionals, allowing flexible ad hoc reporting and rapid response to continually changing requirements; whether summaries of this information can be extracted to enable planning, monitoring, controlling and modelling applications to be carried out by the personnel planners.
Issues
Very few of you will be starting from scratch to implement your computerised personnel information system.
Many will already have computerised payroll systems.
Most will have a manual personnel records system of some sort.
Where you start will therefore depend upon where you are to date.
Figures 4 develops further the three-level approach mentioned earlier.
You can therefore start at payroll, or start at personnel information if you already have a good payroll system, or just cover the planning systems if accurate personnel information is already available.
The more these systems are developed in concert and in a logical sequence, the more likely you are to have a successful implementation, and therefore reap the considerable benefits possible.
Because personnel tends to be low on computer departments' priority lists, you are very likely to have to go it alone, at least initially.
It is therefore important that you take a route which is likely to succeed.
A piecemeal approach using micros will seem attractive at first, but may soon founder, when you realise that it is a shared information system which you actually need.
However, installing a medium or large computer with pre-packaged software  severely increases the risk.
You are faced with a much more complex project and probable future inflexibilities of the packaged software.
An approach which can combine the relative simplicity of the micro with the required data base, network and security of a shared system is to start with a bureau solution.
This way the computer complexities will be removed, and personnel people will be able to concentrate upon the management issues of implementation, such as staff consultations, training, and requirements definition.
Security also tends to be better with this approach as the bureau runs as a service utility, where security and reliability are built into the system as a matter of course.
Once the system is fully operational, then one may consider moving to an in-house installation if the economies are worthwhile.
A final issue is the personnel/finance relationship in the enterprise.
Traditionally, payroll is owned by finance.
However, pay and benefit policies come under personnel.
What is clear is that the most successful computerised personnel systems link payroll and personnel together.
What is more, if proper pay/salary planning is to be carried out, the pay model and the summary information must be jointly sponsored and probably jointly owned by personnel and finance.
This way, the interminable arguments about whose numbers are correct can be replaced by sensible and informed discussions about the real issues.
Conclusion
In summary, I have reviewed the shortcomings inherent in the traditional approach to computing in enterprises.
I have discussed the potential advantages to be gained from the personal computing approach, and some of the component parts of the computerised personnel systems, which many organisations are currently implementing.
I believe too many people spend too much time discussing solutions, and too little on requirements.
To this extent you will all require a shared information capability.
Once you have decided upon the particular requirements of your organisation, then you can consider the size of computer you need.
A bureau approach may be a sensible option, at least initially.
People are your organisation's greatest asset and probably greatest cost.
The benefits of a successful computerised personnel information system are potentially very great.
Some companies are claiming savings in the range one to five per cent of their total payroll bill, depending upon the mix of staff types.
Typical costs for such systems range from £5 to £30 per employee per annum depending upon whether payroll is included.
Can you really afford not to do it?
3.2 — The Birth of Microcomputers
by David King Sales Development Manager Apple Computer (UK) Limited
Developments in the semi-conductor industry in the early seventies led to the production of microprocessor chips which were fast, reliable and cheap enough to be mass produced.
The mini and mainframe computer manufacturers were slow to realise the enormous potential of single board microcomputers based on these microprocessors and it was left to the electronics hobbyists and entrepreneurs, who responded by giving birth to the microcomputer industry.
In many ways the development of Apple Computer symbolises the development of the industry as a whole and it is with specific reference to Apple Computer Inc that David King attempts in this paper to put the micro into its true context.
It is expected that his Conference presentation will make use of videoprojection to demonstrate some practical applications.
The prototype Apple personal computer was developed by two enthusiasts for their own computer club in a garage in a town just north of San Francisco in California in 1975, and was sold originally in kit form.
During 1976 some 200 were sold in this way and pressure was being brought to bear on the company founders to manufacture the completed product.
This was achieved using venture capital and so successful was the product that by 1978/79 some 135,000 machines had been sold.
As the wealth of software grew so did sales of the computer, and distributors were established in countries throughout the world.
By the end of 1981 over 350,000 Apple IIs had been purchased; the company had experienced over 100 per cent growth annually and continues to enjoy a similar growth pattern.
Currently there are over 425,000 Apples in use throughout the world, some 35,000 of these in the United Kingdom.
The Impact
The capabilities of the desk-top micro are similar to the larger mini and mainframe computers.
The differences lie essentially in the speed of information processing, which is much slower, the capacity to store enormous amounts of data, which is reduced, and the cost of ownership, which bears no relationship whatsoever to the cost of owning a larger mini or mainframe computer.
This cost factor alone has brought the power of a computer for storing, retrieving and processing information quickly and very efficiently to the wealth of small businesses and professions who previously could not even have considered computerisation.
Writers of computer applications software were quick to realise the mass market potential of business software and in the UK especially a wealth of talent exists for producing low-cost packaged software for an ever-increasing range of applications.
The Major User Areas
Business accounting is a most popular area and many small to medium sized companies use Apples for stock control, payroll, invoicing, ledgers, credit control, etc. as well as for stand-alone work processing.
Personal computers for management use is a major area of Apple usage, where planning, analysing, managing and assistance with decision evaluation have made the micro a versatile and powerful tool for managers of all descriptions, saving time and money and helping them to be far more effective in their jobs.
Applications software for financial modelling/planning, project management, data-base management systems and many others will make Apple computers as a management tool as important on the manager's desk as the telephone.
Those companies who choose to ignore the power of a desk-top micro will do so at their peril.
In education and training Apples have found a permanent home.
Over 25 per cent of all Apples ever manufactured are used in schools, colleges, universities, training companies and training departments to teach computer literacy and awareness.
This is essential to prepare our children for an ever-changing world and to retrain employees whose traditional role within a company will change with the advent of computers in general and micros in particular.
A revolution in information technology is taking place which will have effects on society, certainly as far-reaching as the impact of the industrial revolution, and we must be prepared for the changes.
In industry and science, process control and equipment monitoring can be far more reliable and effective using a micro.
This is reflected in the enormous growth of micro usage in these areas and especially in the field of robotics.
It is in the professions where the use of microcomputers is having probably the greatest impact.
Personal computers like the Apple are by their very nature easy to learn to use and simple to operate.
Thus if time-consuming, laborious manual tasks can be transferred onto a computerised system which then frees staff for more productive work, then the overall effect is to improve performance.
A great many professionals are actively moving into microcomputer use as specialised software is written for what may be considered to be the more esoteric applications.
Computers in general practice are a typical example where the quality of health care has improved, thanks to the introduction of microcomputers.
To date approximately 100 GPs only have their practices computerised but within five years many of the remaining 7,900 will undoubtedly follow suit.
A similar story exists for solicitors, accountants, dentists, doctors, pharmacists, retailers, etc.
The reason is simple.
The use of a microcomputer will help these individuals be more effective at whatever they do and, as an effective tool, the micro has no equal at the jobs it does well.
Microcomputers in Personnel
As with many other professionals, the personnel manager's personal desk-top computer is emerging as an invaluable tool.
Information on employees may exist on a company's mini or mainframe computer but is stored in a form not usually usable or accessible by the personnel department, and mainframe information does not lend itself to interrogation on a real time basis.
The personnel department's own microcomputer enables information on employees to be stored in the required format, listing those who have specialist skills or training, promotion prospects, attendance, experience, family circumstances, etc., etc.
Since the information stored is likely to differ from one employee to another, several relational database management systems for personnel records have been developed on micros exclusively for use in personnel applications.
This database, however large or small, can then be used to select very quickly certain employees who match up against a particular job profile.
The system should be easy to use, be addressed in plain English and typically would require no knowledge of computers or programming.
The result is quick and easy problem solving for the personnel manager at a cost of hardware and software which is in all probability a small fraction of the cost  of having programs developed, especially on the mini or mainframe computer.
Financial modelling undoubtedly has enormous relevance in the personnel department.
Using a program such as Visicalc, a model of the complete company pay policy can be constructed on an Apple.
This having been done the "what if" situations can be analysed and examined.
The overall effect on the payroll of salary/wage increases, changes in holiday arrangements or hourly rates, pension contributions and so forth can be precisely predicted using a computer model.
Time consuming and costly negotiations on pay settlements can be over and done with in hours instead of weeks, as each proposal is fed into the model and the implications displayed immediately for further discussion.
Oversights can be extremely costly and a microcomputer model carefully constructed will not allow oversights to occur.
Manpower planning is another area where microcomputer use will continue to grow.
Sophisticated software already exists at moderate cost to effectively undertake critical path analyses.
Relating manpower requirements to production forecasts can be costly and inconvenient and using a microcomputer will assist personnel departments in the decision process.
Job evaluation can be a costly exercise, especially if outside consultants are brought in.
Since the task of benchmarking one job against another is essentially based on statistical and mathematical techniques, the process of job evaluation could soon be carried out using a microcomputer at a fraction of the cost of the time-honoured method.
Report generation using a stand alone microcomputer with a word-processing program has already proved invaluable in many company departments, including personnel.
The storage of standard letters, with editing facilities, allows for personalised letters and reports without the need for constant retyping.
There are many areas within the personnel function where a micro such as an Apple will be seen to have a relevance.
Just a few have been mentioned here.
It is clear that the micro is here to stay and it is the responsibility of personnel managers to come to terms with the new technology and use it to their advantage.
The introduction of the microcomputer into the environment allows us to look much more closely at the type of information required on personnel and how to use it to best advantage.
People are an increasingly expensive resource and microcomputers will prove to be a major innovation in the improvement of the selection process.
Section 4 — Uses and Applications
Section Chairman: Len Peach Director of Personnel and Corporate Affairs IBM United Kingdom Ltd
4.1 — Recruitment Administration Systems
by Tony Ive Manager, Personnel Projects Foster Wheeler Energy Limited
There are not many computerised recruitment systems about, although there is an obvious case for computerisation.
The emphasis needs to be on alleviating the problems of day-to-day administration, which can exert a disruptive effect on a personnel department because of the large amounts of work created for short amounts of time.
A computer system can speed up recruitment administration by a factor of about 10, and enable the updating of records and the production of letters to be performed as a single operation.
It can also enable any range of enquiries and reports to be dealt with.
However, recruitment systems are more difficult to design than personnel record systems, and there are complex design considerations.
Bureaux and micros are not suitable, so a choice must be made between using an in-house mainframe and buying a mini.
It is important to avoid system development by buying a package, and such a package will need to be written in a traditional programming language if the requisite speeds are to be achieved.
Introduction
When computerised personnel systems are discussed, it is often assumed that the kind of thing in question is interrogating personnel records, salary modelling and manpower planning.
Recruitment is not normally thought of as an obvious candidate.
This is surprising, because recruitment is perhaps the area in which the most dramatic advantages can be obtained by computerisation.
In addition, recruitment is a major activity in any personnel department and it frequently gives rise to administration problems of an essentially mundane nature which are, nevertheless, a major irritant as far as the personnel manager is concerned.
Many of the general considerations which arise in connection with computerising recruitment administration are the same as those which arise whenever computerisation within the personnel department is discussed, and this makes it all the more surprising that it is so rarely considered.
If a company is going to take the trouble to computerise in other areas of the personnel function, it seems a waste of potential not to tackle recruitment as well.
Of course, there may be considerations arising from the recruitment area which have a bearing on how computerization should be tackled in the other areas, but there is no doubt that a consistent overall strategy can be developed which incorporates all the major aspects of personnel administration and integrates them one with another.
This is essentially what has been done at Foster Wheeler over the past six years, and the views expressed in this paper arise largely from reflecting on the experiences of that project.
This paper will concentrate on five key issues: 1 What are the overriding problems of recruitment administration? 2 How can computerization provide a solution to them? 3 What are the principal design considerations? 4 What advantages can be gained? 5 What approach should be adopted to ensure a successful system?
The problem with recruitment is that a small amount of initial effort produces a great deal of work, and this work proceeds in waves which produce severe fluctuations in activity for the personnel staff involved.
This is a polite way of saying that recruitment normally causes chaos in the personnel department.
Problems
For example, if an advert is placed in The Sun for construction supervisors, it may well produce 500 replies within a couple of days.
All these people need to have application forms sent to them.
When the forms are returned, they must be sent to various people within the company, and regret letters or invitations to attend an interview must then be issued.
A further wave of activity occurs after the interviews have taken place, and then things should tail off as offers are made to a few selected individuals.
The operation proceeds in waves which diminish in size as the target is approached.
The problem is how to deal with the waves.
If a constant level of activity were maintained, it would be possible to employ the appropriate number of permanent staff to deal with it.
But the level of activity is not constant so either the permanent staff have to deal with it at the expense of other work, which leads to chaos; or, temporaries have to be employed, which again leads to chaos.
Recruitment administration is by its nature a fluctuating activity, even if the front end of the process — the vacancy requirements — is constant.
of course, if the vacancy requirements fluctuate as well , as is the case with contractors, a kind of see-saw effect sets in with the recruitment team oscillating between periods of intense activity and chaos on the one hand, and having nothing to do on the other hand.
This point needs to be stressed, because recruitment administration is in many respects so mundane that outsiders to the personnel department have difficulty understanding why it should cause a problem.
What does it involve other than sending out a few letters, keeping a record of what has been done, and putting some figures together at regular intervals?
The answer is that it is mundane, but that it is the addition to these tasks of fluctuations in the level of activity which causes the problem.
To appreciate this clearly it is necessary to look at each of these tasks in turn.
First, the production of letters: The average number of letters per applicant is likely to be about three.
Most people will receive an application form, and then a regret letter after they have returned it.
Those who continue through the process will need more than three letters: interview, offer, references and confirmation of start.
If a single advert produces 500 replies — the example of construction recruitment in The Sun, again — the recruitment team has to write 1500 letters.
This is no mean task, especially if they have not been doing any recruitment for the past few months.
The problem of keeping adequate records of what has been done follows from this, but is compounded by it.
Writing out 1500 index cards is just as time consuming as producing 1500 letters.
A recruitment team faced by this kind of surge in activity is liable to have to make a decision: do we concentrate on getting the letters out or do we give priority to keeping the records in line?
The answer has to be, "get the letters out" , because the success of the operation hinges on this.
But it creates a problem.
After a while, people start telephoning and saying,"My name is Mr Lambert, I was interviewed by you three weeks ago, and I haven't heard anything yet.
Could you please tell me what is happening".
The recruiter looks for the index card, and finds it is not there.
The longer this goes on, the more time has to be spent on trying  to trace missing people.
The recruitment team cannot get the letters out and keep the records up to date at the same time; and if they employ temporaries, other problems arise: where can they sit?
Who supervises them?
What checks are there that procedures are being followed?
The third task mentioned may be referred to as information management.
An index card system only enables individuals to be referenced alphabetically.
Recruiters need a summary of who has applied under each vacancy, and what is the current status of their application.
Managers, too, require information, though what they want is a summary of the position on each vacancy, rather than the details of the applicants within it.
Finally, the board of directors will require information in a further summarised form.
How many vacancies do we have at present?
How many people applied last month?
How many were interviewed?
How many have been accepted?
How many people have started?
There are two reasons why personnel departments have difficulty in supplying this sort of information.
First of all, if the records are not up to date— and it is difficult to see how they could be up to date during high level activity — the source of the information is missing.
Secondly, even if it were not missing, manual manipulation of large numbers of records is a very time consuming task, and hardly one that the recruitment team will have time to do during busy periods.
The question, "Do you want people or figures?" , arises again.
Since boards of directors tend to be unsympathetic to such questions, the personnel manager generally finds it more expedient to adopt an imaginative approach to the information he supplies.
The problem of recruitment administration is not that the individual tasks are difficult, but that the addition of fluctuations in the level of activity makes them difficult.
Since recruitment by its nature proceeds in waves, the fluctuations cannot be avoided, and a serious problem results — all the more serious because it is so difficult to explain to outsiders.
The only way to solve the problem is to iron out the effect of fluctuations, and this therefore must be the first objective of a computerised system.
Solutions
How can a computerised recruitment system iron out the effects of fluctuations in the level of activity?
Answer: by speeding up the processing of applicants to such an extent that the differences are relatively insignificant.
A good computer system will reduce the processing of applicants to about one tenth of the time required under a manual system.
Instead of the difference between one person being kept busy and ten people being kept busy, you have the difference between one person with nothing to do and one person with a lot to do.
Under a computerised system the time taken to send an applicant a letter and update his/her record should be around 7½ seconds.
The longest operation will, of course, be entering the details of new applicants into the system.
It should be possible to put on about 100 new applicants in an hour.
These speeds are the criteria of a successful system.
How can they be achieved?
The first point is that generating letters and updating records must be combined into a single operation.
The operator does one thing, but within the system two things occur: the applicant's record is updated, and a letter is generated.
Combining these operations halves the workload immediately.
It also ensures that the records can never be incorrect.
If a letter was sent, the record must have been updated, and vice versa.
A slightly technical way of putting this is to say that integrated letter writing is a fundamental pre-requisite of a successful recruitment system.
However, it is more difficult to achieve than is generally appreciated.
The kind of letter  writing in question here has nothing at all to do with word processing.
Word processing is concerned with the re-formatting of text.
If a report has to go through a number of drafts, it is an excellent way of enabling changes to be made quickly and without extensive retyping.
But letter writing in a recruitment system is more complex than this.
Take the case of a contract of employment, for example.
The first point to note is that sending someone a contract of employment does not involve any re-formatting of text.
A company does not re-draft its conditions of employment every time it makes someone an offer.
What it does do is to combine the particular letters and clauses which are relevant on a specific occasion with the details of the applicant in such a way as to produce the final document.
In doing this, the system may have to combine and manipulate information from a number of different sources: the operator specifies the letters and clauses to be used; the system fills out certain details from the data base; in some cases it may have to do such things as take the salary and location from the data base, look up the conditions for that location, find out that certain uplifts need to be applied to salary, perform the arithmetic and insert the answers in the appropriate places in the text.
Word processing has to do with re-formatting text.
Integrated letter writing involves combining and manipulating data from a variety of different sources with the minimum of operator intervention.
The nature of letter writing has been emphasised, because it is critical to the success of a recruitment system.
Equally important is the provision of a powerful report generator which can be used by members of the personnel department.
A report generator is essentially a means of instructing the computer to produce a report in whatever form may be required, by typing in a series of English-type commands on the terminal.
The commands follow a strict syntax, but they are not difficult to learn.
Whereas programming in the normal sense is a specialist task, report generation is not.
This means that the personnel department can write its own reports to be run on a regular basis for supplying information to recruiters, managers and directors along the lines mentioned earlier.
It also means that enquiries like, "Who has applied to us as a project engineer over the last year, and been rejected as not sufficiently experienced?" can be answered with ease.
A report generator solves the problem of information management provided that the records stored are up to date.
Making letter production and record maintenance into a single combined operation ensures that the records are up-to-date, because only by updating them can a letter be sent.
Integrated letter writing and powerful report generating facilities are fundamental pre-requisites.
There are others which are implicit in the type of system described here.
It must be on-line, that is, people in the personnel department must have easy access to it by means of visual display units (VDUs) on their desks.
It must be easy to use, so that everyone in the personnel department can have access to it.
And it must be flexible — defining the kind of flexibility required is difficult, but it is clear that an entirely rigid system is impractical.
These are all basic points, but it is still necessary to tackle the question of how the kind of speeds mentioned earlier can be achieved, and this involves more detailed consideration of the way the system should be designed.
Design Considerations
The key to designing a recruitment system is to reduce the recruitment process to a series of operation levels, for example: 1 application forms sent 2 applications received/hold  3 regret 4 interview/hold after interview 5 regret after interview 6 offer/chase offer 7 accept offer 8 decline/withdraw offer 9 confirm offer Within each of these levels there will be further sub-divisions (presumably A-Z) indicating precisely what happened to the applicant at this level.
The operation codes will therefore be such things as 1A or 2A, and they will normally have a specific letter or number of letters associated with them.
There will, of course, be some operation numbers which do not require a letter to be sent: application received, for example .
If every applicant is allocated a number by the system when they are first put on, and this number is written on the application form, all future processing can be performed simply by telling the system the applicant number and the operation to be performed.
For many operations this will be all that is required; others will require further information, such as interview details in the case of an interview letter or offer details in the case of a contract of employment.
The system should ascertain from the operation number whether further details are required, and request them if necessary.
Handling this efficiently requires the use of formatted screens, and cursor positioning.
A formatted screen is a screen which has been laid out like a form with clear headings and data inserted in appropriate places.
Whenever an applicant is updated, his/her record should be displayed on a formatted screen.
This eliminates the possibility of the wrong person being updated, and enables the operator to see if any details are incorrect.
Cursor positioning refers to the system positioning the cursor automatically at any point on the screen where an entry is required to complete the transaction.
It is both clearer and faster than the question and answer technique which many systems employ, and should be determined by the operation number entered.
This is an outline of the way speed can be achieved during normal updating.
Further facilities should be provided to enable ultra high speed updating to be performed in special cases.
For example, there will be a tendency for a large number of applications under a particular vacancy to be processed together, after the forms have been discussed with the appropriate manager.
There is no need in this case for an operator to call up applicants individually.
The system may as well do it, and present the operator with each applicant within the vacancy in turn in numerical order.
This may be called the chain through vacancy facility.
Again, there will be cases in which an event occurs which affects everyone in a given vacancy — recruitment is held, or the position is filled.
It should be possible in these cases to instruct the system to send a hold letter or a regret letter to everyone concerned.
of course, the system will need to have the ability to examine the status of each applicant in turn, and decide on the appropriate action.
These fast update mechanisms may be referred to as the hold and terminate facilities and they have an important role in eliminating the drudgery of recruitment administration.
Facilities such as these make computerised recruitment an attractive proposition, but it is important to realise that recruitment systems are difficult to design.
There are a number of problems which can easily be overlooked, and a system may have to be completely re-written to cope with them.
For example, applicants do not always progress through the operation levels in a straightforward manner.
They may repeat operations at certain levels,(a  second interview or a re-offer); they may double back, as when the company regrets them and later decides to re-establish contact; and they may change vacancy.
All these situations pose difficult questions for the system designer, and need to be resolved satisfactorily if the system is to work.
Working successfully involves being able to cope with 100 per cent of the cases which arise.
The purpose of the system is defeated if manual records have to be retained or if special letters are written which by-pass the system.
The difficulty is that a recruitment system has to be both a production system and an information system, and this is what makes it so much more complex than personnel records.
Advantages
Having stressed the problems, it is perhaps worth taking a look at the advantages.
The effect of fluctuations is ironed out, so that the personnel department is not disrupted by recruitment activity.
In many companies there would undoubtedly be scope for reducing staff, or at any rate switching resources to more productive tasks, bearing in mind that the system reduces recruitment administration to one tenth of the time required under a manual system.
This could be an important consideration for a personnel manager when putting together a cost justification for a system.
It might even mean that the personnel records and salaries systems could be cost justified largely on the basis of savings in the recruitment area.
Apart from providing a dramatic increase in speed in return for a reduction in effort, a computerised recruitment system improves the quality of the service provided.
It eliminates the possibility of inconsistencies arising between what is done and what is recorded — with all the subsequent difficulties this causes -by the simple device of reducing the two activities to a single operation through the provision of integrated letter writing.
It also makes available a data base of information which can be interrogated flexibly and easily by means of a report generator.
Standard reports can be provided on a regular basis without additional effort, and ad hoc enquiries or applicant searches can be performed as a matter of course.
Speed, consistency, and the ability to answer questions as they arise are the three great benefits of such a system One of the difficulties which personnel managers encounter whenever they get involved in computerisation is that there are apparently so many options available.
This makes it difficult to reach a decision, and causes a nagging worry as to whether the right system has been selected.
As far as recruitment systems are concerned this problem does not arise.
A logical consideration of the alternatives quickly enables most of them to be eliminated.
Which Approach?
First of all, batch processing is out of the question.
Recruitment always operates to tight deadlines, such as catching the last post.
Letters need to be run off throughout the day, and there will be a constant stream of enquiries.
In this environment the so-called real time mode of operation is essential.
This means that transactions are processed as they are entered by the operator, and not at some later date.
Inevitably, the VDUs will be used frequently and unpredictably.
All this effectively rules out buying time at a bureau.
It is far too expensive, and involves an open-ended cost.
The other end of the scale — micros — can also be ruled out.
Micros are astonishingly powerful, and it may well be that in a couple of years time they will provide the most attractive solution — but they do not provide it yet.
Information  handling is a highly demanding exercise as far as computers are concerned — much more demanding than carrying out complex calculations — and at the present time micros do not provide the kind of flexibility and robustness which is required.
There is no point in having a system which keeps on playing up; much better not to have one at all.
This leaves two possibilities on the hardware side: in-house mainframes and minis.
If a company has an in-house mainframe, there may well be attractions in using it.
However, two points need to be considered: 1 How heavily is it loaded? 2 How good are its on-line facilities?
If a machine is heavily loaded, its response times suffer.
Problems of this sort will quickly undermine the value of a recruitment system, which is designed above all for speed.
It will also frustrate the operators, and discourage them from using it, so that the system falls into disrepute and founders.
The caution about on-line facilities is appropriate, because many mainframes are surprisingly weak in this area.
Batch processing is still the bread and butter work of the mainframes, and their on-line capabilities sometimes leave much to be desired.
By contrast one can normally expect a mini to have good on-line facilities.
The reason for this is a simple commercial one.
Minis are used primarily for on-line work, so they have to perform well in this respect.
A mini which did not have good on-line facilities just would not survive.
There are two further attractions to buying a mini.
First, it enables the total cost of the project to be identified unequivocally at the outset.
There is no question of buying time, as with a bureau, or being charged internally, as in the case of a mainframe.
Secondly, it makes it feasible to select a software package which suits your requirements and to buy the hardware to run it on.
There need be no problems about converting for the in-house mainframe.
The advantages of buying a package cannot be stressed too much.
It means effectively that you are buying someone else's experience, and all the traumas of system development are avoided.
These traumas should not be underestimated, because, as was mentioned earlier, recruitment systems are peculiarly difficult to design.
The overriding criterion of speed means that they have to be written in a traditional programming language, such as FORTRAN.
There are very high level languages on the market which enable certain types of systems to be developed quickly and easily, but they are not as fast as the traditional languages, and so they are not suitable for recruitment applications.
If anyone were to suggest that ultra high level languages could produce the requisite speeds, it would be easy to test their claim by requesting a demonstration of a recruitment system with integrated letter writing putting on a hundred applications in an hour, and updating them in an average of 7½ seconds each.
This may seem an aggressive approach, but it is important if personnel departments are to make advances in computerisation that everyone should be clear about the objectives.
4.2 — The Use of Computers in Job Evaluation
by Peter Roper Management Services and Manpower Officer The Electricity Council
This paper gives details of the experience of the Electricity Council in using computer facilities during the negotiation of a Job Evaluation Scheme for 30,000 technical engineering staff.
A considerable quantity of data was collected and use was made of both a main frame and a desk top machine.
The paper explains the use of computers to assess the effects of varying the structure of the scheme in terms of altering the weight attached to different aspects of a job.
It also explores their use to evaluate and cost negotiating options during formal negotiating meetings.
It seeks to explore the further development of such techniques in the Industrial Relations field and suggests some guidelines to be borne in mind when considering a potential application.
The thrust of Peter Roper's paper is to outline the practical use that can be made of computer technology in Industrial Relations applications, not to give detailed descriptions of programs or suites.
To this end, some remarks are included on the practical problem of gaining acceptance by management of the use of such techniques in a field still sometimes regarded as one where judgement alone is relevant.
Background
The Electricity Supply Industry in Great Britain employs 160,000 people, has net assets in excess of £30 billion and is responsible for generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity, with other aspects of the business covering electrical contracting, shops, etc.
The Electricity Council is the central co-ordinating body for the industry and the Management Services and Manpower Branch of the Industrial Relations Department provides advice to management side negotiators on specialist manpower issues.
The Branch played an important role in the negotiation of a job evaluation scheme for the industry's 30,000 technical engineering staff, who are responsible for the running of generating sets in power stations, installation and maintenance of the distribution network, construction planning, generation and transmission development, etc.
This group of staff is highly qualified and represented by an efficient single industry trade union with over 90 per cent membership.
There were many other important aspects of the overall project, but this paper concentrates on the computing side alone.
It is in no sense a history of the development of the scheme.
Outline of the Scheme
By agreement, these staff had been provisionally allocated to six grades and the job evaluation scheme was to be used to finalise this allocation.
Consideration was given to several different job evaluation schemes and, finally, a points-rated scheme somewhat reminiscent of the Hay-MSL approach was adopted.
This scheme evaluated a post in terms of eight factors.
For example, a typical factor profile might be 32 331 321 with the theoretical maximum (unattainable in practice) being 45 553 553 and the theoretical minimum being 11 111 111.
A score was assigned for a given profile, and computer facilities played a key role in the development of this area.
The scheme uses a set of grade boundaries in order to assign posts to grades.
With only six grades for such a large group of staff, it was not felt sensible, however, to use a system which apparently stated that a post scoring x points was clearly in one grade and yet a post scoring x 5 points was, equally clearly, in a different grade (all possible scores were multiples of 5 and the range of possible scores was approximately 135 to 1500).
The scheme, therefore, made use of the concepts of "grey areas" and "core areas" .
The core areas are the ranges of points which define the grades, with any post falling within a grey area being assigned the appropriate grade.
Grey areas are the (much smaller) ranges of points between the core areas, and any post falling in a grey area retains its current grade (at least initially).
It was in negotiations concerning these core and grey areas that the major use of computers was made.
Scheme Development
A series of studies was made, under joint management and staff side auspices, of some 700 posts throughout the industry.
The first use of the computer was to assist in selecting the sample by analysing the percentage of jobs by location, function and grade.
After lengthy discussions, agreements were reached on the assessments (of the eight factors) for each of these posts.
The information collected on each post studied was: reference number, employing board, location, current grade, job family, job title, factor assessments 1 to 8.
These data were stored on the large IBM installation of the Central Electricity Generating Board in London, and an "in house" written data base handling language, INFSYS, was used to marshall the data.
Early in the development of the scheme, one of the main areas of debate was the question of the scores to be assigned to a particular factor profile.
At issue were the relative weights attached to the factors and also the progression of scores within a given factor, which together determine the score for a given assessment.
The availability of computer facilities permitted investigation of a large number of options in this area.
The posts could be sorted, for example, on the basis of the scores implied by any set of factor weightings and the resultant ranking, then examined taking into account views on the relative importance of posts and also the then current gradings.
Judgements about the acceptability of a given ranking were clearly to some degree subjective, but the computer provided a fast and accurate analysis of the effects of different options.
As the assessments were received, the aid of the computer was also enlisted to ensure that they were consistent.
They were monitored to ensure that similar posts received similar assessments and also that they were "sensible" bearing in mind the position of various jobs within their hierarchies.
Negotiations
Once agreement had been reached on these questions, the negotiations centred on the key issue of grade boundaries, i.e. the translation o job scores into grades.
In order to be able to evaluate any proposals accurately, management instituted a "Read-off" exercise.
This consisted of "reading off" , against the benchmarks established in the study, broad descriptions of posts (or groups of similar posts) to arrive at an assessment.
This was done for all posts in the industry and the data were computerised in a similar manner to that undertaken for the study posts.
Data on the key properties of posts, namely current grade, total score, job family (function) and location, were extracted from the mainframe based data sets and stored on a desk top computer system based on Tektronix 4050 series graphics machines.
The use of these machines permitted rapid analyses and allowed complete security and availability of data.
This approach (as opposed to relying on remote link via a telephone line) made it possible to provide interactive analyses during negotiation meetings.
The advantages of having such detailed and reliable advice available immediately  need hardly be stressed.
Negotiating proposals were, obviously, in the form of a suggested set of grade boundaries.
Naturally, one of the key issues was the effect of a particular set of grade boundaries in terms of percentage "upgrading" and "downgrading" .
There was also a general desire to achieve a reasonable spread of changes across the grades in order to minimise the disruption of established hierarchies.
Thus a program was written which, given a suggested set of grade boundaries, would evaluate their effects in terms of:(i) the numbers of staff by "before" and "after" grade;(ii) the overall percentage upgrading and downgrading;(iii) the percentage changes by grade (that is the percentage of staff in each "before" grade who are upgraded, who remain the same grade and who are downgraded).
This information was available for any chosen data set.
That is, information could be produced for the entire Read-off, all posts in a particular employing location, all posts in a given function, etc.
These analyses, being based on the desk top machines, were available instantaneously during negotiations.
The ability to break down the analysis by location and function enabled assessments to be made of the likely organisational consequences of a given set of boundaries as well as the effect on the overall and grade specific grading changes.
A second analysis program for interactive use was written to provide cost estimates.
This program requested from the user assumptions on wastage and recruitment patterns, as well as the grade specific rates of upgrading produced by the evaluation program.
The output produced consisted of the cost of implementing the proposed grade boundaries in the first year together with estimates of the cost in forthcoming years.
The advantages of immediate estimates of the consequences of any proposed set of grade boundaries, in terms of changes in grade numbers both overall and by function and location, and in terms of the likely cost over the forthcoming years, are obvious and considerable.
There are, however, other less obvious advantages.
The fast response time enabled negotiations to be concluded more quickly than might otherwise have been the case.
Negotiations dragging on where there is apparently little separating the two sides (quite likely in the case of job evaluation where a five point difference in a grade boundary might represent hundreds of posts) can lead to accusations of bad faith and a potentially dangerous deterioration in the general climate of industrial relations.
Conclusions and Further Developments
Clearly, an important long term objective for any large organisation should be the production of a comprehensive negotiating suite, capable of forecasting the cost of any "standard" agreement, shorter work week, x per cent on basic pay, y per cent on differentials, reduction of retirement age, changes in shift premiums, call out payments, etc.
To produce such an all embracing package would obviously be a task of considerable magnitude from the technical side alone.
But this may not be the most difficult part of the exercise.
It is necessary to win over the negotiators to the idea of using such a computer model, and resistance is likely to focus on the idea that negotiating is a matter of judgement and cannot be mechanised.
As in so many computer applications, particularly in the personnel field, it is necessary to make it clear that the technology is an aid to managerial judgement and not a replacement for it.
In the case of the job evaluation exercise this was achieved by  producing a program whose function was to "translate" a proposed set of grade boundaries into consequences quoted in the same terms as those in which the management's negotiating aims were couched: costs, grade changes, etc.
The judgement on whether the consequences were acceptable was clearly left to the negotiators: all that had been done was to remove the uncertainty as to what the consequences would be given a set of grade boundaries, not to state whether any set of consequences was acceptable.
It is important to point out that the department did not go into this exercise "cold" .
A reputation had been built up over several years for the use of computers in the fields of manpower planning, personnel statistics and other industrial relations applications.
Job evaluation, however, was an ideal application for the use of interactive computing during negotiations in that:(i) the issues were clear cut and technical (no elements of pure judgement, such as the value of a cooperation clause, were present, for example);(ii) several different facets of the outcome were important (grade specific rates of upgrading being relevant, not merely the overall upgrading figure; the effect on individual formations, not just the overall position) making manual calculations particularly slow and cumbersome.
Many organisations will have important "one-off" industrial relations issues arising from time to time which are suitable for a similar approach.
A complete reorganisation of a grading structure is one, a claim for early retirement is perhaps another.
Such an issue provides an opportunity for the technical people to gain valuable experience before considering whether to tackle the more comprehensive negotiating model.
It can also introduce to the management the idea of direct support from computer systems during negotiations, making acceptance of a more fundamental package easier.
4.3 Computers In Negotiation
by David Lowe Manager, Employee Relations Planning
and Howard Griffin Operational Research Officer
British Airways
This presentation will be based on the following outline and will include a number of practical demonstrations.
Introduction
1.
British Airways' use of computers in managing staff.
2.
Need for sophisticated planning in negotiations.
3.
Three parts to presentation: a) The Industrial Relations Environment and Specification b) The Technical Computer Solution c) Demonstration and Questions
Industrial Relations Environment and Specification
4.
Background of Civil Air Transport National Joint Council 11 National Sectional Panels or Bargaining Units.
5.
Industrial Relations Environment.
6.
Complexities of Pay Structures/Different Settlement Dates.
7.
Need to cost all possible settlement options for negotiating year and financial year in order to contain total cost within ability of company to pay.
8.
Problems of defining the data base.
9.
Restructuring of pay scales.
The Technical Computer System
10.
The Data Base.
11.
On-line Use.
12.
User friendly Programs.
13.
Costing Function.
14.
Restructuring.
Demonstration
15.
On-line VDU connected to British Airways DEC10 computer should be  available to demonstrate this set of programmes.
16.
Technical and personal questions.
4.4 Controlling Manpower Levels
by Horace Weedon Manpower Planning and Personnel Systems Manager
and Philip Mepstead Manager Personnel Systems Development and Planning
Rolls-Royce Limited
Rolls-Royce Limited designs and manufactures gas turbine engines for aeronautical/marine and industrial use.
It employs about 50,000 people.
The company operates at factories in Bristol, Coventry, in and around Derby, Glasgow and at Leavesden near Watford.
There are smaller plants at other locations, and offices in London.
In addition there are a number of overseas locations but these operate autonomously.
The parent company as it now exists was formed in the late 1960's by a merging of several aero engine manufacturers.
Each separate constituent part of the organisation had developed its own personnel information systems and methods of operation.
Following the merger the requirement to report to a common base was established and Horace Weedon and Philip Mepstead will outline briefly how that was achieved and then demonstrate how this information base can be used to aid the control of manpower levels.
The company perceived the need for two types of Computerised Personnel Information System, the first being an IMS database system covering all aspects of personnel administration.
The second and perhaps more complicated system was designed with the capability to respond to the "what if" type of question.
Here the approach has been through the use of APL (pioneered originally in the Derby factories in the mid 705).
Output from these programs will form the basis for discussion.
Introduction
We realise that we may be attempting to put a quart into the proverbial pint pot.
This is because we believe the many aspects of manpower control essential in today's climate cannot be covered in detail in a relatively short presentation.
We were therefore left with two alternatives, to concentrate on particular aspects of "Manpower Control" using very few slides, or alternatively deal briefly with the many aspects of this topic in order to demonstrate the potential of the system available to us.
We felt this latter course more appropriate for this particular occasion.
Rolls-Royce Limited designs and manufactures engines for aeronautical, marine and industrial use.
It is one of only three major aero-engine manufacturers in the West, the others being General Electric and Pratt & Whitney of America.
The company employs some 55,000 people worldwide.
In this country we employ 50,000 people in a number of locations.
The systems we will talk about today cover all of these UK facilities, pinpointed in figure 1.
The parent company, as it now exists, was formed through a series of mergers in the late 1960s.
It was not surprising to find that each part of the organisation had developed its own method of personnel operation and had created personnel systems to support these.
For a number of years after the mergers little was done to harmonise either practices or systems.
It was not until 1978 that a feasibility study was undertaken on the possible application of a Company Personnel System.
Early Systems
In Bristol and Coventry three years prior to this, a decision had been taken to replace a batch personnel system with an on-line internally developed IMS package, covering recruitment, personnel administration/records, training and management information.
By 1978 work was well advanced and parts of the system were actually up and running.
In what was at that time the "Derby Group" , work had continued on the enhancement of batch payroll systems and the addition of other "cheap" batch systems for specific application — for example, training records, job evaluation, staff search.
In Derby itself a decision had also been taken in 1975 to look at the use of APL for providing management information via on-line access of any of the personnel files available.
In 1978 the preferred option for the "Company system" was to take the Bristol system (PARIS II) and apply it across the parent company.
On investigation many problems were identified, including the following:(1) PARIS II was written in COBOL.
Only Bristol/Coventry use COBOL; the other areas of the Company program in PLI.
(2) The system was specific and a lot of re-programming would be required to make it work elsewhere.
(3) Resources were extremely limited — full implementation at Bristol was several years away — if applied across the company it could have been ten years from design to implementation.
Because of(1) re-programming would need to have been carried out in Bristol.
It seemed it would have been ill advised to follow the PARIS II route — costs would have been astronomical and timescales unrealistic.
Instead, it was agreed that we would begin by harmonising coding standards for personnel so that data on the major fields of interest would be coded in the same way by all personnel systems across the company.
This has of course been a gradual process but has achieved results (see figure 2).
Introduction of New Systems
In 1980 Derby bought the APL software packages ADI (A Data Interface) and ADRS (A Departmental Reporting System) for use against existing files.
These are fairly generalised packages and a lot of work has been done in personnel on enhancing ADI in particular to make it more attractive as a Personnel Information System.
This work has consisted of adding graphics, providing a much improved statistics capability, salary modelling facilities and, more recently, the examination of its use for manpower modelling.
It was quite apparent in Derby that what was required for personnel was perhaps two systems not one — an administrative system (IMS based) and a management information system (APL based).
The Derby APL facilities were extensively demonstrated to all other areas of the company and the Derby view  was quickly endorsed by all the other groups.
As a result of this, the PARIS II Management Information segment was cancelled and APL adopted; this enabled the final implementation of PARIS II to be brought forward.
Derby and Scotland agreed on the specification for an IMS administrative system PIROS (after looking at and rejecting the available packages).
PIROS is essentially a simplified version of PARIS II designed to be much more general and thus more readily suited for use over a variety of locations.
It is scheduled for full implementation during 1983.
By the end of 1983 the company will be using either PIROS or PARIS II for personnel administration (as in figure 1), and for site management information each area is currently using, and will continue to use, APL.
The work we have been doing on the standardisation of company codes has started to pay dividends.
We are able to take extracts of data from each of our systems, transmit the extract to Derby and then join the extracts together to produce a company file.
A decision to go ahead with this approach to the formation of a company file was taken in January this year and the initial test files became available during April.
We can access this file on-line, again using APL.
Control by Personnel Staff
In adopting this approach we have created a company information system relatively quickly at very little cost.
Virtually the whole process has been controlled by Personnel staff thus freeing us from many of the conventional DP constraints.
We write our own programs.
We do not have to specify what it is we want to any analyst who in turn specifies it to a programmer who then writes a program.
It is the output from the management information system to which we now wish to turn, with particular reference to how we use it to control and monitor manpower levels.
Our central company file contains skeleton records on all employees (as in figure 3).
More detailed records on each employee will be held for access via each site's own APL system (Figure 4).
It is our intention to provide a high level service for planning work using the central system.
What is important to us is that all the areas will now use the same software for interrogation purposes, and as we develop new enhancements, details are released to all other areas.
For the discussion today we are using examples that have come from a test version of the Derby files.
Head Counts
In common with most organisations we have a requirement placed on us to provide a head count at periodic intervals.
In our case we produce a return every four weeks — the Company Manpower Report (see for, example, figure 5).
As you can see this goes into quite a high degree of detail.
Until about four years ago the return was produced by hand (and its equivalents still are in some areas), a time consuming and laborious job.
The breakdown of departments into functional areas is unfortunately subject to frequent change, making computerisation of the return difficult.
The program would require maintenance at very regular intervals.
We decided to write "modular" APL programs to produce the return.
By using APL we can alter the programs from our own  office as changes become necessary.
This has brought considerable benefits to us; a return that took weeks to produce now takes a matter of minutes.
The programs we use to produce it have been developed and improved over the last few years.
One of our next aims is to extend this facility to produce the company report.
The return does, of course, produce largely high level numbers.
What we need to be able to do is to get inside them to really see what is happening.
Taking a specific population, in this case the engineering function, we first produce an age histogram, as in figure 6, together with a brief range of statistics.
As you can see from the details on the bottom of figure 6, the system produces the information quickly at relatively low cost.
Going on from these analyses, we can next look at the same population in terms of combinations of age and service.
The system allows us to establish ranges of values for fields and then codes the data accordingly.
In this instance we have used five-year steps for both age and service, coming up with a result as in figure 7.
We could of course add percentage to this output perhaps making things stand out more, as in figure 8.
At this stage it is perhaps useful to start going into a finer degree of detail.
Let us look now at the number of designers due for retirement between 1982–1992 (see figure 9).
We could next look at the numbers of designers who have left the company over the previous 12 months by reasons for leaving (figure 10).
Alternatively, we could generate crude annual wastage rates based on any given period (figure 11).
We can take data out of our files using AD! and then feed them into manpower models (the models themselves should soon also be AD!).
The program used to produce the above charts — with the exception of the manpower report — are all used with AD!.
We still continue to use normal APL programs for some of our applications.
Again, looking at wastage we can produce reports by area for all of the company by broad occupational category.
Voluntary Redundancy
A topic of interest to many companies at present is voluntary redundancy.
Rolls-Royce is no exception here, and we have written some APL programs, first to calculate an employee's severance terms (see figure 12) and then further programs to monitor their effectiveness.
We have done this by monitoring our population by age/service and monitoring employees offered severance terms and their reactions to them.
This has enabled us to construct and continually update probability tables on the acceptability of our terms — we are able to estimate very accurately the number who will leave as we extend our offers.
Controlling Expenditure
Controlling manpower, of course, extends beyond controlling sheer numbers; it also covers controlling expenditure.
For our pay rounds we now create APL programs to model the types of offers we may make to enable us to assess the costs and effectiveness of different strategies (as in figure 13).
We can analyse remuneration policies between different areas, again using ADI, or look at increases by employee or group over time.
The package not discussed so far is ADRS.
This we have used to construct and  maintain a database of management job evaluation results.
The system operates autonomously but we can link it and our other ADI systems to produce information like correlations between Hay/MSL points and salaries paid.
In all, we have developed a very flexible system capable of responding to virtually any question of the kinds we have illustrated at very short notice.
The beauty of what we have is that even if some of the programs we currently possess will not provide the sort of answer we want, we can always write one that will.
We have the ability to monitor and control our manpower extremely efficiently be it in terms of numbers, pay or potential or whatever.
Section 5 — Software, Packages and Systems
Section Chairman: David Fairbairn Director, National Computing Centre
5.1 — Low-cost Computerised Personnel Records for Medium-Sized Companies
by Dudley Morgan Group Personnel Executive SGB Group plc
The SGB Group — with 5,000 employees in various size units throughout Britain — has developed a fast and flexible computerised personnel records system used by personnel management.
Dudley Morgan describes how the Group has done so by building on its DP experience and resources in other applications — particularly payroll —and by identifying the practical information needs of personnel management.
He shows how the system has been developed, and can be developed further.
In 1971 the management of SGB Group decided that there was a need for more detailed and (perhaps more important) more up-to-date information on the composition and pay profile of its workforce.
Clearly, the computer provided the ideal way to process the mass of information contained in personnel records in offices and depots all over the United Kingdom.
But it was equally evident that traditional approaches to the computerisation of personnel records was too complex, laborious and expensive.
At the time SGB Group had some 5,000 employees distributed in units ranging from one or two persons to several hundred.
The Group was — and is —involved principally in providing service and sales to the construction industry with its traditional brisk rate of labour turnover, although individual companies within the Group varied greatly in size and composition.
The Problems Facing Personnel Management
Compiling an elaborate data base or investing in systems akin to those of very large companies or the Civil Service would clearly be uneconomic and unjustified for a medium size group.
Yet the need to harness the ability of the computer to monitor a dynamic situation far faster than is possible with manual methods was as pressing for SGB, with a Group payroll at the time approaching £13 million, as for the very large organisation able to make substantial investment in computerised personnel records.
In the early seventies the first indications were already apparent that inflation might increase sharply, although we had not yet reached such runaway rates as 30 per cent.
The development of the Group was obviously going to depend upon the capacity of management to monitor current, not historical, trends.
This meant much detailed work, such as keeping track of the relative sizes of the workforces and payrolls of each operating company, the ratios of hourly, weekly and monthly employees, and frequent monitoring of the way these and other factors were changing.
It was important, for instance, to know how the salary profile of Company A or the age profile of Division B had altered over a particular period.
The need to combine accuracy with flexibility in any system was paramount in SGB, for changes in the data to be processed were often swift and sweeping.
This need arose not merely because of switches in statutory and other economic factors outside the control of the Group, but because the Group needed to develop the ability to expand, amalgamate, contract or transfer  depots quickly in response to changing market demand.
Such, then, were the problems facing personnel management: the need to harness the ability of the computer was recognised, but there appeared to be no orthodox route to this end which was also cost-effective.
The Key Questions
The solution was found by looking inwards at the character and operations of our own Group rather than outwards at the way other organisations had approached the problem, and then asking two questions.
The questions were: 1.
What modules of data were already available as building blocks for computer programs without a major investment in new software? 2.
Assuming it was impractical to produce immediately a system which would do everything that personnel management wanted, which were the most important factors?
At this stage SGB Group already had some 12 years' experience in processing by computer its main business systems.
These included stock control, invoicing, trading statements, accounting, salaries and wages.
DP Support
Personnel management could thus draw upon a wealth of experience, a skilled data processing staff and the fact that there already existed a library of programs although none of them were designed to access or process personnel records.
In formulating answers to the two basic questions, one factor was paramount.
Since virtually everyone working for the Group in Britain was paid by computer, the most reliable and immediate source of data would be found in the existing salary and wages software.
The aim was to improve on the situation inbuilt in manual systems whereby information is sampled at intervals and may be several weeks out of date by the time it has been assembled.
To carry out even that form of monitoring would have required the full-time work of two clerks.
But the chief aim was to construct what was in some ways an analogue of the dynamics of the personnel situation which could be watched almost while it moved.
Existing Payroll System
SGB management, seeking the easiest and cheapest methods, decided not to assemble or store new data but to use what was already in the payroll system and manipulate it by means of— initially — a single additional program specially written for the purpose.
This avoided the usual data capture problems, and although the amount of data was less than ideal (ie there were no job titles, qualifications, addresses etc) the accuracy was likely to be of a high order.
Particular attention was given to the ability to assemble the data in a wide variety of different ways.
The information available through the payroll was: name man number payroll number (hourly, weekly, monthly) depot number birth date date of joining salary company division department marital status date left At a later date indicators were added for: membership of pension scheme savings scheme part-timers address job title It became apparent immediately that quite a lot could be done with a good program.
For a start, it enabled Personnel Department to answer rapidly simple enquiries such as have we got a man named Bloggs working for us?
But it was capable of far more sophisticated applications, giving swift updating of average salaries and enabling Personnel Management to compare one company within the Group with another.
It was possible, for instance, to find out how many married women or single men the Group employed, and establish whether they were paid hourly, weekly or monthly.
The results of such diagnostic inquiries could be separated into individual companies or divisions within companies, or depots within divisions.
Average ages and lengths of service could be updated progressively by accessing data from new payroll runs.
Arithmetic functions were used to add, subtract, divide, multiply, find standard deviations, mean squares, variance and select the highest and lowest values.
Such a program provided Personnel Management with the ability to manipulate data already stored in the payroll system.
But the processing capability is in itself, no matter how good the program, only half the benefit; the other half is derived from being able to get the answers when they are wanted and not have to wait for them.
Speed and Flexibility
SGB's approach to computerised personnel records therefore incorporated from the start a facility to interrogate the Group computer (initially an ICL 1300, later an ICL 1904E and currently a Burroughs 6700 system) by means of a visual display unit on the desk of the Personnel Manager.
The need for hard copy was met at first by initiating, via the VDU keyboard, an instruction to print remotely in the Data Processing Centre.
Today, a miniprinter in the Personnel Office not only saves laborious inter-departmental walks but is also more economic.
The final result is a system which, although it does not contain all the data one would wish, has speed and flexibility.
Personnel Management can access information for any part of the Group, making instant comparisons on salaries, ages and so forth.
If a field manager in, say, Scotland, phones SGB Group headquarters in Mitcham with a personnel query, the Personnel Manager can have a printout of the personal details of all the employees involved while the conversation is taking place.
The SGB Group Personnel Executive, as a part of his job, has to maintain contact with the Group's locations — there are some hundreds of them in Britain alone — by frequent travelling.
Before leaving his desk the computer supplies a printout of each location to be visited showing the individual name, job title, man number, depot number, hourly/weekly/monthly paid, age, birth date, service, joining date, marital status, salary or wage, total numbers by payroll and average salary or wage.
Further Developments
To obtain maximum benefit, any such system has to be reviewed and developed.
One such development currently taking place at Mitcham concerns an historical file to store personnel events for up to five years.
One example of the use of historical information is to find out the rate of increase in wage costs relative to different job categories or different companies or different geographical locations.
A further refinement, now being studied and the logical sequel to the success already achieved, is to develop job identification in the system.
It is hoped to use the Institute of Manpower Studies in this field.
Measurable Benefits
The cost at the time the system was developed was estimated at about the same as the salary of one personnel officer — for one year — without the costs of an office, car or secretary that the officer would need.
Any personnel manager who has three or four square feet of desk space can install the equipment.
Connection is by ordinary telephone lines via moderns.
For SGB's Personnel Department, the benefits are measurable.
1.
It provides far greater control of the personnel situation — the extra efficiency derived from the availability of up-to-date information instantly.
2.
The information is also available confidentially and the risk has ended of starting unfounded rumours by initiating enquiries from line management which might be misinterpreted.
Today the dialogue is exclusively with the computer, which cannot start rumours.
It is also private and secure as access to the system is by carefully controlled passwords.
3.
Adoption of this system has not only avoided the need to employ at least two clerical assistants.
It has avoided the need to invest in time and paper systems, such as monthly reports which would otherwise be required to keep in touch with personnel developments.
The most significant of these time-and-material savings, perhaps, is that line management are freed from forms and paper work they would otherwise have to complete.
4.
The great convenience of the system has an added benefit for the Personnel Manager, as use of the VDU and printout has a rehearsal effect aiding memory recall each time data are accessed.
The Manager using the system is constantly face to face with data and this increases his knowledge of the company and its personnel.
5.
Costs tend to decrease as expertise in accessing data develops.
The amount of computer time needed to obtain answers to inquiries falls and with it the time that has to be paid for.
6.
The system can be stretched by adding additional functions later, such as the job identification program.
At a later stage a job/salary grading program may be added, and qualifications and experience.
This, of course, does mean that new data have to be gathered.
Building Up the System
An intervals the system can be increased by a further analytical, statistical or informational function, capable of processing information which might otherwise need an additional personnel assistant to maintain.
The cost would probably be about one year's salary of such an assistant, but it does not recur.
As soon as one person's work has been built into the computer, it stays there and goes on working for as long as needed.
Finally, it is possible to take all this with you when you travel.
Terminals are available of an attache case size.
You can plug these into an ordinary 13 amp socket at your remotest depot and call up the computer, no matter how far away, via the normal GPO telephone system.
Thus it is possible to start quite modestly and gradually build a really powerful system, while staff and overheads remain low (possibly not expanding at all) and knowledge and information multiply.
5.2 The Integration of Personnel and Payroll Systems
by Richard Wheeler and Christopher Hennings Group Personnel Division The Wellcome Foundation Ltd
The Wellcome Foundation Limited owes its origins to the formation of the partnership Burroughs Wellcome Co in 1880.
The business interests of the group were consolidated in 1924 under the name of The Wellcome Foundation Limited and the Company aims of today still correspond very closely to those of its founders, namely the discovery, development, manufacture and sale of products to promote the health and hygiene of man and animals.
Since the death of Sir Henry Wellcome in 1936, the company has been wholly owned by the Wellcome Trust, a registered charity which distributes all profits it receives for the support of medical and allied research in universities and hospitals throughout the world.
The Wellcome Group has subsidiaries in 36 countries and in total employs around 18,000 people.
The Payroll Personnel system is, however, solely concerned with UK employees with the exception of a small number of expatriates who are paid through the UK payroll.
Wellcome UK currently has eight main sites, namely Dartford, Beckenham, London, Berkhamsted, Crewe, Royton, Pirbright and Kelvindale in Glasgow.
The system controls personnel records and administrates payroll at each of these sites.
The numbers employed are about 6,800, ranging from 2,500 at Dartford, which is the Group's major production site, 1,500 at the Wellcome Research Laboratories, Beckenham, to about 130 at Pirbright, Surrey, where further research programmes are carried out.
The system also administrates and pays about 1,700 pensioners from the Wellcome Group Pension Fund.
Personnel and Payroll Systems 1960–1980
The Wellcome Foundation Limited has always attached particular importance to the well being of its employees.
This concern has traditionally been associated with both a sensitivity within the organisation towards personnel issues and a responsiveness on the part of the personnel function to new opportunities for developing the service provided to the company.
From the early 60's, while most company operations still relied on manual systems, the payrolls for several sites were processed centrally at Dartford using an ICL 1202 processor.
This machine used valves rather than transistors or microchips and required input in the form of punched cards.
Accounting and some stock control applications were also provided.
In order to keep pace with growing demand for services, by the end of the 60's hardware has been upgraded to include first one and then a second ICL 1900 series processor.
Scientific applications and various developments to production planning systems were added and the Computer Services Division was formed as part of the Finance Directorate.
The 70's were a period of considerable change in several areas.
A series of Acts of Parliament concerned with employment, labour relations, discrimination, health and safety gave rise to the need for substantial developments in the recording of payroll and personnel information.
This need arose either through specific statutory requirements or alternatively through management's growing need for up-to-date, accurate information about company manpower.
Furthermore, the very frequency of legislative change caused a higher premium to be placed on the flexibility of any computer system.
In addition to legislation, two other significant effects gave rise to the need for the Wellcome Foundation to adopt a more detailed and subtle approach to meeting the dynamic manpower requirements of the business system.
Firstly, the 70's was a period of considerable world wide corporate growth and, secondly, economic recession associated with structural change in the UK economy focused attention on manpower as a priority area in terms of productivity and cost control.
The initial response to this situation came in 1971.
Decimalisation meant that a major revision of the payroll system was needed and the limited time scales involved resulted in the acquisition and implementation of a payroll package called "COMPAY" .
This was operated on the ICL 1900 processor.
At this time the Personnel Information System Department was formed within the Personnel Directorate and the evolution of a Personnel Information System began.
(The current organisation of the Personnel Directorate is shown in figure 1; the organisation of the Finance and Personnel Directorates prior to the database system is illustrated in figure 2).
Initially, the system simply extracted various details from the weekly and monthly payroll files, in order to generate management information.
However, this was soon extended by using spare areas on the payroll files for personnel information and maintaining wholly separate data files containing information on absence and leavers.
Although much of its data was derived from the payroll system, the Personnel System operated separately (see figure 3).
Payroll details were the responsibility of the site wages offices or the salaries department at Euston Road, while personnel information was the responsibility of the site personnel records departments.
Data were collected from the relevant site departments, transcribed onto coding forms and sent to Dartford for punching onto paper tape.
The paper tape was then used to input the data either to update the personnel files or to update payroll files prior to the weekly or monthly payroll sequences.
Output was printed at Dartford for distribution to the various sites, although subsequently both input and output facilities were made available at Crewe and Berkhamsted.
There were three major disadvantages with this arrangement.
First, the operation of the two systems gave rise both to the duplication of effort and data and more importantly to considerable discrepancies between the details of an individual held on the two systems.
Secondly, by the mid-70's the payroll system could no longer be easily enhanced to accommodate new requirements.
Furthermore, dependence upon the payroll system had become a critical limitation to the development of personnel information for which there was an increasing management requirement.
Thirdly, the growth of computerisation within the organisation allied to the advent of newer technologies meant that the ICL 1900 series computers were being phased out and needed to be replaced with systems which would meet company needs through the 1980's.
A major review of company computer strategy began in 1975 and resulted in two key decisions.
Owing to uncertainty about the new ICL 2900 series systems, the decision was made to convert to IBM equipment and software.
Furthermore, an assessment of the company's future requirements for information processing indicated that new systems should provide the facility for online updating of records and access to information to replace the existing asynchronous batch processing facilities.
Batch processing in the case of the personnel system could in some areas lead to information being up to two months out of date.
Databases and Database Management Systems, the results of RED programmes started in the mid-60's, were now commercially available.
In particular, the IBM Database Management System (IMS) offered not only the advantages of a single unique data store with considerable flexibility as regards the future development of management information systems, but also the facility for on-line update and enquiry.
It was therefore decided that this database technology should provide the basis for future computerisation.
Since the introduction of the first IBM 370 series processor in the late 70's, there has been a rapid growth in computerisation.
Currently the main installation at Dartford comprises three IBM central processors supporting some 350 terminals located throughout the UK.
In addition, there is substantial use of mini or micro computers, word processors and other information processing or communication services.
An IBM 30335 processor is used to support the main company database systems, including the Payroll/Personnel system, operating IMS under MVS.
During the day users are responsible for inputting their own data, while at night this machine runs commercial batch work.
To complement the database operation of the 3033, an IBM 4341 processor provides a wide range of computer processing facilities and interfaces with other systems to the terminal user, via the time sharing service, running CMS under VM370.
This service is largely used for the development and operation of highly flexible management information systems rather than standard data processing work.
The third processor, an IBM 3031, is used by the Computer Services Division for development work and is shortly to be replaced by a second 4341 processor.
Although hardware developments have been significant, it is the development of new software and the associated administration systems which have had the greatest impact on the organisation, particularly so in the case of the Payroll/Personnel System.
Work began in early 1978 on the problems associated with replacing the existing Payroll and Personnel Systems which were run on the ICL computer with a single integrated system to be run on the new IBM processors.
The Payroll/Personnel Database System Design
Along with other major applications within the company, the new Payroll/Personnel System was to be designed and developed using on-line database techniques, in particular the IBM database/data communications management system, IMS.
The objectives for the system were:(i) To design a "tailor made" computer system.
(ii) To have for each employee a single computer record containing all personnel and payroll details held on a central database.
(iii) That each site would be responsible for the accuracy of its own employees' data and to this end input would be via local VDU's from each site and output would be displayed or printed locally at each main site.
(iv) To have a unique, unchanging staff number for every employee.
(v) To improve on information shown to employees via the payslip and to provide more comprehensive payroll controls.
(vi) To provide a payroll/personnel enquiry facility for ad hoc information.
Special requirements of the system were:(i) Flexibility — to cater for changes in requirements of legislation.
(ii) Ease of use.
(iii) Information quality, eg up-to-date and accurate.
(iv) Security and confidentiality to be of the highest level due to the sensitivity of the information.
With the introduction of such a large development, obviously extensive changes were going to be likely, not only in computer terms, but also in the administration of payroll and personnel records and in the organisational requirements for the new system.
To facilitate this, a Steering Committee was set up consisting of senior members of the relevant departments to oversee the development and decide or recommend courses of action on major policy areas.
Reporting to the Steering Committee was a working party which dealt with the overall management of the project and acted as a direct liaison between computer staff, payroll staff and personnel staff.
Probably the most radical of the recommendations of the Steering Committee was to propose a complete integration of the payroll and personnel functions within the organisation.
At this time, the payroll activity, with the exception of salaries and the London weekly payroll, was within the Finance Directorate reporting to site accountants whilst personnel was within the Personnel Directorate and reporting to Site Personnel Managers (see figure 2).
After lengthy discussions at the highest level it was decided that because of the confidentiality of the information, and since most of the authorization procedures were already within the personnel function, the responsibility for the new system should be vested within Personnel.
To this end Payroll/Personnel administration departments were set up reporting to the Site Personnel Managers.
The one exception was at Dartford where the Payroll/Personnel Administration Department reported to a central Payroll Manager.
This Manager was a member of Group Personnel and had a central function overseeing the future development and maintenance of the system (eg, administering global changes; end of year tax information) as well as providing Dartford Site Services (see figures 4 and 5 for the resulting organisation).
System overview
The major principles of the system design were as follows:(i) Each employee would have a single record held on the database containing all current information and, for some items, historical data.
(ii) An employee number would be generated by the system consisting of a unique 5 digit staff number followed by a check digit.
(iii) Data were to be input by Payroll/Personnel Administration Departments at each site using VDU's.
(iv) The data were to be taken from source documents, thus avoiding transcription and the possible errors associated with that task.
(v) Where relevant, input was to be submitted in batches and batch control totals were to be checked against the input.
Update of the record in  this case would be overnight.
(vi) Permanent data were to be validated against the employee record at time of input and either rejected or a warning issued if the data were either invalid or dubious.
Update of the record in this case would be immediate.
(vii) Output would be printed at the site of origin.
(viii) Each site could only access its own employees' records.
The system was to be protected by two levels of security.
First, security generated by the system programs would ensure that only recognised users could access certain elements of the data within the system.
Secondly, the Wellcome Security Sub-System would control the operator identity passwords and ensure that:(a) an operator could only enter a system from a particular logical terminal; and (b) that the operator could only access the system — and, indeed, programs — for which he/she was authorised.
System Security
System Description
Having logged onto the Payroll/Personnel System, the system as designed offered the operator a choice of options from a standard menu screen.
These options generally split into three categories:(1) Enquiry upon an employee's record (no update allowed).
(2) Update of an individual employee's record (updated immediately).
(3) Batch input screens (eg absence and overtime) where more than one employee's information could be updated using the same input screen (updated overnight).
Options to enquire or amend an employee's record could be executed either directly by entering the employee's unique staff number, or via a secondary index by entering the employee's name code.
The namecode is the first 5 digits of the surname, 2 initials and M or F depending on sex.
If the staff number was entered, the first screen displayed would be the Personnel Data screen.
If the namecode was entered then either the Personnel Data screen would be displayed, if only one employee matched the namecode, or a selection screen showing the name, department, date of joining and staff number of those employees with that particular namecode.
The correct staff number could then be entered directly from this selection screen to display the desired employee's Personal Data screen.
The difference between the two options, enquiry and amend, to the user was that the amend option highlighted colons on each screen after each item of data which could be amended.
Additionally, certain screens could only be accessed through the enquiry option because the data displayed could not, and should not, be directly amended.
Examples of this are Pay History and Absence and Overtime History.
The batch screen options could be displayed by entering a week ending date.
Input for absence, overtime, payroll exceptions and temporary upgradings are generally made using this method.
The batch screens retained all of the controls that would normally be associated with traditional batch entry, namely batch headers and batch control totals.
In addition, certain other validation checks could be made on-line, namely the validation of a week ending date and staff number (check -digit verification).
A major advantage of this type of input was that these basic validation checks were made at input time and any errors detected were displayed back to the operator immediately, thus allowing corrections to be made quickly.
Any batch failing the checks would not be forwarded for update until corrected.
One very special option not yet mentioned is the starter option.
This option enables the operator to enter employee details in as much detail as available before the employee actually starts.
This is achieved by the operation of a "confirmed starter" marker.
When accessing this option from the menu screen, the system generates an employee staff number and displays a blank Personal Data screen.
One of the fields on this screen is the confirmed starter marker.
This is automatically set to "N" for No.
Employee details can then be entered onto the Personal Data screen and all subsequent screens, but the system will not allow the confirmed starter marker to be changed to "Y" (Yes) until all the information required to pay the employee is present.
This includes name, date of birth, date of joining (must be current), pension details, bank details (if paid by BACS or Credit Transfer), grade, hours, salary, organisation code and cost centre.
Each of these items is, of course, subject to individual validation checks.
System Input and Display Screens
A list of screens available is shown in figure 6.
The following section describes in outline the major screens of interest and highlights any special feature present.
Personal Data Screen
This screen contains most of the general payroll and personnel information about the employee, including such obvious items as name, sex, marital status, National Insurance number, date joined, date of birth, date joined pension fund, department, pay, grade, hours, job title.
Some more interesting fields are: confirmed starter which we have discussed; pay schedule code which contains the allowable levels of pay for the grade; shift code which contains the shift pattern; leave date which is entered for a leaver — if the employee retires then a date of retirement is entered instead — and reason for leaving code.
All codes entered on the system are checked against a master file called the Codefile.
The Codefile is, in fact, a separate database and therefore can contain much information to be used both in validation and payroll.
For example, the pay schedule code contains all the rates of pay and hours of work allowed for a particular grade and will therefore act as a validation check when grade, hours and pay are entered.
Shift code, on the other hand, contains the actual shift pattern and rates, and is used in the actual calculation of pay for that employee.
Pay, grade, hours and job title are displayed on the Personal Data Screen, but are, in fact, first entered on the system on the next screen which is the Salary Job History Screen.
Salary Job History Screen
Entered on this screen is the job code, reason for change of information code, salary, grade, hours, cost centre, organisation code, monthly, weekly, hourly paid and an effective date of change.
The current history line is the driving force of the payroll and is subject to very high validation checks.
As mentioned earlier, pay, hours and grade are validated against the pay schedule entered on the previous screen.
Job code and cost centre are also checked against the Codefile and cost centre file.
The company organisation code tells the site, directorate and department, and is checked against the Codefile.
The site code (first digit of the organisation code) is, in fact, part of the security of the system and determines whether or not an operator can access this record because each operator can only look at his/her own site's records unless designated otherwise.
One side effect of this site security mechanism is that if an employee transfers between sites, all that needs to be done by the transferring site records department is to change the site code to the new site.
This automatically transfers the total record (including rights of access) to the new site.
The key to the information held on this screen is the effective date of change.
This need not be a current date and therefore future changes can be made in advance.
Similarly, history lines can be amended which is particularly useful in the case of retrospective pay awards, because if the correct "reason for change" code is used, the system will in these cases calculate back pay including shift and other allowances due.
Absence and Absence History Screens
Each employee has the current year and previous year's absence held in detail.
This is a complete record held in half days showing the type of absence and the date it occurred.
Additionally, for the last five years a history is kept aggregating the number of days absence by type of absence.
One feature of the absence screens is that sick pay and absence entitlements are displayed.
If entitlements are exceeded, the system will issue the relevant warning message and stop pay.
Overtime and Overtime History Screens
As for absence, there is a detailed record showing the current year's information and a five-year history in aggregate form.
Markers and Codes Screen
This screen contains codified information, some of which is used in the payroll production such as pay type (ie cash, credit transfer), and bank account details.
Examples of other codes held are contract type, company car details, loans or advances, etc.
In addition, each site has the facility to set up codes of its own for local use.
As before, each code is validated against the Codefile.
Tax Screen, National Insurance Screen and Pay History Screen
The Tax and National Insurance Screens hold all the tax and National Insurance details used in the calculation of the payroll.
The Pay History Screen holds a detailed record of the employee's payments to date showing each element of pay separately — in effect, the make-up of the employee's pay.
Allowances and Deductions Screens
Codified details, start date and actual amounts are entered onto the screen.
The codes are again validated against the Codefile.
The system uses this information to calculate pay and prints the description of the allowance or deduction (as held on the Codefile) on the payslip.
Similarly, as with much codified information, the description is decoded onto the screen as well, to allow the operator to check that the correct code has been used.
For certain fixed term or fixed amount allowances or deductions, eg repayment of a loan, the system will automatically stop the allowance or deduction when the term or  amount has expired.
Memoranda Screen
This screen allows diary notes to be put against an employee's record.
Some are generated automatically, eg retirement date and follow up interview dates.
These notes, if required, can be printed in a report showing the next month's memoranda details or, if confidential, can be held but not printed.
Occupational Hazards Screen
This screen holds details of the types of processes that an employee may have worked on.
Other Screens
Other screens are largely self explanatory and so will not be discussed in detail.
These are: Address (permanent/temporary) of employee and next of kin.
Overseas Travel.
Overseas Allowances History.
Qualifications and Institute memberships Training record.
It can be seen, therefore, that the system holds a great deal of information, both personnel details and pay details, and is completely integrated.
The payroll is calculated using the permanent data stored on the employee record as well as temporary information, such as payroll exceptions, temporary upgradings, etc. from a holding file made up of the input from the batch screens.
Once the payroll has been run the temporary data become "permanent" in so far as they become part of the employee's history information and, accordingly, the employee's record is updated.
The system itself does not differentiate between different types of employee, ie current staff, leavers, pensioners, and as each employee has a unique staff number a complete history is available for all staff who have worked in the company.
Eventually, leaver information will be dropped onto magnetic tapes when the database becomes too large.
The payroll, needless to say however, only calculates pay for current staff and pensioners, which tends to increase the accuracy of input, particularly of leavers (to ensure non payment) which in many non-integrated systems is a particular problem area.
Were the objectives and special requirement achieved?
Basically speaking, the objectives set for the system have been achieved, but like all other systems the achievement of those objectives brought with it other problems.
The biggest single problem area was in the provision of an on-line enquiry facility for ad hoc information requirements.
The initial response was to use an IBM enquiry system called GIS.
This, however, proved to be wholly inappropriate for Wellcome's needs, largely due to the fact that GIS had a big effect on the system response times and that the amount of report formatting which was required proved to be unmanageable for on-line GIS.
Wellcome therefore adopted a different approach to meet this problem and developed a separate management information system using extracts from the address.
The MIS is discussed later in this paper.
In order to meet all the requirements of the payroll a large amount of support  was necessary, particularly from the Computer Services Division, even after the system had gone "live" .
This meant that fine tuning of the system in many areas, particularly on the personnel side, had to be held in abeyance until the payroll was running smoothly.
The system generally has been found very easy to use.
Organisationally, the working of both payroll and personnel records has been very useful in providing an efficient administrative service.
For example, queries on absence or overtime can be pinpointed immediately and problems answered very quickly, whereas before it quite often required considerable co-operation between Finance and Personnel.
The system has proved to be flexible thus enabling enhancements to be made — enhancements which quite often could not have been thought of at the initial design stage, since the concept of an integrated payroll and personnel function was very much new ground.
The quality of information is of a much higher standard than ever before.
Consequently, managers are gaining confidence in management information provided to them, though, of course, this is a slow process and an evolving one.
The main advantage of the integrated database is, of course, that payroll and personnel information is always "in step" which allows for a consistency not achieved in the past.
The security of the system has proved to be sound and no problems have occurred in its resilience, integrity or privacy.
Needless to say, associated with all the benefits have been costs.
Most of the costs, however, were probably due to the fact that the system is by any standard very sophisticated and large.
This meant a heavy involvement at senior management level and a heavy workload for both the Computer Services Division and the new Payroll/Personnel Departments in order to implement and operate a system which had such a radical effect on the organisation and administration of payroll and personnel records.
It must also be remembered that the computer installation was new in that the company had only recently "gone" IBM.
Also, on-line input and databases were new, particularly to payroll and personnel.
As well as the qualitative benefits brought about by greater accuracy and timeliness of information, the efficiency of the system meant that it was possible for the integration of the personnel records and wages departments to be achieved with a 40 per cent reduction in staff, natural wastage and redeployment within the organisation accounting for some 20 individuals.
What must be appreciated, however, is that the system is still fairly new and still evolving and only recently has the full potential of the database approach in general, and the integrated payroll personnel system specifically, been realised to anything like its full extent.
The Personnel Management Information System
Leading up to the introduction of the Payroll/Personnel database, the personnel information system, despite various limitations, had developed to a considerable degree of sophistication.
A wide range of basic lists, statistical information and management control reports was produced.
Manpower forecasting systems were developed as were systems to support pay negotiations and the implementation of salary reviews.
The failure of the GIS language to operate efficiently as an on-line database enquiry facility initially precluded local site personnel departments from  producing their own information.
In response to this situation the Group Personnel Information Services Department developed a set of batch GIS enquiries which, run overnight, generated specific extracts of the database in an appropriate structure for the generation of management information under the timesharing service (see figure 5).
Accordingly, many of the programs in use prior to the introduction of the database were amended to run against the new datafiles.
One immediate advantage of this arrangement was the ability to control the point in time at which datafiles were extracted from the database.
This is important because while an online facility enables the database to record information about a highly dynamic process, management information is more often related to a fixed point in time or a precisely controlled period.
From this time, although the accuracy and timeliness of information dramatically improved, in addition to the availability of new data items and historical information, it was  nonetheless recognised that the potential of the database went largely untapped.
The need to develop this potential is recognised by the Group Personnel Information Services Department which currently performs several roles.
The department produces a wide range of reports relating to aspects of company manpower.
These range from simple audit listings to complex systems for monitoring absence and overtime.
Having developed the framework for central co-ordination, the range of time sharing services made available to group or site departments now extends considerably beyond the facilities offered by GIS for the autonomous generation of information.
These systems are maintained and developed centrally either in response to a new business requirement or in order to make new facilities available to the non-specialised user.
Major personnel projects are supported by the formation of teams within the department, responsible for meeting information needs associated with the project as they arise.
The annual terms and conditions review provides a good example.
Information facilities are applied throughout the review ranging from interactive modelling of the effects of wage awards on company pay structure, through the collection of performance information and the derivation of new payments for each employee, to the eventual production, via a word processor interface, of a personalised letter informing each individual of his or her new salary.
As well as recording, developing and applying new processing facilities, such as graphics or word processing, within the framework of the personnel information system, the Group Personnel Information Services Department has a responsibility to advise on and co-ordinate developments to the Payroll/Personnel database itself.
The need for developments of this type can originate outside the company as in the cases of self certification of sickness, EEC regulations regarding health and safety or the proposed legislation on privacy and data protection.
Development can also originate inside the organisation from a desire to increase operating efficiency through the integration of existing company systems.
Administration of the company pension fund is now computerised and fully integrated with the database.
Training records, staff development systems, the creation of a job database and the possibility of automatic data collection and access control systems linked directly to the database are under investigation, and major projects to integrate elements of the Payroll/Personnel system with both the company general ledger system on the one hand and occupational and environmental health records on the other, are currently in existence.
It is in this area of development that the advantages of a central corporate database become most apparent.
A fundamental database concept is that data should "model the real world" as accurately as possible.
All business activity is  related either explicitly in terms of the way in which functions are organised or  implicitly by the business system.
The single database approach to corporate information provides the potential to relate data about business activities and to describe and analyse a particular aspect of the business system regardless of whether or not that aspect is already functionally formalised within the organisation.
The management information system is therefore highly resilient to changing management needs.
This resilience and flexibility of the system means that developments to meet the seemingly unrelated needs of different parts of the organisation may be viewed as a single process of continuing evolution.
This in turn implies that a more wholistic view of the business system is available to those areas of management seeking to adapt company operations to the prevailing market conditions.
Furthermore, it is possible to raise the effectiveness of individual departments by ensuring that information used in one part of the organisation is entirely consistent with all other information (concerning the business system) in use with other departments.
The Future
While discussion of a corporate information system is as yet largely speculative, our experience of the Payroll/Personnel database system over the last three years has given rise to various working  hypotheses of relevance to management in general and the personnel function in particular.
Organisations involve the juxtaposition of co-operative and competitive processes.
The balancing of these conflicting influences is an essential function of management.
The current business environment gives rise to unparalleled demands for flexible and dynamic management of the business in response to economic or legislative change.
In this situation, new information technologies represent a vast potential for understanding and facilitating necessary change within an organisation.
But while the interaction of company information systems can lead to a consistent view of company operations and so encourage co-operation, the effects of change on individuals can lead to the most severe conflict.
The limiting factor in terms of future developments is not technology itself but the creative insight with which applications of technology are developed and a sensitivity towards the needs and concerns of the individuals affected.
The requirements for new skills, changing roles and management styles, the erosion of traditional functional boundaries and the needs for training and staff development will give rise to conflict and accordingly focus attention on the role of the personnel function as a mediator.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to expect that there will be an increasing demand from management in general for personnel information to support specific operational problems.
Balancing the dissemination of personnel skills and techniques will be the need for personnel professionals to develop a more detailed awareness of the needs, activities and challenges facing all parts of the organisation.
Finally, if we are to imagine an organisation in which information is widely diffused, where the members of that organisation are aware of both the volume of data held about them and the decision making processes based on that information which affect them, then two factors are essential.
First, management decision making must take account of the responsibilities inherent in the access and use of information.
Secondly, those individuals affected as a result of the decision making process must be able to trust the competence and integrity of the decision makers.
5.3 The Power of Software
by Max Dobres Marketing Manager Comshare Limited
Powerful software exists which can greatly simplify the task of implementing and using computer systems.
Classifying software according to whether it is machine or user orientated, it is possible to identify those types of software which will best suit personnel systems.
By applying a set of pragmatic guidelines to software choice a clearer picture of the more attractive options emerges.
Application packages and command driven data management systems are two attractive approaches — the choice between then depending mainly on whether the user wants an instant solution or a tailored system.
Max Dobres uses examples of command driven data management software being used for personnel systems to demonstrate the power users should expect from well designed software.
Introduction
The power of software should not be measured in terms of technical efficiency or elegance of design.
Rather, the true power of software lies in its ability to allow the user to achieve his objectives with minimal constraints and without undue effort.
Currently there is a bewildering variety of software available and my first task will be to suggest a simple classification.
The next step will be to draw up a set of criteria which personnel users new to computing, or the experienced user representing their interests, can use to make a sensible choice.
For most personnel systems this will lead to a simple choice between two types of software which I shall illustrate.
Classifying Software
The perspective taken in this paper is that of the end user.
No apologies are made for suggesting a classification system which grossly simplifies differences between software and ignores some types but which should prove useful to new users.
The classification is shown in figure 1.
Different types of software have been placed on a continuum from machine orientated to user orientated.
Starting at the computer end we have machine code.
(There is in some machines a lower level called microcode but this need not concern us here.)
In machine code, one instruction corresponds directly to one of the fundamental operations which are hardwired into the computer.
Machine code is tedious to write but is the foundation on which all other software systems sit.
Many instructions are required just to specify that two numbers be divided.
This code is machine specific; that is, it will run only on the type of computer for which it was written.
Assembler is less computer orientated than machine code.
An assembler instruction will correspond to a frequently performed operation and represents many machine code instructions.
Like machine code, assembler is computer specific.
It is used in applications where technical efficiency and speed of  operation are important.
Above assembler are the high level languages with such familiar names as COBOL, FORTRAN, ALGOL and BASIC.
The languages define higher level functions and operations.
There are standards associated with these languages so that in theory a program written for one type of computer will run on another.
The translation from a general language to the machine specific is performed by a compiler or interpreter.
From here on, the continuum becomes less clear.
Rather than attempt an exhaustive classification of all remaining types of software, two important classes will be considered, data management systems and application packages.
All the languages considered so far are highly flexible; they can be used to write almost any type of computer system.
The price that is paid for flexibility is complexity.
Such languages require considerable knowledge, skill and experience to use effectively.
Application packages are at the other end of the spectrum.
They are pieces of software which have been written to perform a particular function.
While certain aspects of their operation can be varied, they are essentially fixed.
The advantage of such systems is their reliability and speed of implementation but they are usually difficult to modify.
The term "data management system" is used to cover a wide range of different systems, but all provide a method for structuring data and facilities for adding, changing, deleting and reporting which are separated from the data.
The database represents a repository of information together with facilities for data manipulation.
The positions of data management systems on the machine-user spectrum vary: some have complicated procedures for defining and modifying data structures and use programming languages for performing most processing.
These types are intended to provide a structured and secure environment for data addressed by many different programs.
As such they are programmers' aids and not intended for the user unfamiliar with computing.
However, there is a class of data management systems where all operations are initiated by simple commands.
As we shall see later, these command driven data management systems offer an attractive opt ion to those users who do not want a packaged solution.
They allow data structures to be set up easily and then to be changed as experience is gained in operating the system.
Their command driven report writers provide a quick and flexible way of getting information out of the system.
Choosing Software
Classifying software allows the user to make sense of the different types of software which are available and to recognise the type of software that will best suit his/her needs.
This will still leave a wide choice of systems and it is important to take the correct perspective when making the final choice.
The user should not assess a piece of software solely on technical merits.
It is more important for him to be satisfied that it will serve its purpose once installed.
Only the user can make this decision; here are some simple guidelines which should help: Before even considering which computer to buy or whether to use a bureau, it is important to define precisely what the system must do.
Start with the minimal requirements.
The best way is to draw examples of all reports to be produced by the system.
From this it is possible to define what information is to be stored and therefore what the updating requirements will be.
a Understand the problem
Example reports will be very useful later when assessing software suppliers' claims.
b Accept Responsibility
Only the user can assess whether a system is working properly.
He must take full responsibility for making sure his requirements are met.
Third parties may provide technical advice but the responsibility must stay with the user.
c Start Simple
Installing any new computer system can be a traumatic experience.
At the design stage it is easy to be over ambitious.
Successful systems, particularly new ones, only include those things that are vital.
d Insist on Demonstrations
Demonstrations are the only way of testing out claims made for software systems and ensuring that the system supplied is the one that was specified.
e Examine the Impact of Changes
No matter how thorough the initial investigation, some aspect of the system will change between the initial study and installation.
Find out how easy it is to make changes after the system is implemented, in particular, to add new items of information (ie new fields), add and change reports and modify processing.
f Ignore the Hardware
The success of an application will depend almost entirely on the software.
The hardware is just a means of allowing it to perform.
The ideal approach is to choose the software to fit the application and then buy the hardware it needs or subscribe to the appropriate bureau.
Because hardware is tangible, it is easy to place too much emphasis on it when choosing systems.
The cost of hardware is often small when compared with the real cost of software which includes not only the purchase cost but also the staff time of the organisation in which it is to be installed.
For this reason, bureau x are often attractive to new users.
g Examine the Documentation
Documentation will be the main source of information about the system once the suppliers have installed it.
Read the first few pages and flick through the rest.
If it is difficult to understand now, it will not be any easier when the system is installed.
Documentation is also a useful guide to the perspective of the supplier.
Well produced, clearly laid out documentation that makes few sweeping assumptions about the user indicates that the supplier has thought about who will be using  the system.
Documentation that describes the system from a technical point of view may indicate a technically orientated supplier who may find it difficult to appreciate the needs of his users.
h What Support is Available?
Who will help when a problem occurs that the user cannot solve?
If possible ask to meet the person who will provide the support.
How much of this support is included in the software price?
Like documentation, a good training course will pre-empt many problems and indicates that the supplier has thought about the needs of the user.
If the supplier suggests that the manual is self explanatory and no training is required, be very sceptical.
i Is there Training?
Nearly all software is now described as user friendly, flexible, easy to use, reliable and English-like.
These are all relative terms.
Remember that buying software is like buying the emperor's new clothes.
There is little to see, and users must make up their own minds on whether it covers their needs, rather than relying on the opinions of others.
Two Alternatives
It is up to each user to decide which type of software will best meet his needs.
However, because many personnel users are new to computing, and because they may be uncertain of their needs, two particular approaches are likely to be the most satisfactory.
These are application packages and command driven data management systems.
In different ways — and for different reasons — these two approaches make the software work for the user.
1 Application Packages
Packages will be attractive if it is important to make use of an existing computer or if a quick and simple solution is required and users are willing to tolerate restrictions.
Packages provide a ready made solution, as long as users have carefully checked that the system will meet their basic needs.
If extensions and enhancements are required, they will probably have to wait until the system is replaced.
Nevertheless, for a new user a package can provide a useful way of getting experience with computerised systems quickly.
2 Command Driven Data Management Systems
A command driven data management system allows the user to evolve a system under his own control.
It is possible to start off with the simplest possible system with a few reports and then add to it as new requirements are uncovered.
As will be demonstrated, these systems have been designed to be operated by users with little or no experience of computing.
The power of these systems to manage themselves and simplify the interface with users comes from the large amount of computer power which they use.
Currently such systems are available only on larger in-house computers and on bureaux.
However, the dramatic reduction in processing costs which are occurring makes it likely that systems of this power will soon be more widely available.
To demonstrate how powerful software can be, here are some examples from different aspects of personnel systems: record administration, reporting, and  analysis.
These examples are illustrated using a Comshare command driven data management system called QUESTOR.
Record Administration
Keeping records of personnel, updating them and reporting on this information is the foundation of any personnel system.
To define the data to be held in a system like QUESTOR the user types the following commands: CREATE SET EMPLOYEES INCLUDE EMP.NO(1), NAME(A20), DEPT(A10)…
In such systems the software is managing itself.
This command tells it to set up a storage area called Employees and to allocate space for Employee Number, Name, Department and any other items specified.
This rudimentary system is now ready for the user to input data.
Adding data does not require special programs to be written.
In its simplest form the user can type: ADD TO EMPLOYEES!
The system knows what data is held on Employees and, therefore, what information it needs.
The user is prompted for this information line by line: EMP.NO: 123 NAME: JONES DEPT: FINANCE (The computer requests are shown underlined).
Powerful software should only ask for information it needs.
No matter how carefully systems are designed, there will always be a need to make changes as the needs of organisations change.
Software should be written to recognise this and allow changes to be made as simply as possible.
The most common change to the basic structure of a system is to add a new item of information.
To do this in QUESTOR the user types: RETRIEVE FROM EMPLOYEES TO EMPLOYEESNEW INCLUDE ALL, HOMETEL(A10)!
Here a new item, Home Telephone Number, has been added to the database.
It is almost inevitable that changes such as these will need to be made during the life of a system.
Good software gives you the power to change your mind.
Other facilities for changing, deleting and processing data are also provided.
A record of changes to items such as salary, job and grades is an important part of any record administration system.
Good software will provide facilities for automatic audit trails to be kept.
Reporting
The reason for storing data and keeping it up to date is to provide information to managers for decisions.
This usually means providing reports.
While it is possible to specify many reports when the system is first designed, their number and content change frequently.
Indeed, if the system has been  well designed and is well run, it should stimulate demand for more and different types of information.
It must be possible for users to change existing reports, quickly and easily, and produce new ones.
This applies both to standard reports that may be added to a report library to be called off on demand and to ad hoc reports that are produced to answer a special request.
Requirements of this sort mean that any system must incorporate a report writer which is intelligible to ordinary users.
Good software should allow the user to provide the minimum of information about what is required and get something useful in return.
It should then be possible to add to this minimal definition more closely to define what is to be done.
For example, the QUESTOR command: PRINT FROM EMP INCLUDE NAME, BIRTHDATE! tells the system to print a list of employees' names and birthdates.
The system assumes that you mean all employees.
More specific information can be given to tell the system to include only those employees from a particular grade, to specify how the information should be sorted, whether any totalling is required and to give a title.
For example: PRINT FROM EMP INC NAME, SEX, SALARY FOR GRADE LT 3 SORT ON /SALARY/ SUM SALARY TITLE "HIGHER SALARY BANDS" A list of other options exists to allow the user to subsection a report, specify page lengths, perform calculations and so on .
But because such systems are modular, much can be done with simple commands.
Good software encourages and supports learning by providing a simple entry level.
Simple commands have been used to set up a recording system, add data to it, change its structure and produce reports.
While it would be possible to restrict the use of some of these functions to particular staff, all are within the comprehension of the first time user.
But personnel systems do not stop with record keeping and reporting.
These principles of simplicity, flexibility and ease of use can be extended to analysis and modelling.
Analysis and Modelling
Again it should be possible to get basic information from the system with little effort.
So a command like: ANALYSE SALARY, AGE can give basic information such as minimum, maximum and average values of salary and age.
Tables, histograms and graphs can be produced just as easily.
A crosstabulation of Age by Salary showing the numbers at each age in particular salary bands is possible with a command like: CROSSTAB AGE, SALARY and a graph showing the same information is produced by typing: GRAPH AGE VS SALARY Similarly, modelling systems exist to allow the users to explore the effects of changes on their organisations.
These can be manpower modelling systems which are concerned with the number and type of people at different levels in the organisation or at different stages of their careers or with some other manpower dimension.
Where money rather than people is the primary concern, financial modelling techniques can be used.
And, of course, it is possible to model systems using a mixture of resource types.
Because modelling is more complex in concept than simpler analysis or record keeping, it is even more important that the software used is powerful enough to look after itself and not burden the user with computing problems.
This paper started by classifying software and proposing some simple guidelines to try to aid users, particularly new users, identify helpful and appropriate software systems.
The examples from the Questor data management system were designed to demonstrate just how simple computing can be if users take advantage of the powerful software that is available.
Users have to ensure that the software works for them and they do not end up working for the software.
Software systems exist which can make the life of potential users a lot easier.
All they have to do is to hold out against substandard systems and apply pragmatic criteria in the face of technical jargon.
Conclusion
5.4 Small Machines — Microcomputers and Word Processors
by Peter Watsham The Computer Shop Group
In this paper, Peter Watsham describes a range of personnel activities which lend themselves to computer assistance, examines the role of small machines in relation to these, and presents an appraisal of what is currently available.
Several years' experience of manpower planning work in large organisations (Rolls-Royce and the NHS) led to the conviction that microcomputers could provide the best solution to many of the problems encountered.
In 1980 he moved to the computer industry to develop the use of microcomputers in the personnel field.
In order to identify the scope for computer use, let us consider the tasks involved in a fairly large company's centralised recruitment of a number of graduates and their subsequent employment.
Although this precise example may not be directly relevant to many of us, we should all be able to identify with at least some of its elements 1.
The details relating to the vacancies must be established.
Job descriptions, advertisements, fact sheets about the posts, about the conditions of employment and about the company, profiles of the qualifications and other personal attributes required must all be produced.
2.
Applications must be processed Assuming that the company requires a range of different skills, the applications must be divided into groups according to their suitability for the different posts Some applicants may appear in more than one group, in which case some account will need to be taken of their preferences Managers involved in the selection process must choose those to be invited for initial interview.
3.
Arrangements for interviews must be made.
This will involve the sending of rejection letters or invitations to interview detailing time, place and other arrangements.
Details must be sent to interviewing panels References may need to be taken up.
4.
Interviews must be followed up.
It is possible that there will be more than one round of interviews, but this simply introduces the repetition of some of the above activities The verdicts of interviewing panels must be recorded and where necessary reconciled with the preferences of applicants Offers of employment must be sent out including contracts Once these (or alternatives) have been accepted, rejection letters will be sent out.
Statistics may be required for future reference concerning such aspects as the response to different forms of advertising and a profile of those rejected 5.
New staff having been appointed, it is necessary to obtain certain information about them which was not contained on their application form — eg. National Insurance number and PAVE details Personnel files will be established containing information relating to their current position in the company, personal circumstances and background, qualifications and career history.
Records of attendance, holidays, and sickness will usually be kept.
Much of the data held will be required by different parts of the company — eg payroll, pensions and line management.
These files will need constant maintenance as staff progress within the company.
6.
Staff will probably move to different positions in the company and will ultimately leave for any of a number of reasons Information about such movements is particularly important in the assessment of personnel policies especially those relating to recruitment, training and deployment.
It will therefore be wise to record details of job changes and about leavers No doubt there are gaps in my scenario, but the range of activity I have described provides ample scope for the beneficial use of computers, so let us see how they can be used In doing so I shall make particular reference to the value of microcomputers.
Microcomputers are often described as personal computers In fact it can be quite helpful to think of them in this way when considering the differences between them and mainframe or minicomputers Usually microcomputers are used by only one person at a time; for example, a personnel manager might have one on his desk top which he uses to examine trends in recruitment.
Unlike the large computers, they deal with one job at a time.
Moreover, the equipment that sits on the manager's desk is all that is required — the computer's intelligence is housed within the one unit.
A complete microcomputer system will generally comprise: i) the computer/processor itself, with a large amount of memory a workspace for storing instructions and data; ii) a screen and keyboard; iii) probably a printer; iv) some kind of external storage device — usually disk drives There is one major difference between microcomputers and other larger computers It concerns the way in which information is stored by the computer.
Mainframe and minicomputers have data storage facilities which are remote from the majority of suppliers and users of the data They can be stored on magnetic material, often in the form of tape (much as music can be held on magnetic tape) These tapes are held centrally and are frequently accessible to many users.
Even if access to data is restricted through the use of passwords when calling it up from the computer, it is often felt that data are not secure and confidentiality may be breached.
Microcomputers on the other hand generally use local storage on floppy disks.
These are simple small disks made out of magnetic material which are small enough to be carried in a briefcase.
Once the microcomputer has been switched off the data is only available from one or the disks — it is no longer in the computer's memory.
Thus confidential data can be stored on such a disk and the user of this data can physically remove it, even take it home with him if he so desires, thereby ensuring that the information cannot be seen by any unauthorised persons This control over sensitive data coupled with the fact that the computer is personal to one user at a time gives the operator a greater sense of confidence in, and control over, the machine he is using.
Let us now return to consider the kind of assistance one might expect from computers in relation to the particular areas of personnel work referred to earlier.
Two main kinds of activity recur throughout this work: 1.
the preparation of quite large amounts of text (letters, job descriptions, contracts) with a considerable amount of repetition of common material; 2. the creation and maintenance of files containing a mass of details about people and their subsequent analysis to provide information in a wide variety of forms for many different purposes Both these activities can be considerably simplified and streamlined using computers Word processing systems are eminently suited to the first.
Without digressing into the subject of word processing in itself, which would probably require a paper all of its own, suffice it to say that word processing programs on computer enable letters and any other documents to be created, corrected if necessary, then stored on disk or tape ready for printing or alteration at a later data In this example a general letter inviting a candidate to interview could be drawn up and then only the details specific to each candidate need be added before printing the letter.
This allows the personnel department to produce individual personalised letters efficiently without repetitious typing Another example is the pre-recording of all the elements of contracts of employment.
The preparation of each employee's individual contract then requires only the assembly and printing of the relevant components, modified as necessary.
The second kind of activity is handled by what are generally called "database management systems" .
There is no need to be put off by the name, for in fact database systems are simply computerised filing cabinets.
A local microcomputer is like a manual record system which can be accessible to all levels of staff.
The great advantages of using a computer lie in its ability to select the records of specific kinds of people very much more quickly than is possible with a manual record system, and to extract and present information required in a wide variety of formats These two applications of a computer not only save a vast amount of time.
They also encourage the use of information which would otherwise have been too inaccessible.
However, the full potential of word processing and database management is not realised until the two are linked.
This enables the computer to take details from its records and to enter them into standard documents.
Once the files and the standard documents have been created the work required to produce finished products (eg. contracts) is cut to a minimum.
It often happens in large computer systems that, because of a lack of local control over the system, there is little confidence that accuracy of data can be guaranteed.
Access to the system is nearly always indirect and therefore slow, and likely to be confined to certain times because of a need to load the payroll or manpower tapes within the computer centre.
In short, the computer system is seen as unreliable, inaccessible, inflexible and therefore largely irrelevant to the needs of local managers Once seen to be irrelevant to local needs, there is little hope of sufficient local commitment to the system to ensure the accuracy of data supplied.
Local managers are likely to cling to their manual systems Of course, there is another side to the coin in comparing manual and computerised systems.
Because of its ability to store and manipulate far more detail than a manual system, a computerised information system is usually capable of providing a much wider range and variety of analyses; without it, certain information will simply not be produced.
Clearly what is required is one unified system which at least matches the manual system for reliability, accessibility and flexibility so that local managers regard it as their primary source of information.
The fundamental design concept of a microcomputer is that it should provide real computing power to tackle the same kinds of task that larger computers handle but in a machine which is almost as easy to use as a calculator and typewriter.
Its ease of use is related to its low cost.
Microcomputers are accessible to individuals at home, to small businesses and to schools This means that the majority of microcomputers are used by people without specialised skills in computing Manufacturers of microcomputers and the writers of programs for them therefore design their products to be simple to use Mainframe and minicomputers, however, are extremely expensive and have always been the preserve of large organisations where specialist staff and trained computer operators are more readily available.
So there has not been the same emphasis on ease of use.
Microcomputers cannot store as much data as the larger computers nor can they process it as quickly.
But it must be said that multi-user computers can be slow at times if a large number of people are all trying to use the computer at once.
They require a lot of maintenance and some may be out of action for up to a day a week on a regular basis.
Microcomputers on the other hand need little maintenance.
Their low cost means that a secretary can have a computer to herself instead of having to compete for time with many other users from other departments in the company.
The user always has access to the machine.
The fact that microcomputers can communicate with larger computers means that data can be prepared on the micro and then sent to the mainframe at a convenient moment.
As a result, microcomputers provide a realistic (and extremely advantageous) alternative to the local managers' manual information system I referred to earlier.
One further dimension to such a system is the possibility of "networking" a number of micros This involves the interconnecting of micros which retain their full power as independent computers but gain the additional ability of communicating with other computers in the network and having access to common files The result is analogous to a minicomputer with a number of terminals but with the big difference that each of the micros has its own processing power instead of sharing that of the mini.
The Personnel Department is involved in the formulation and implementation of policies governing the organisation's dealings with its existing and potential employees Here, too, microcomputers can make a valuable contribution They place in the hands of managers a powerful analytical tool which is available to them at any time.
There are a number of modelling programs suitable for use on microcomputers at a price which is so low that a complete system often costs less than the terminals used merely to communicate with larger computers.
A brief period of training using the manual provided with the program is all that is required for a manager to start developing his own models.
The otherwise lengthy job of constructing models and using them (frequently not even attempted because of the time involved) is made quick and simple.
Nor is such a program limited to manpower analysis For instance, they can work out the consequences of various different levels of pay award.
The appeal of microcomputers is particularly strong for those who have already defined their needs but are faced with the prospect of months (or even years) of delay while waiting for in-house programming resources to be made available.
First there is the choice between a word processor and a microcomputer.
The former will generally be more straightforward to use for word processing but may not have any database management system programs Some word processors do have other programs available but the choice is unlikely to be as great as that relating to one of the popular micros Second.
assuming that you choose to purchase a microcomputer, there is the choice of hardware In practice it is often the selection of software which determines this choice, but there are certain hardware features which are likely to be important.
A screen which will display clearly at least 80 characters per line and lower- as well as upper-case letters, and a full keyboard with a number of special purpose keys will be advisable for word processing A large amount of internal memory, a fast processor and high capacity external storage will be required for database applications, assuming that you have a fairly large number of records to be accommodated.
For both capacity and speed, the use of "fixed" or "hard" disk (as opposed to "floppy" ) provides a significant improvement.
Finally, unless you can afford both, you will probably choose either a fast "daisywheel" printer or one of the new breed of correspondence quality "dot matrix" printers with a high resolution graphics capability — possibly even colour as well for graphical presentation of results Third, the all important choice of software.
There are several good word processing programs and a fair choice of simple modelling/what if…packages, some linking to statistical and plotting programs It is the area of database management that I believe provides the greatest scope for further development.
Again there are several very competent programs available and they would certainly provide considerable advantages over manual systems But they are general purpose in their construction — ie. they were not specifically designed for personnel applications The main deficiency is that the reporting facilities (iQ the way in which information can be presented) do not generally go beyond well formatted listings with totals and subtotals In my view, more advanced numerical analyses are required, especially for factors such as wastage and sickness/absence.
Other database features which I consider important are: i) a proper data function (in order to calculate age and length of service); ii) good sort facilities (so that staffing information can be presented in a variety of different sequences);(iii) good selection facilities (so that staff may be selected according to complicated "if…or…and…" criteria); iv) a "look up table" facility (so that coded data may be entered to save data entry time but full descriptions/interpretations will appear on reports) The provision of a really sophisticated system, comparable to the best mainframe personnel record/manpower information systems, is quite demanding.
The larger users will certainly require a networking and mainframe communications capability.
I believe that the new generation of "16 bit" machines (such as the ACT Sirius 1) will prove to be well capable of meeting these demands If I may be permitted one small advertisement, I do not expect it to be long before I can fulfil my objective of promoting the use of micros in personnel through the marketing of systems developed specifically for this field.
Personnel Activities Amenable to Computer Assistance
Microcomputers — their Elements Features
Use of Computers in Personnel
Problems Associated with Large Computer Systems
Benefits of Microcomputers
Appraisal of Existing Systems
Section 6 — Designing and Implementing a Computerised Personnel Information System (CPIS)
Section Chairman: Trevor Owen Managing Director Remploy Ltd
6.1 — Choosing a CPIS — The Key Issues
by Andrew Brown Personnel Officer
and Keith Brain Systems Analyst
The Parker Pen Company Limited
The Parker Pen company, based at Newhaven in Sussex, employs about 1,000 people on the production and sale of quality writing instruments.
During 1978 it became apparent that the existing methods of storing and handling personnel information were inadequate and in need of urgent review.
A number of key issues — the requirements of the system — were identified.
These were: Accuracy speed Report Compilation Confidentiality Flexibility Cost.
These issues implied that a CPIS should be designed rather than a manual system.
As no suitable package could be purchased at an acceptable cost, it was decided to carry out all systems analysis and programming work in-house.
The method of meeting the key issues, the level of data held, and links with other areas of database are discussed by Andrew Brown and Keith Brain.
Parker is an international company which established its UK base at Newhaven in Sussex in 1946.
From 1946 to the early 1970's Parker expanded steadily.
During the period from the mid-1970's to date, rapid expansion has taken place; the company now has a turnover of about £25m per annum and around 1,000 employees.
These employees are involved in a variety of tasks concerned with the manufacture and sale of writing instruments — together with a variety of administrative support functions.
In order to supply a comprehensive background to our experience with a Computerised Personnel Information System (CPIS) it is important to tell you something of the Personnel and Data Processing functions at Parker.
The Personnel and Training Department was, by comparison with most other companies of similar size, small.
It consisted of a Personnel Manager, two Personnel Officers, a Training Officer and three clerical staff.
It is therefore apparent that labour within the Personnel area was something of a scarce resource!
This factor was a major reason for instituting a CPIS.
The Data Processing Department consisted of about 40 people of whom seven were concerned with Systems Design and Development.
The data processing hardware consisted of a one megabyte IBM 370/138 with 18 Visual Display Units, 8 printers and Redifon Key to Disk data preparation  equipment.
The software included the Environ teleprocessing monitor and Total database.
A mixture of batch and on-line systems was run including most of the standard applications, for example, order processing, sales ledger, purchase ledger, general ledger, payroll, stock recording, inventory planning and control.
Why a Revised System?
Early in 1978 it was decided that it was necessary to review the method of storage and processing of all employee information held within the Personnel Department.
A number of factors led to this decision.
1) The continued growth of the company through the 1970's had stretched the clerical resources within the Personnel Department too far.
It was necessary either to retain the existing records system and recruit an additional member of the clerical team, or to tackle the problem -employee record keeping and reporting — at source, and create a more efficient and appropriate information system.
2) With a larger number of employees we believed that accurate routine manpower information in a number of key areas — such as labour turnover, recruitment, and pay and benefit levels — becomes a still more important issue.
As we wished to maintain effective management of manpower resources it was a requirement.
3) A personnel department is a service department.
As such it should be able to supply manpower statistics and other personnel information quickly in response to line management requests.
We were, however, unable to provide this important service — either because we did not hold appropriate information in an accessible form or, if it was accessible, we did not have sufficient resources to extract it as required.
For example, line management required a list of their staff, showing basic salary, age and other basic information in date of start order in order to aid them during appraisal sessions.
When this information was required across the company it took an estimated two man days to compile.
These resources were never available without displacing other important work.
4) With both routine and ad hoc statistical analyses it is not only speed of presentation of information which counts but also — and more importantly — quality.
Due to the nature of the task, manual analyses of employee records could not guarantee accuracy.
5) Certain specific tasks (eg salary reviews) were particularly difficult and cumbersome to carry out.
An important part of this particular procedure, for example, was the identification of the numbers of people it was proposed to place upon new points of each salary scale, to determine the financial implications and analyse the salary movements within each division of the company and make possible divisional comparisons.
For senior managers to spend hours with calculators carrying out simple arithmetical tasks of this nature was a serious misuse of company resources.
These five areas of concern indicated that an improved and modified manual personnel records system would be inadequate.
Some form of aid — in the form of a computer — was implied.
A working party was set up to investigate further.
The working party, under the chairmanship of the Personnel Manager, consisted of five members drawn from Data Processing (1), Finance (1) and Personnel (3) areas.
Systems Requirements and Objectives
A number of key issues were identified by the working party as essential requirements for Parker's revised Personnel Information System.
They were:
a) Accuracy
We wished to:
(i) obtain a more accurate database;
(ii) ensure that the database was maintained in an up to date state.
These requirements dictate two basic principles of data storage (applicable to manual and computerised systems).
The first principle is that only the minimum amount of data necessary is held or, in other words, only data which will be put to regular constructive use.
For example, when storing information about employees academic qualifications, does one really need to know that a Research Chemist has a CSE in woodwork?
Rather, it is the highest level of qualification held by an employee which is of interest, and therefore any lower level information is superfluous and a burden on the system.
The second principle is that only information which is known to be reasonably accurate and which is capable of being maintained in a reasonably accurate state should be stored within the system.
In other words, no information is better than inaccurate information.
It is for this reason that we decided not to input existing historical information to our CPIS (though historical information would begin to build up from the launch date of the system, so providing an accurate historical background to an individual employee record).
b) Speed
It was required that the system be capable of:
(i) instantly providing up to date information on individual employees.
This was necessary in order to provide the same level of performance as our old manual system where, in order to obtain information on an individual employee, we would simply look at an employee card which was filed in surname order within department;
(ii) providing up to date information on selected groups of employees within 24 hours of a request.
An example of this type of report can be taken from the administration of our employee benefits package.
One item which makes up the package is life assurance — a benefit for which all employees over the age of 18 are eligible.
Once a year the company insurance broker will "shop around" for the best deal.
To do this, he requires information about current employees.
Generally, this will be employees split male/female and then broken down into five-year age bands and the average salary for the age band calculated.
In the past this exercise would take at least three man days and, due to the "five bar gate" method of data collection, was certainly inaccurate.
c) Statistics
We wished to be able to:
(i) quickly produce ad hoc reports on groups of employees;
(ii) provide regular statistical summaries — such as personnel strength, labour turnover reports and annual pay reviews.
d) Confidentiality
It was important that employee information remained secure, and was seen to be so.
The principles for the handling of personnel information defined by the Younger Committee were adopted as a basis for the confidentiality requirements of the system.
The ability of employees outside the Personnel Department to have sight of even the least confidential items of personnel documentation was, at the very minimum, to be retained at the same level as the manual system.
e) Flexibility
It was desirable to be able to link the Personnel Information System with other items of company information — such as payroll, pensions administration, absence and overtime reports, etc.
f) Cost
We wanted to reduce the manual effort required to maintain Personnel records and generate such regular and ad hoc reports and analyses as were required.
It was expected that elimination of the anticipated need to recruit an additional personnel clerk would result in sufficient cost reductions to at least partially cost justify the system.
It was realised that the main benefits of the system would be intangible, ie. increased efficiency, improved service in quality and quantity etc, but it was an aim to achieve a payback of the system development cost within eight years.
It was decided that only a CPIS would meet the requirements imposed by these key issues.
In-House or Package
Consideration was given to the purchase of a CPIS package.
This option, however, was found to be impractical.
In 1978 packages were designed for companies with much larger workforces than our own 1,000 plus employees.
The requirements from such companies for personnel systems varied from our own in both data input requirements and output reports.
For example, there was no real requirement to handle Training or Sickness and Absenteeism recording (although it was not ruled out for the future).
The detailed information about each employee in some systems was too comprehensive for our needs, eg. blood group, christian names of children, date of marriage, trade union name/number (there are no trade unions within the company).
Packages were expensive — in excess of £30,000 in 1982 terms — and in some cases did not offer on-line data entry facilities and were not cost justifiable particularly as all the facilities would not be required.
It was therefore decided to proceed with the design of our own in-house system.
How The Requirements Were Met
The employee records were created on Total database files thus giving us the flexibility to link the information into other systems as required.
A link with the payroll files was soon established.
This link was required for two reasons.
First we decided, for security reasons, not to hold salaries on our CPIS.
However, there would be times when we would need to obtain salary information — for example, during pay reviews.
This information could be obtained from payroll files — accuracy could be assured as salaries are checked carefully each month by the individual employees as they receive their pay slips!
Secondly, for historical reasons we did not hold records of National Insurance numbers on the payroll file (and could not easily add them).
These NI numbers were required each year for the production of P.60's.
By holding NI numbers on our CPIS we were able to obtain a significant saving on labour.
Employee detail records are updated and enquired upon in real time via a single Visual Display Unit in the Personnel Office.
This VDU is the only one in the installation which can access the personnel database.
An employee's details are quickly accessible and the Instant validation of the data input achieved the desired levels of speed and accuracy.
Employee information is maintained within the personnel department thus retaining the necessary degree of confidentiality and security of the data.
An annual employee profile is issued to each employee showing the information held about him/her and giving the employee the opportunity to make known any inaccuracies.
All other enquiries and reports are produced in batch mode.
All reports are produced using the VDU as a security device.
A batch number is assigned by a member of the Personnel staff to the report and a parameter with this batch number is input into the relevant computer program.
Unless the same batch number has also been input into the VDU the program will not produce the report.
A method of information retrieval for ad hoc and regular statistical analysis purposes was of great importance.
The purchase of a software package to achieve this was not cost justifiable and the facilities offered were too sophisticated for our needs.
The problem was resolved by writing our own information retrieval program which met most of the requirements as they then existed and, with much thought being given on the subject, was designed to be flexible enough to cater for the majority of future needs.
On more complex analyses, the concept was to retrieve the information meeting the simpler selection criteria, thus significantly reducing the volume of data to be examined subsequently, then, to extract manually the information meeting the more complicated selection criteria.
The required analyses are scheduled to be produced within 24 hours of the request but the normal elapsed time currently averages two hours.
Specific programs were written to produce regular statistical analyses and as management tools for use during the annual pay review process.
The manager's "clerical" function was therefore eliminated.
The clerical effort in providing personnel information was drastically reduced following the introduction of the CPIS.
This resulted in the budgeted additional Personnel Clerk not being required.
The system could not be fully cost justified on the savings of labour alone.
The intangible benefits of improved service to line management in quantity and quality of personnel information was the major influence on the management.