

NORTHERN IRELAND
THE ASSEMBLY AND THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
June 1973 to March 1975
After the election of 28 June 1973 the Northern Ireland Constitution Act became law on 18 July and the Assembly held its first meeting on the 31st.
This broke up in disorder.
The real work of the Assembly started with its second meeting on 15 October but before that much negotiation took place between the British and Irish governments and representatives of political parties in Northern Ireland.
During this period the idea of a Council of Ireland was repeatedly canvassed in terms of the Westminster White Paper of 20 March 1973.
At the beginning of October, William Whitelaw, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, began to hold regular meetings of certain Unionists, Alliance, and SDLP, in an attempt to find a basis upon which a Northern Ireland Executive could be established.
The Loyalist Coalition, consisting of the Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party led by William Craig and the Democratic Unionist Party led by the Rev. Ian Paisley together with the Anti-White Paper Unionists led by Harry West, refused to take part in the talks.
The Coalition took the view that the Assembly should regard itself as a conference to renegotiate the constitutional settlement embodied in the Constitution Act.
A condition of the setting up of the Executive was that tri-partite talks should be held between the Westminster and Dublin governments and those Northern Ireland parties which were prepared to take part in the Executive.
This meant that the Loyalist Coalition and the Anti-White Paper Unionists would not be invited to take part (though they were invited to address the conference) and they pointed out that this was contrary to Paragraph 112 of the White Paper of 20 March which stated "the Government will invite…the leaders of the elected representatives of Northern Ireland opinion to participate…in a conference…" 
By 21 November agreement on the Executive was reached and its composition was announced at Westminster the next day.
This effectively marked the end of William Whitelaw's service as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and he was succeeded at the beginning of December by Francis Pym.
Disorder took place at the Assembly meetings held before and after the changeover.
The tri-partite conference was held at Sunningdale from Thursday to Sunday 6/9 December.
The main points in the communique which was immediately issued included, a) parallel statements by each government regarding the status of Northern Ireland b) the setting up of a Council of Ireland c) the setting up of a joint committee to consider the creation of a law enforcement area covering the whole island d) consultation on, and coordination of, policing.
Within days steps were taken in the Republic to challenge the Sunningdale proposals since the apparent agreement regarding the statue of Northern Ireland seemed inconsistent with the constitution.
Oliver Napier of the Alliance party thereupon wrote an open letter to the people of the Republic calling their attention to the same matters.
Nevertheless the Northern Ireland Executive was sworn in on 31 December 1973 and took office the following day.
A few days later the Ulster Unionist Council rejected the Sunningdale proposals by 427 votes to 374.
Brian Faulkner thereupon resigned as leader of the Unionist party and this was followed by further resignations.
Harry West was elected leader of the Unionist party on 22 January, 1974.
Though the constitutional case against the Irish government was dismissed in the Dublin High Court the general tenor and legalism of its defence did not seem to be entirely in accord with the spirit of Sunningdale.
This caused Brian Faulkner concern but Republic Ministers continued to discuss ratification of Sunningdale with the Northern Ireland Executive.
On 7 February, after the Executive had been in office for less than six weeks, the Prime Minister, Edward Heath, announced that there would be a UK general election on the 28th.
Although majority opinion in Ulster might have been prepared to let a power sharing Executive show what it could do, the same opinion was not prepared to accept the idea of a Council of Ireland since that could be regarded as a step towards unification of North and South.
The general election therefore became an opportunity for this opinion to make itself felt.
Anti-Sunningdale candidates polled 51% of the votes cast and won eleven out of the twelve seats.
Five of the eleven anti-Sunningdale M.P."
s were elected by a minority vote.
Though the election was carried out by the usual X-vote system which provided scope for tactical voting and complaints about vote splitting, it was generally accepted as a crushing defeat for Sunningdale.
The announcement of the results coincided with publication of  of the judgment in the Supreme Court of the Republic which explained the reasons why on appeal the constitutional case against the government should be dismissed.
Again the point was made that the government of the Republic had not been party to any agreement regarding the status of Northern Ireland.
The combination of the general election and the constitutional judgment caused the Unionists to put further pressure on the Executive to the effect that Sunningdale should not be implemented until there was an alteration in the constitution of the Republic and/or another election was held in Northern Ireland.
While the constitutional case was still sub judice Liam Cosgrave, Prime Minister of the Republic, could not comment on Sunningdale but in the middle of March, after the case had been settled, he made a statement which though it reiterated the terms of the communique gave Unionists no grounds for changing their view that there should be a moratorium on Sunningdale.
On 19 March the Assembly started a series of debates on a motion to reject Sunningdale and the constitutional arrangements which led up to the conference, and there built up a demand from Loyalists that new elections should be held for the Assembly.
The United Ulster Unionist Council (UUUC) had been formed as a coalition of the Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party, the Democratic Unionist Party, and the Unionists led by Harry West.
The UUUC fought the UK general election in February and held a conference at Portrush on 24/26 April to clarify its policy which included a demand for an immediate general election for the Northern Ireland Assembly.
The fourth day of debate on the motion to reject Sunningdale took place on 14 May.
That morning an advertisement appeared in the Belfast News Letter warning that a body which described itself as the Ulster Workers Council would call a general strike if the Assembly approved the Sunningdale agreement.
In spite of this the agreement was approved by 44 votes to 28 and the strike began the same evening.
The chief demand of the strikers was that there should be fresh elections for the Assembly.
By 19 May only one electricity power station was working and a State of Emergency was proclaimed.
The Westminster government refused to negotiate with the strikers and proposed to use the army to maintain essential services.
Harold Wilson caused offence in a broadcast on 26 May in which he referred to supporters of the strike as "spongers" .
The government continued to refuse to talk to the Ulster Workers Council in spite of increasing support for the strike and in consequence the Executive resigned on 28 May.
Since there was no prospect that an Executive could be found which satisfied the "wide acceptance" provisions of Section 2 of the Northern Ireland Constitution Act, the Assembly was prorogued and the strikers returned to work.
The outcome of the strike and its immediate consequences was that for almost the first time many people, including politicians in the Republic, who had previously been unconvinced were now satisfied that the majority of people in Northern Ireland would not accept a united Ireland and wished to have another election before their future was again discussed.
As a result of a two day debate at Westminster and the publication of a White Paper "The Northern Ireland Constitution" the Westminster government decided that a Constitutional Convention should be elected which would make proposals regarding the way in which the people of Northern Ireland themselves wished to be governed.
The government thereby gave up the attempt to impose a solution and admitted that the people of Northern Ireland must be given an opportunity to work out for themselves how they should be governed.
Though it was willing to assist if required the government emphasized that it would play no part in the proceedings of the Convention.
It was however made clear that any proposals made must be acceptable to the people of the United Kingdom as a whole and also to the parliament at Westminster.
The situation was complicated by the fact that a further United Kingdom election was expected some time during the autumn.
This was held on 10 October.
After some manoeuvring in order to reduce the amount of electoral competition and therefore the risk of "splitting the vote" , UUUC won 10 seats for 58% of the votes, that is fewer seats for a greater percentage of the poll than in February.
One seat was lost by UUUC to an independent in Fermanagh and South Tyrone as a consequence of an arrangement by which the anti-Unionist vote was not split between SDLP and Unity.
Only in Mid-Ulster was a UUUC MP returned without a majority of votes.
Sir Robert Lowry the Chief Justice of Northern Ireland was appointed Chairman of the Convention on 22 February 1975, and on 25 March Harold Wilson went to Northern Ireland to announce that the elections for the Constitutional Convention would be held on Thursday 1 May.
THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN
The scene for the election to the Constitutional Convention was formally set by the British Government when it published its White Paper "The Northern Ireland Constitution" (see above page 8) which was almost immediately followed by the passing of the Northern Ireland Act 1974 on 17 July.
The Act applied the provisions for elections to the Assembly to the elections to the Constitutional Convention.
The White Paper and the Act were supplemented by three discussion papers, "Finance and the Economy" in September, 1974, "Constitutional Convention: Procedure" in November, and "Government of Northern Ireland" in February 1975.
Together these give the Convention its terms of reference and some guidance as to how it should set about its task.
Broadly these are to make proposals for a scheme of government for the Province which shall have widespread acceptance within the community and in which the whole community can participate.
The proposals must be acceptable to the people and parliament of the United Kingdom as a whole and because of the land frontier with the Republic of Ireland any political arrangement must recognise and provide for the special relationship between both parts of the island.
Within these limitations the Convention is free, indeed urged, to suggest whatever kind of Constitution it thinks fit.
The principal point made in the first discussion paper on Finance is that the United Kingdom in 1973/74 contributed £313 million towards the support of Northern Ireland services, the equivalent of £200 per annum per head of the population.
The paper on Procedure includes information about three possible precedents, the Irish Convention 1917/18, the Newfoundland Convention 1946/7, and the Australian Constitutional Convention established in 1972.
The paper on the government of Northern Ireland describes the present structure and also reviews experience in three other countries with community problems, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland.
During March the Northern Ireland office drew attention to the discussion papers and issued advertisements which included the following:
It is necessary that the people of Northern Ireland fully appreciate the importance to the community of the Constitutional Convention, and the opportunities it offers to the public and its elected representatives to determine the future of Northern Ireland.
A Convention is not a Parliament or an Assembly
has no government or opposition parties
does not make laws
is not responsible for administering the general services of Northern Ireland.
The sole task of the Convention will be "to consider what provision for the government of Northern Ireland is likely to command the most widespread acceptance throughout the whole community." 
It is important that the people of Northern Ireland take this opportunity to play a major part in deciding the future pattern of government in the area.
The government will play no part in the proceedings.
However Parliament at Westminster, as the sovereign authority in the UK, must have the final say in what arrangements are made for governing Northern Ireland."
The government believes that the Convention offers an opportunity for the people of Northern Ireland to contribute directly and in their own way to the establishing of a joint and stable society in Northern Ireland.
Politicians and political parties for some months prior to the announcement of the date of the election had been making their arrangements for manifestoes and candidates.
The British government appeared to be in no hurry to decide the date of the election, but impatience was sometimes expressed in Northern Ireland.
Spring had been mentioned as a possible time, the timing of the UK referendum on the European Community, and the incidence of Easter, were obviously factors in the situation.
By the time the United Kingdom referendum had been held at the beginning of June 1975, electors in Northern Ireland would have voted seven times in two and a quarter years.
The average interval between polls would have been four and a half months, and the longest interval eight months.
The electorate was expected to be weary of elections and possibly apathetic as well.
The Parties
The Assembly elections of 1973 served as a guide to the Convention elections which was an advantage to the participants which they did not have for the Assembly elections themselves.
Any kind of first occasion always seems more difficult than subsequent occasions and this is no less true of a change in an electoral system than it is of any other kind of change.
Precedents elsewhere and imaginative anticipation can help but experience is better.
All the parties had learnt much from the single transferable vote elections of 1973 and this informed their strategy and tactics in 1975.
In the paragraphs that follow the references to party manifestoes are not intended to do more than to highlight some of the more obvious differences in emphasis.
United Ulster Unionist Council (UUUC)
As has been noted above (page 8), the United Ulster Unionist Council was formed to co-ordinate the efforts of the Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party (VUPP), the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and the Ulster Unionist Council (Un)."
Together they fought the general election of February, 1974 when UUUC candidates secured eleven seats out of twelve for 51% of the votes and also the UK general election of October 1974 when they secured ten seats for 58% of the votes.
The three parties fought the elections for the Constitutional Convention as a coalition with a joint manifesto which-emphasised that Northern Ireland should remain indefinitely as an integral part of the United Kingdom and that power would not be shared with Republicans although that was not an objection to Catholics as such.
Minority representation would be through influential back bench committees.
In January 1975 a Steering Committee was set up to recommend how the coalition should develop its electoral tactics and strategy.
The coalition had regard to-the- mechanics of the single transferable vote and made some attempt to match the number of candidates nominated with the support which those candidates might expect to attract in each constituency.
They were understandably concerned to steer a middle course between over-confidence which might lead to an excessive number of candidates and realism which might have a restrictive effect.
It was part of the general understanding that supporters would be asked to express preferences for all the UUUC candidates in any one constituency.
In Belfast East public voting instructions went further (see below page 14).
UUUC candidates were expected to sign an undertaking to support the coalition in all respects during the  proceedings of the Convention.
James Kilfedder (see below North Down page 16) is apparently the only candidate who refused to sign the undertaking without losing the support of the coalition.
Unionist Party of Northern Ireland (UPNI)
This party was formed by Brian Faulkner after the fall of the Executive in May 1974 and fought two seats in the UK elections of October.
The party manifesto stressed the importance of the link within the UK to the extent that it was of paramount importance that any proposals made by the Constitutional Convention must be fully acceptable to the United Kingdom government and people.
The idea of a Council of Ireland was discarded.
Alliance
The Alliance party contended that both sections of the divided community must be involved in future administration at all levels but acceptance of the state should not preclude practical cooperation between Northern Ireland and the Republic on matters of common concern.
The Constitutional Convention must be made to work but provisions in the Constitution of the Republic of Ireland were a formidable barrier to cooperation.
Northern Ireland Labour Party (NILP)
NILP stressed that a provincial government should allow for fair representation of all shades of opinion.
Departments should be supervised by Committees upon which each party should be represented in proportion to its strength in the Assembly.
Chairmen of Committees should constitute the Executive.
Co-operation with the South was obstructed by the Republic's  territorial claim to the North.
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP)
Power sharing was understandably crucial for SDLP and it proposed that government should be carried out by an Executive with cabinet posts in proportion to party strengths in the Assembly.
Relations with the Republic of Ireland should be institutionalised.
Republican Clubs
The Republican Clubs, which is the name under which Official Sinn Fein fights elections, called for the establishment of a democratic socialist republic for all Ireland.
Other Candidates
Roy Bradford who had been a member of the Executive stood as an Ulster Unionist in East Belfast but without the support of UUUC, and Tom Conaty who was well known as Chairmen of the Central Citizens Defence Committee (CCDC) stood as an Independent in West Belfast and identified himself as a Catholic representative.
Abstention
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland had legalised Sinn Fein in order to allow the Provisional wing to take part in the election but in spite of efforts to persuade them to do so they declined to take part and urged their supporters to stay at home on polling day.
The Irish Republican Socialist party (I RSP), which had been associated with Official Sinn Fein(Republican Clubs), at one time considered the possibility of participating but decided against this shortly after the election was announced.
This meant that Mrs. Bernadette McAliskey (nee Devlin) could not take part though she had earlier indicated that she would stand as a candidate in Mid-Ulster.
Frank McManus who had been MP at Westminster for Fermanagh and South Tyrone until February, 1974 had been selected earlier as a Unity candidate for the Convention elections but after a party meeting just before the close of nominations withdrew his name.
In addition two Catholic clergy Father Denis Faul of Dungannon and Father Raymond Murray of Armagh conducted an independent boycott campaign.
These activities reinforced the general fear that apathy might cause the poll to be unduly low which it was thought would be a greater handicap to SDLP than to other parties.
Republic of Ireland
As part of the Sunningdale agreement the British and Irish governments agreed to take steps whereby offences committed in one part of the island could be brought before the Courts in the other.
The British government introduced the Criminal Jurisdiction Bill in the Lords during January 1975 and, following the announcement of the date of the election for the Convention, the government of the Republic introduced their counterpart Criminal Law (Jurisdiction) Bill at the beginning of April.
This passed through preliminary stages and was debated during the period prior to the date of the election.
It may be that little notice of this was taken in Northern Ireland.
Public Instruction
In 1973 the government ran a considerable campaign to instruct electors how to record their votes under the system of proportional representation, but it was thought that after the experience of two proportional representation elections in 1973 the electorate did not need to be more than reminded of what was required.
A very much smaller advertising campaign was therefore mounted in the press and on commercial television.
The BBC again showed its playlet "PR made clear" .
The two 1973 elections, i.e. for Local Government as well as the Assembly, were held immediately after the advertising campaign and the electorate could concentrate on one method of voting, but since that time two Westminster elections were conducted by means of the X-vote, and it is possible that some voters may have been confused.
There were certainly suggestions that more explanation should have been given and that more discussion should have taken place.
Most newspapers comment however was clear and to the point.
It was noticeable that there was a willingness on the part of quite a number of voters to express as many preferences as there were candidates and the comment was sometimes made that while it was not too difficult to decide which candidates should be given first and early preferences and which candidates should be given last and later preferences it was less easy to decide the order of preference in which the middle range of candidates should be placed.
It is here of course that the precise order in which voters place candidates can have a decisive effect on the destination of the last seat(s).
It is impossible for the voter to know in advance whether it is his ballot paper which is going to contribute to the result of the election in this way but if voters do not express enough preferences then there is a risk that at some stage in the count their vote will become non-transferable and therefore exercise no further influence upon the result.
THE ELECTION RESULTS
It was clear that UUUC were going to do well but many people including perhaps some UUUC candidates themselves were surprised at the extent of their success, The relative absence of "Centre" candidates in the Westminster X-vote election of October 1974 was marked and this alone and understandably made realists doubt the validity of the figures as a guide to a single transferable vote election six months later.
One fact stands out that in spite of "persuasion" by the British government that electors could be well advised to support power sharing, voters continued to support anti-power sharing candidates.
Thus the percentage of the poll gained by UUUC was again over 50% in the third election within fifteen months and the result of the election suggests again that the majority of voters in Northern Ireland will not have an institutionalised Irish dimension and that they are profoundly suspicious of any party which is prepared to share power with those whose explicit or implicit aim seems to be to "destroy the state" .
The result removed any lingering doubt on this issue and showed clearly that while the outcome of the Westminster elections was distorted in terms of seats secured by parties by the X-voting system the voting pattern roughly reflected the division in public opinion,(see page 20).
Proportionality (see page 19)
A comparison of the proportionality of first preference votes and seats in the Convention election is of interest because investigation of the differences leads to a better understanding of the working of the system.
The table on page 19 summarises and compares first preference votes with seats secured.
This shows that the greatest divergences happened to VUPP, Republican Clubs, SDLP, and UPNI in that order.
VUPP had nearly 13% of first preference votes and 18% of seats, the equivalent of four more seats than the ten which their first preference votes would appear to warrant.
Republican Clubs had over 2% of first preference votes but no seats.
SDLP and UPNI each had one less seat than first preference votes might suggest to be appropriate.
The explanation of these divergencies may help to explain the working of the single transferable vote and its underlying principles.
The divergencies are a consequence of voters' use of their preferences and the geographical distribution of party support.
If the voters' expression of preferences leads to transfers of votes across parry lines, then proportionality of first preference votes and parties' seats may be upset.
Similarly, if some voters restrict the number of preferences they express, this gives greater influence to those voters who do not restrict their preferences and this tendency may be more marked in one party than another, and thus affect proportionality.
On the geographical point, if a party is to secure a seat it must have the best part of a quota of votes after transfers at the end of the count.
If however support is evenly spread throughout a country or province but is insufficient in any one constituency to reach this threshold, a party may achieve a small but respectable proportion of votes over all constituencies without securing a seat.
Such disproportionalities are marginal however and rough and ready proportionality normally occurs.
The object of the system is to give effect to the expressed preferences of voters in terms of their personal representatives in the Convention (or any analogous body), and the detailed rules for the conduct of a count are carefully drawn to ensure this result.
These rules include provision for the calculation of a quota of votes which if gained by a candidate will ensure election and this has the effect of producing in each constituency a result in seats which is as nearly proportional as possible to the opinions of the voters.
Sometimes proportionality can be very close indeed but it is possible for there to be divergences from strict proportionality for the reasons explained above.
As far as the 1975 election is concerned VUPP had a greater proportion of seats than was warranted by its first preference vote for two reasons.
First, other parties in the UUUC put up rather fewer candidates in certain constituencies than quotas of first preference votes would have suggested and there was a subsequent transfer of votes from those parties in VUPP's favour.
Second, failure of supporters of other parties to transfer votes on elimination caused these to be non-transferable and made it possible for VUPP candidates to be elected "without reaching the quota" in the last stage of a count.
Of the other parties SDLP suffered because the votes of Republican Clubs supporters in particular were not transferred on elimination to SDLP candidates and support for Republican Clubs was so dispersed throughout the province that there was insufficient support in any constituency for one of their candidates to be elected.
Turn Out & Spoilt Votes
Though misgivings had been expressed regarding the possibility of a low turnout, in fact the percentage of votes cast fell from 72% in 1973 to 66% in 1975.
It would seem to be doubtful whether a fall of this magnitude was commensurate with the effort put in by those who called for a boycott, that is, Provisional Sinn Fein , I RSP, Unity and Fathers Faul and Murray.
Such a boycott might reasonably have been expected  to damage SDLP more than other parties but in fact the percentage of first preference votes cast for SDLP rose slightly from 22.1% in 1973 to 23.7% in May 1975 (see page 26).
First preference votes cast for Republican Clubs fell from 3.2% to 2.6% but, instead of transferring votes on elimination to SDLP, a great many Republican Clubs votes became non-transferable which did damage SDLP candidates.
Candidates
The number of candidates fell from 210 to 165.
Alliance and NILP put up substantially fewer candidates while Republican Clubs increased their number.
The Unionists in general decreased the number of their candidates though the precise locations of these decreases are not easy to unravel owing to personal realignments in various parts of the different Unionist parties.
A change related to the smaller number of candidates is perhaps the increase over 1973 in the number of candidates who were elected with a quota at Stage I, 25 against 17.
This suggests an increase in the pulling power of personalities and does not suggest that there was a marked tendency towards "equalisation" of voted for candidates of the same party.
The most marked change however which is obviously connected with the smaller number of candidates is in the number of lost deposits which were only 35 against 64.
Of the 35, 15 were accounted for by Republican Clubs, who had only two candidates who kept their deposits (see page 38).
The reduction in the number of candidates had a side effect in that no count in 1975 went beyond 12 stages whereas in 1973 two counts reached 18 stages.
Of the 78 members of the Constitutional Convention, 24 are new in the sense that they were not members of the Assembly, and of those 24, 20 belong to the UUUC coalition.
This is a reflection of the rejection by the electorate of UPNI in favour of UUUC.
For the rest Alliance retained the same number of seats with two changes within their number, and SDLP lost two seats.
Non Transferable Votes
Non-transferable votes numbered 28,000 against 36,000 in 1973, a reduction from 5% to 4 ¼%; of valid votes.
Although the turnout was lower those who cast valid votes seemed to be slightly more inclined in this election to express preferences further down the list of candidates than they were in 1973.
Much however, depends upon how votes were actually spread, and how many times the same papers were transferred from one candidate to another.
Effective Votes
The percentage of effective votes, that is votes which clearly contributed to the election of a candidate and which may be regarded as a measure of voter satisfaction, throughout the Province remained unchanged at nearly 88%.
(See page 27).
UUUC
UUUC had all their candidates elected in Armagh and Mid-Ulster and lost no deposits in any constituency, The nearest that any of their candidates came to losing a deposit was 28% of a quota on elimination (McNeice, Belfast South).
This may suggest that in putting forward candidates they were less sanguine of their chances than they might have been.
The numbers of seats secured approximated to the quotas of first preference votes expressed and the only exception to this was the special case of North Down (see below).
UUUC in general were helped by votes which were non-transferable from Republican Clubs and "" UPP were helped particularly by this.
(See Belfast South, North Antrim, South Antrim, and Armagh pages 42–43, 48–49, 50–51 and 52–53).
SDLP
Compared with 1973 SDLP lost seats in Armagh and Mid-Ulster which could have been retained had Republican Clubs supporters transferred votes to SDLP.
In addition they could have gained a seat in Belfast West if Republican Clubs supporters had transferred to SDLP in that constituency as well.
THE CONSTITUENCIES
Belfast North
The difference between the last elected candidate, Annon,(DUP) with 5,800 votes and the runner up, Donnelly (SDLP) with 5,124 votes, was 676, which was covered two and a half times by 1,698 non-transferable votes most of which came from NILP and Alliance.
In Stages IX and X more of Boyd's (NI LP) and Ferguson's (Alliance) votes which were transferable went to UPNI than to SDLP in the proportion of approximately 2 to 1.
If the non-transferable votes had been transferred in the same proportion there would have been insufficient transfers to Donnelly to ensure his election.
The difference might have been closer but transfers of otherwise non-transferable votes would have had to have been massive in favour of Donnelly in order to ensure his election.
An interesting technical point arose in connection with the transfer of Bell's (Un) surplus of 38.
A ballot-paper can only be transferred as the result of a surplus if its value is .01 or more.
This means that a surplus of 38 votes can only be transferred if there are 3,800 voting papers or fewer which have expressed on them subsequent preferences for continuing candidates .
In this particular case many more than 3,800 papers were transferable so that the value of each paper was less than .01 and therefore no transfers could be made.
The surplus of 38 had to be considered because it was greater than the difference, 6, between Trimble 525, and Robinson, 519, and might conceivably have affected the order in which they were to be eliminated.
Belfast South
Though there were two candidates with 3.4 quotas between them at Stage I, Smyth (Un) and Glass (Alliance), no deposits were lost in this constituency.
Non-transferable votes at 695 were the lowest in any constituency in the province but they nevertheless covered the difference, 66, between the last candidate elected Burns (DUP), and the runner up, Magee (UPNI), more than ten times.
The main source of these was Caraher (SDLP).
Those votes of Caraher's which were transferable went for the most part to Hendron (Alliance) in Stage VI I I, and ensured his election with a surplus of 498.
This surplus was in its turn largely transferred to Magee (UPNI) who became runner-up.
If another hundred of Caraher's non-transferable votes had been transferable first to Hendron and then to Magee the latter would have been elected in place of Burns.
On the other hand when Jordan's (VUPP) votes were transferred in Stage IX 117 were non-transferable, and equally, if these had been transferable to Burns, the latter's position compared with Magee would have been unaltered.
In 1973 four Official Unionists represented this constituency all of whose seats were lost, three to UUUC and one to Alliance.
The Rev. W. Martin Smyth (Un) a leading figure in the Orange Order, gained the third largest personal vote in the province with 2.2 quotas.
Transfer of his surplus caused the VUPP vote to the increased from .6 of a quota to a full quota thus ensuring the eventual election of Trimble with the transfer of Jordan's votes in Stage IX.
This is one of the "extra" seats won by VUPP.
Belfast East
At an early stage in the campaign Robinson (DUP) was reported in the newspapers as being prepared to "beat the PR system" .
This later took the form of a public advertisement in which UUUC supporters were urged to distribute their first preferences evenly as between five candidates on a geographical basis according to the polling stations at which they voted.
If votes had actually been cast in accordance with this advice the five UUUC candidates would each have received over five thousand first preference votes apiece.
Transfer of their opponents' votes would then have decided the order in which UUUC candidates were eliminated.
But UUUC voters were not so persuaded and their first preference votes varied from 2,609 for McNarry (Un) to 11,958 for Craig (VUPP).
Craig was therefore elected first with 1.7 quotas.
UUUC won three seats which without transfers from other parties was their 3.8 first preference quotas entitlement.
Robinson was runner up.
Condy (Alliance) and Maginness (SDLP) were eliminated together in Stage VI and therefore the precise sources of 1,008 votes transferred to Bleakley (NI LP) 913 to Napier (Alliance) and 469 to Cardwell and Agnew (UPNI) are not clear.
Both these transfers contributed towards the immediate election of Napier and the ultimate election of Cardwell and Bleakley.
McNarry led Bradford (Unionist without UUUC support) to Stage VI when there were only two votes between them.
In Stage VII however, when Napier's (Alliance) surplus of 284 (from Condy and Maginness, see above) was  transferred, five votes went to Bradford which brought him above McNarry who was eliminated in Stage VIII.
With more first preference votes as a result of successful equalisation McNarry might have expected to stay in the count longer than Bradford and thus receive votes from the transfers of opponents.
In Stage XI one in six of Bradford's votes were non-transferable while all the continuing candidates shared in the transfer of the remainder.
Belfast West
After the transfer of Laird's (UUUC) and Devlin's (SDLP) surpluses in Stages II and III, five candidates (three Republican Clubs and two Communist) were eliminated together in Stage IV.
Their total vote of 1,510 was 600 votes short of Conaty (Independent) with 2134, and no amount of vote transfer between them could have postponed the elimination of any of them until after Conaty.
Of their total votes nearly half, 727, were non-transferable.
Had these votes been suitably transferable the relative positions of Smyth (Other Unionist), elected sixth, and Gillespie (SDLP) runner-up, who were separated at the end of the count by only 179 votes, could have been reversed.
This would have meant a gain of one seat to SDLP.
On the elimination of Conaty in Stage V a high proportion of his votes was transferable which helped SDLP substantially and Alliance to a lesser extent.
Cooper (Alliance) started third in first preference votes but was overtaken by Coulter (Un) in Stage VI when Goligher's (DUP) votes were transferred.
North Antrim
Paisley (DUP) received 2.5 quotas of first preference votes, the second highest in the province, and the distribution of his surplus ensured the elections of McFaul and Smyth (both DUP).
When the distribution of these three candidates' surpluses was complete in Stage IV, VUPP had 1.4 quotas.
DUP had 4.2 quotas at Stage I but with only three candidates most of the surplus voting power went to VUPP.
Further transfers from Rainey (Un) and Agnew (UPNI) in Stages VIII and IX ensured the election of two candidates from VUPP, a party which had only .7 of a quota of first preference votes at Stage I.
Allen (VUPP) secured the seventh seat with 6,114 votes from Erwin (Un), runner-up, with 6,066 votes, a difference of 48 votes which was covered eighty-four times by 4052 non-transferable votes.
2,800 of these came from SDLP candidates in stages X and XI.
SDLP supporters could therefore, had they so wished, have reversed the positions of Allen and Erwin.
The constituency saw the highest fall in turnout in the province from 72% in 1973 to 61% in 1975.
In 1973 Craig (VUPP) contested this constituency and was elected after the transfer of Paisley's surplus.
He moved to Belfast East, was elected MP at the Westminster elections of February and October, 1974, and remained there for the elections to the Constitutional Convention.
Wilson (Alliance) was elected with a surplus at Stage IX after the transfer of Agnew's (UPNI) votes nearly half of which went to him.
Wilson's surplus which  benefited Erwin (Un) against Allen (VUPP) thus originated with Agnew.
South Antrim
After the distribution of the Stage I surpluses of Beattie (DUP) and Ardill (Un) and the triple elimination of McDonald (SDLP) Smyth (Rep.
Clubs) and Somerset (Communist), McCloskey (SDLP) was elected at Stage IV.
After the transfer of his surplus in Stage V this left ten continuing candidates in the running for the remaining five seats and their votes at that stage ranged from 3,403 for Semple (Unionist) to 6,279 for Dickson (UPNI).
This was a fairly close spread of votes though the relative positions of the ten candidates had changed significantly between Stage I and Stage V. Positions continued to change through the remaining Stages of the count.
In Stage VIII votes were transferred from Cousins to Kinahan (both Alliance) and from Kinahan in Stage IX to Dickson and McLachlan (both UPNI).
Most of Dickson's surplus of 297 which originated with Cousins' votes went to McLachlan but this was not sufficient to elect him.
At the end of Stage Xl the difference between Morrison (VUPP) and McLachlan (UPNI) was 1,043 which was less than the combined surpluses of Lindsay (VUPP) and Dunlop (DUP).
Dunlop's surplus was therefore distributed and nearly all of it went to Morrison to put him 819 above McLachlan which was much more than the undistributed surplus of Lindsay.
McLachlan became runner-up.
One fifth of Logan's (Un) votes at Stage Xl went away from UUUC to UPNI or became non-transferable.
As a result of the transfer of surpluses from, and votes of, DUP and Unionist candidates VUPP gained one more seat than their single quota of first preference votes would suggest.
Dunlop (DUP) started the election at Stage I fairly lowdown but was elected sixth in Stage Xl in front of Lindsay and Morrison (both VUPP) who had started with more votes than Dunlop.
Semple and Logan (Un) failed to attract transfers on the same scale as Smyth and Dunlop (DUP).
This constituency had, with Belfast West, the lowest turnout of voters in the Province at 59%.
Armagh
SDLP lost a seat in this constituency, O'Hanlon, who was elected first in 1973, became runner-up in 1975.
The difference between O'Hanlon and News (both SDLP), who was elected seventh, was only 96, which was covered thirty-eight times by non-transferable votes.
Over two thousand of the non-transferable votes came from Republican Clubs.
If these had been transferable to SDLP, they would have ensured the election of both O'Hanlon and News each with about a quota of votes.
Thanks to the non-transferable votes of Republican Clubs supporters Carson and Black (both VUPP) were elected fifth and sixth without reaching the quota.
At Stage I VUPP had only 1.5 quotas but with the aid of transfers mainly from Armstrong (Un) and Maginnis (UPNI) as well as non-transfers from Republican Clubs the two VUPP candidates were elected.
It must be noted however that Alliance and UPNI supporters were also responsible for about 1,300 non-transferable votes and it would have been necessary for these either to have remained non-transferable or to have favoured SDLP as much as UUUC for those votes to have had no effect on the relative position of SDLP and VUPP.
If SDLP spread first preference votes geographically over the constituency as has been suggested, first preferences did favour O'Hanlon more than News but most transfers of votes to SDLP seem to have favoured News rather than O'Hanlon.
Transfers from Houlahan and Moore (Republican Clubs) were a slight exception to this.
UUUC won five seats with just over four quotas of first preference votes, and Republican Clubs' abstention does appear to have contributed to UUUC success.
North Down
Kilfedder (Un) with 3.0 quotas received the highest personal vote in the province.
His votes are included in the 5.2 quotas received by UUUC candidates at Stage I but in spite of this UUUC secured only four seats and supplied the runner up, Oliver (Un).
The difference between Brookeborough (UPNI), elected seventh, and Oliver was a mere twenty votes which was covered seventy-six times by 1507 non-transferable votes (see below).
Kilfedder increased his vote from 2.7 quotas in 1973.
Taylor (Un), who was Assemblyman for Fermanagh and South Tyrone in 1973, obtained a clear quota of first preference votes.
As has been noted above (page 10) all UUUC candidates with the exception of Kilfedder signed an undertaking that they would observe the directives of the UUUC.
Kilfedder refused to pledge himself and was reported to have said "I have no intention of being  anybody's dummy" , which does not seem to have damaged him electorally.
Not all his surplus transferred within UUUC.
Of his surplus of 14,470, 1,604 went to UPNI, and 961 to Alliance, some of it via Green (VUPP).
This transfer of nearly 18% of his surplus away from UUUC reduced the UUUC vote to under five quotas and with it the number of UUUC candidates who were elected.
Kilfedder's vote seems highly personal and only those who are close to the political scene in North Down can know whether natural supporters of UPNI and Alliance had Kilfedder as a first and personal preference, and then reverted to their natural allegiance, or whether the position was reversed.
Kilfedder's transfers ensured the election of at least one UPNI candidate and contributed towards the election of the second Alliance candidate.
Hollywood's (SDLP) votes when transferred ensured the election of Dunleath and McConnell (Alliance) in Stages VII and VI II.
Nevertheless SDLP were responsible for nearly 1,300 of the non-transferable votes, some via Alliance.
From and including Stage IV, transfers from UPNI, Alliance, and SDLP, showed a preference for Brookeborough rather than for Oliver.
As in Belfast East it is possible that voters themselves, as well as party managers, may have strong opinions as to how their preferences should be expressed.
South Down
The pattern of first preference votes was symmetrical in the sense that the votes, and therefore the percentage of support, for UUUC were almost equal to that for SDLP and Republican Clubs, at about 25,300 votes or 42%.
The centre represented by UPNI and Alliance had 10,000 votes altogether or about 16%.
The range of SDLP first preferences was fairly close, that is, from 6,657 to 9,730 which suggests that steps may have been taken to persuade SDLP voters to spread their first preference votes as nearly equally as possible between the three candidates.
By Stage IV all three had been elected without assistance from any other party including Republican Clubs whose elimination did not commence until Stage VI.
Some Republican Clubs transfers did cross party lines to Alliance UPNI, and even UUUC.
When Broadhurst (UPNI) was eliminated in Stage VII only half his votes were transferred to Faulkner, the leader of his party, and most of the remainder went to UUUC.
The two Alliance candidates, Williamson and Rowan-Hamilton, were eliminated together in Stage IX.
Forty-five per cent of their votes went to Faulkner which ensured his election with more than a quota of votes as fifth member.
Fermanagh & South Tyrone
Turnout here was still the highest in the Province at 78% though it showed a reduction from 1973 when it was 85%.
The Unionist vote remained stable at about 27,000 but the SDLP/Republican Clubs vote fell from 25,500 to just under 23,000.
This change was insufficient to make any alteration to the ratio of three Unionist to two SDLP seats.
The candidate elected fifth, McKay, was again Unionist, and the runner-up, Murray, again SDLP with a difference between them which well exceeded the number of non-transferable votes.
UPNI and Alliance transfers favoured UUUC as against SDLP candidates.
A quarter of Calverts' (DUP) votes were non-transferable instead of being transferred to McKay.
Murray (SDLP) picked up transfers from all parties but not enough to do better than to become runner-up.
Londonderry
As in South Down SDLP had three first preference quotas for their three candidates all of whom were elected though in this case with some assistance which must have come from Republican Clubs in Stage VI.
An Alliance candidate, Canavan, was again the runner-up who would have needed two-thirds of the non-transferable votes to bring him above McClure (DUP) who was elected seventh.
UUUC started with 3.8 quotas at Stage I but won four seats mainly with the assistance of over half Morrell's (UPNI) votes on his elimination in Stage X. 
Mid Ulster
Larkin (SDLP) was runner-up only 124 votes behind Overend (VUPP) and this difference was covered 35 times by 4364 non-transferable votes over 2,000 of which originated with Republican Clubs.
Three-quarters of these would have brought Larkin in above Thompson FHE (Un) who was elected fifth, with Overend (VUPP) as runner-up instead of being elected sixth.
DUP thus secured a seat after having only .7 of a quota of first preference votes.
However, Lagan and Cooper DH (both Alliance) were the source of 1,700 non-transferable votes which could conceivably have affected the issue either way if they has been transferable.
SDLP lost a seat here as in Armagh which together accounts for the reduction in their representation by two seats as between the Assembly and the Convention.
On nomination Ivan Cooper (SDLP) described himself as Averill Ivan Cooper which had the effect of bringing his name above that of DH Cooper (Alliance) on the ballot paper.