

Her thin voice trailed off into thin air, leaving its faint warning of damage, dirt, even theft.
For Miss Baker after all, may have been right.
And if Miss Adeane was a wanton then might she not also be a thief?
And while cambric for the fashioning of chemises was one thing, costly brown satin from China must surely be another?
Miss Adeane appeared to have become rather deaf.
So did Miss Dallam.
 "Perhaps you would be ready to come and give me a fitting on Friday afternoon?" 
Miss Adeane agreed that she would, hurrying back to St Jude's with a shout of triumph in her heart, to find that Odette and Liam had gone out and that Daniel Carey was waiting for her.
She had not seen him for a month.
They had said goodbye already.
What now?
Who say it all over again?
But her pulses had started their racing, her heart its pounding at the first sight of him, her stomach lurching, as it always did, clean over and then, for hours afterwards, refusing to be still.
 "For the love of God — what do you want, Daniel Carey?" 
But already her mind was full of him, her triumph shrinking, slipping between her fingers like that future of silk and satin and feathered bonnets she had been dreaming about so eagerly an hour ago.
Miss Cara Adeane.
Dressmaker and Milliner.
She might even attain that future.
Faced now with the future upon which she dare not hazard herself, the other seemed suddenly quite possible.
And would she be any better off than Miss Ernestine Baker, at the end of it, without Daniel?
 "Your mother let me in," he said.
"And then she took Liam out to the park.
Or so she said.
1 suppose she knew I was wanting to talk to you."
 "Talk, then." 
There was no point in being sweet and understanding and breaking her heart all over again about it.
 "I'm away to London tonight and then to France." 
 "You told me that last month, so you did." 
"I know.
But I have my ticket now.
And since it's about all I do have until the end of the month I shall have to use it."
 "I suppose so." 
"I've given up my lodging in Leeds, as well.
I have a friend  in London who'll put me up until I get myself sorted out.
A fine man
"Yes.
The world's full of them.
What has he been in prison for?"
He smiled.
"Selling untaxed newspapers.
And handing out broadsheet ballads about the Charter.
But he is a fine man."
 "I'll take your word." 
 "Goodbye, Cara." 
She turned her back on him, praying that he would not touch her, her throat so tight now with tears that it seemed to be closing, her chest feeling as if frantic hands were hammering it from the inside, bursting it — in several raw, sore places — wide open.
"Cara, you can't go on
They had been through all this before.
 "Yes I can." 
"Cara
They had said it all.
Gone over it, through it, round it, beyond it, and ended, every time, trapped in the same corner, backed up against the same blank wall.
She turned around again to face him.
"Goodbye.
It was almost a command.
He understood the reason.
They had decided to part.
Part, then.
Do it and have done with it.
Since all they were achieving, by these repeated farewells, was to inflict the same wounds over and over.
 "If I leave you an address.?" 
 "No," she said.
"I won't write to you.
Don't be writing to me either.
I won't be here much longer in any case.
Things are looking up.
And if they go on like this I shall need something bigger and lighter.
Much bigger, to take a real sewing table
"Cara
 "Just go, will you." 
"Yes.
I will."
"I don't care, you know.
"Why should you?
I'm not much of a catch.
Just a poor schoolmaster who can't afford to keep you in the style to which you've never been accustomed
"If you were even a schoolmaster.
When did you last teach anybody anything except how to get locked up "Don't quarrel with me, Cara.
Not now.
 "You say that every time." 
 "I know." 
She could force no more words through her aching throat.
Nor he.
Go then — and be damned.
God bless you.
Come back to me.
 "Oh Christ," he said.
"You're the most glorious creature God ever made, Cara.
I swear it."
"No.
You are."
And she went forward as if some irresistible force, slowly gathering behind her back, had suddenly erupted and hurled her against him.
His body had been expecting her.
 "Come to me, Cara." 
She was here.
And his.
If he could take her now, overpowered as she was by her emotion, and take her quickly, before she started to reason and to be afraid again, then he thought he would be able to keep her.
She might be angry afterwards and certainly she'd be terrified in case he'd made her pregnant, but she'd get over that.
And once she'd given herself to him, she'd stay with him, one way or another.
She'd be his woman, which was all he wanted.
Faithful to him, even if they would have to be apart sometimes, as he'd be faithful to her, although he knew she'd take more than a little convincing about that.
He loved her.
And it was love, just as much as that damned dog by the hearth suddenly growling and raising its hackles, which made him hesitate.
Had he simply desired her he would have taken both her and the consequences then and there, booted that evil-looking brute of a dog aside, and made love to her, gloried in her, possessed her once and for all, on the hearth-rug.
But the dog rose shakily on its bandy legs and bared its teeth.
And his desire had too much love in it, too much natural chivalry, to take what he knew to be advantage of a vulnerable moment.
Loving her, he wanted that moment to be perfect, to be hers as well as his.
And since whatever happened he would have to take the London train, could he really expose her — a woman who had one child and so could surely have another — to the risk of her own fertility?
Only if he knew her to be ready to take that risk herself.
He knew she was not.
Knew, indeed, that she feared it more than anything else in her life.
Yet, even then, he could neither leave her nor cope with the weight of his frustrations, and the blurted, cumbersome feeling growing inside him, which, when some of the numbness wore away, he knew would be misery.
 "Come with me, Cara." 
It was a last and desperate chance.
"Come now — while we can She was shaking, crying as if every teardrop scalded her.
 "Come where?" 
 "Anywhere." 
That too he had said before.
"Just come with me.
Cara God knows how much time there is left in the world for any of us."
 "Not much," she said.
 "Not much, if I have to walk barefoot through my share of it, following you — waiting for you — being left behind by you — with a tribe of children trailing after me." 
"Cara
"And see you hanged at the end of it, like as not.
She was shaking again.
Horribly.
"I'd rather die now, Daniel Carey, believe me.
So I would — now — this minute — than go through all that.
Like my mother."
Because if he treated her as her father had treated Odette, she knew she would not bear it so patiently, would not bless him on the day he finally left her, as Odette had done, but would go after him with a knife to hunt him down.
One fatal blow to his heart.
The second to her own.
Since, all too probably, she would love him still.
She did not see him leave.
She turned her back again, her shoulders heaving, her eyes blind with tears.
And when she calmed herself sufficiently to face him he had gone.
Thank God, at least, for that.
Much better so.
Or, at least it would be when she managed to dry up these damnable tears.
She was still crying, quietly but persistently, when her mother returned.
 "I'm perfectly all right," she said.
"So I see.
"Wonderful news, mother.
Just look at this glorious satin She told her tale of triumph.
 "Wonderful news," said Odette.
"So we should make a start now.
I've already cut the  pattern.
Shall I cut the dress while you do a sample of a fleur-de-lys?
Have we any gold thread?"
"Yes.
Gold thread we have.
Sorrow we have too, it seems to me.
 "I'm all right, mother." 
And she sat down, took out her scissors, wiped the backs of her hands against her eyes, found her pins and linen pattern.
Shed her tears.
 "I'm all right, mother." 
 "Yes, my darling." 
It would have helped, she thought, if Odette had pretended to believe her.
It would have helped, perhaps, had she not known that Odette, in her place, would have given up everything and anything had, in fact, already several times done so — for love.
By Friday morning the brown satin dress was ready to be fitted, its rare, coppery sheen catching even the perpetual sooty twilight of St Jude's as Cara folded it in layers of clean muslin and stowed it carefully away in her bag.
She had cut the skirt wide, the neck low into a broad band falling away from Miss Dallam's perfectly presentable shoulders into huge, puffed sleeves which finished above the elbow, giving a curving softness to Miss Dallam's square-cut silhouette which, in turn, would have a narrowing effect upon her waist.
The embroidery, a pattern of golden lily-flowers dotted here and there, each one at a fair distance from the other, would be confined to the shoulder band and to a broad sash fastening at the back in as large a bow as Miss Dallam would tolerate, its ends falling to the hem of her skirt.
Miss Dallam's mother would, at first glance, think it Quaker-plain.
But Miss Dallam would not only feel at ease with it but would look well in it too.
Far better at any rate, than in the diaphanous sweet-pea tinted frills in which her mother and Miss Ernestine Baker seemed intent on smothering her.
Not that Cara had anything against tulle frills.
Far from it.
On Miss Linnet Gage, for instance, one could create a positive sea-foam of gauzy draperies dotted with lace bows and silk rosebuds to the extent of one's imaginings.
On Mrs Marie Moon one could write a fresh drama every morning in black lace, sequined taffeta, white watered-silk with one huge splash of crimson at the waist.
On every woman Cara had ever seen one could do something to enhance what Nature had given, or cover up what had been left out.
She loved clothes.
She understood them too.
She knew how to dress other women and how to dress herself.
And when Mrs Amabel Dallam remembered to pay her for all those wedding chemises she might just take a few shillings to a certain bazaar in Leeds where  she'd heard good dress-lengths were to be had at bargain prices and make herself a new dress for Christmas.
That, at least, would be something to look forward to, a new dream, albeit a small one, a poor one, to spread wanly into the corners of her mind and try to fill them; now that the real dreams had gone.
But a dream — God dammit — nonetheless.
She wished to arrive at Frizingley Hall that day around two o'clock, a convenient hour when, with luncheon just over, Mrs Amabel Dallam would be lying on her bed recovering from the exertions of ordering and then pecking at her food, Miss Linnet Gage reading aloud to her, perhaps, as an aid to the digestive processes of one lady, the nest-building of the other, so that Cara might give Miss Gemma Dallam her fitting alone.
And, further wishing to appear brisk and fresh, as if she had simply alighted at the manor gates from her carriage, she allowed herself plenty of time for the familiar trudge down the cobbled hill of St Jude's Street to the flat plain of St Jude's Square and Market Square in the valley below and then up the other side, past the brewery and the iron foundry, through the maze of brewers' and iron-workers' cottages, to the manor, the skyline beyond it dominated by the squat, square bulk and the huge, foully belching chimney-stack of Dallam's mill.
She was as much a part of this murky landscape now as if she had been born here, every step of the way between Miss Gemma Dallam's cloistered corner and her own — in spirit a universe apart — being so familiar to her that it seemed she had always known them, or had known them before, in another place, a dozen other places; another life.
A wheel designed just to go on turning, never stopping, so that for a hundred years with a hundred more to follow, she had been coming out of this cottage doorway, carrying her carpet-bag, filling her lungs with this damp, sooty air which had started to make Liam cough, reminding herself — as one simply had to do — to be thankful for such mercies as came her way, however small.
Thankful that this was the top of St Jude's Street, for instance— with the immaculate Thackrays on one side of it, the abominable Rattries on the other — and not the bottom end, where the factory smoke collected, hung low, never lifted, spreading a deep, damp gloom in which  old men coughed and spat blood, and women — old before their time — bred babies like rabbits, who died like flies.
Not that the Rattries were doing much better, three of the youngest — Cara did not know which — having died the week before of measles, Sairellen Thackray thought, or some such childish ailment involving a rash and a cough.
No doctor having been called, even had they been able to find one willing to attend since one glance would have been more than enough to convince any practitioner of medicine that his fee could not be paid.
And no other care taken either, except for the broth Sairellen had sent round, and the collection she had organized afterwards to pay an undertaker and avoid the consequences of a paupers' grave.
Cara had not seen much sense to it.
Or so she had said.
The Rattries were destined for the workhouse anyway, sooner or later.
Everybody knew that.
So why not sooner?
Who not now, by leaving them to admit, to the Poor Law Officer, that they had no money to bury their children?
At least that way the remaining infants would be deloused, taught to read and write, fed, and Mrs Rattrie, by being separated from her husband — since paupers were not allowed to breed — would have been spared the trouble of having any more.
But when Luke Thackray came round with his cap, she'd put a penny or two in it just the same, like everybody else, knowing, as they all did, that Disaster, which had struck the Rattries today, might strike any of them tomorrow.
She'd tacked a few scraps of old cotton into a baby-gown too and sent it round next door for the new Rattrie baby, born very inconveniently, as it turned out, the day after the funeral, her fit of generosity entirely misplaced, since the child had only lived a few hours and the gown — upon which Odette had worked a few hasty  stitches of embroidery — had ended up in the pawnshop — Cara had seen it herself in the window — to help pay, she supposed, for yet another infantile disposal.
Ah well.
Never mind.
The Rattries would remain abominable, the father drunk, the mother vacant, such children as survived a damned nuisance.
Just like all the other children who swarmed in their rat-packs all day and half the night in the nooks and crannies of St Jude's.
Turned out into the street, most of them, every morning — Cara knew well — while their mothers went to the mill, a ragged band of infant  desperadoes, all under the magic age of nine when they too could be put out to labour.
Little pests until then though, scuffling and squabbling, paddling their bare feet in the sewage channels, hanging about the shop doorways for warmth and anything else they could manage to lay a hand on before the baker or the pork butcher, both mighty men, sallied forth and scattered them like a flock of starlings.
Little boys of seven, bandy-legged as old men expertly running for cover, little girls of five or six remembering, more often than not, to pick up the new baby and last year's baby, to grab the two-year-old, the three-year-old before they ran off too.
Cara nodded and smiled at the pork butcher as she passed him by, being fond of the pies he would sometimes sell off at half price before closing his shop on a Saturday night.
She smiled at the baker too, rather warmly, not for the sake of Saturday's bread bought cheap on Mondays but because his wife detested the Irish in general and that"bold, brazen strumpet from the top of St Jude's' very much in particular.
And because her bag was light, with only Miss Gemma Dallam's brown Chinese satin in it, and her hopes as high as she ever allowed them to be, she smiled at everybody else who came her way, the fishmonger, the old-clothes dealer pushing his cart with its flea-ridden bundles; the organ-grinder whose emaciated monkey, cowering sadly on his shoulder, always caused her a stab of pain:
She smiled at the decent, hard-working housewives like Sairellen Thackray — too busy to smile back at her — who were scouring their doorsteps with pumice stone and polishing their door-knockers; waging war to the death — their own, quite likely — against soot from the mill chimneys which attacked their washing lines; against foul air and foul water which attacked the bodies of their children; against bad housing, bad weather, a spell of bad trade when a reduction in a husband's wages could cause their whole, grimly constructed edifice to crumble.
She smiled at the slatterns too — why not?— most of them living a little lower down the street, who, for one reason or another, had lost all taste for building edifices of any description, hanging on by the skin of such teeth as they had left, to a precarious existence of borrowing today to pay what one owed from yesterday and hoping that tomorrow  would somehow take care of itself.
Inadequate women, some of them, both by nature and by inclination.
Others who had coped well enough to begin with on those scanty mill wages, who had even picked themselves up and patched things together, the first time that demon of bad trade had halved their weekly pay; the first time there had been sickness and doctors' bills to eat up anything they had been able to put by during the good times — never much; the first time a husband had suffered injury at the mill or the foundry, which meant no weekly pay-packet at all.
Nothing, if the injury persisted, but whatever a man's mates might collect for him by passing round a hat.
The first time.
Sometimes even the second.
Rarely the third; when gin might seem a cheaper and faster way of easing pain than any other.
Nevertheless Cara smiled at them that morning, as she smiled at the frail, clerical-looking gentleman who was both their saviour and their torment, the pawnbroker who held his court on one corner of St Jude's Passage, the other corner housing the red-headed madam of the fringed shawl who did not emerge from behind her green shutters so early in the day.
Two establishments of furtive commerce which marked the end of the part of St Jude's Street which even tried to be respectable.
The place where even the barest sketch of family life ended and vagrancy began.
Entering St Jude's Passage — her most direct approach to St Jude's Square and the old market place which would lead her to Miss Dallam's side of Frizingley — Cara was at once hemmed in by tall houses as sinister and insubstantial as shadows, tottering almost beneath a weight of sheer dilapidation and the load of displaced humanity they carried.
Lodging-houses these, not of the ruthlessly spotless kind kept by Sairellen Thackray but terrifying places — even to Cara — where men and women slept twenty or thirty together on whatever mattresses or bundles of rags had been thrown down on the rotting floor, tramps, drunkards, lechers, syphilitics, crude young whores, wan little virgins turned out of charity-schools who would not be virgins in the morning, packed side by side in the dark and in a horrible proximity which made Cara shudder.
A terrible place, St Jude's Passage.
Dark kitchens where men could purchase an hour or two on a chair by the fire  and a tin mug of bacon grease and hot water.
Cellars sprouting fungus from every dripping crevice, where those who could not even afford a place on an upstairs mattress paid a penny to sleep standing up like horses, leaning against a rope which would be simply untied the next morning when the landlord considered they had slept long enough.
Narrow staircases, infested with mouse droppings, where those who had no money whatsoever huddled on the steps for shelter, coming like wraiths in the night when they were less likely to be turned away, and drifting off again in the early morning.
Except for the few who tended, from time to time, to inconvenience the landlord by dying there, passing so imperceptibly that it sometimes went unnoticed for an hour or two, from a state which had not really been living at all .
For it was in St Jude's Passage that such corpses as were picked up in Frizingley — whether they had been reported missing or not — were usually found.
Children, quite often, who were classed brutally but realistically as orphans and rarely identified.
New-born infants, of course, more than somewhat.
And, every now and again, their young mothers, since at least three old ladies in the neighbourhood of the Passage were well-known for their services to girls in trouble.
An occasional man or woman who had been stabbed or beaten or strangled but who, far more often than not, had simply gone without food for a week or two, and given up.
Irish men — and women — not a few of them, but Cara had been long enough in Frizingley to know that the Irish had no monopoly on starvation, that good, solid Englishmen, handloom weavers, for instance, on the tramp for work and farm labourers from the south who had lost their farms due to land enclosures, could do it just as easily.
For although there was work here, there had never been enough to supply the desperate horde which had applied for it, choking this ancient heart of the town to death with its demands for air and space and water, overwhelming its sanity resources, clogging its sewage channels, fouling its canal, draining its reservoirs.
A fragile, breakable, disposable population, with no more than a toe-hold on life when trade was good and employment more plentiful; flicked off life's surface, almost without being noticed, when it was not.
And with so many work-hungry applicants to choose from, the millmasters had never felt obliged to pay very much.
A dreadful place, this Passage.
The stuff of which Cara's worst nightmares were woven, night-images of herself crushed beneath twenty alien, naked bodies on one of these lodging house mattresses, struggling to get up because she had to find Liam and Odette, who would surely suffocate beneath all this bare, sweating flesh, without her.
Dreams which turned her cold even now, when she was wide awake and full of her day-time urgencies, hurrying to make herself pleasant and useful and necessary, if she could, to Miss Gemma Dallam who knew nothing, as yet, of nakedness.
One could be quite sure of that.
Hurry then, and leave this damnable place behind.
Not that she was afraid of it.
Disgusted, and contemptuous of it, certainly.
Because she had never sunk so low, and never would.
Cautious of it, of course, as one had to be in any den of thieves where pickpockets and cut-purses abounded.
Good.
St Jude's Square lay before her, level and familiar, flanked by its old taverns and the graceful iron railings of St Jude's churchyard where Luke still often waited for her; the square crowded and ebullient today with the stalls for the Friday market, with traders and dealers and pedlars of fancy braids and buttons, fans, feathers, bright little birds in cages, beads, sequins, second-hand dresses that could be unpicked and made over, second-hand bonnets that could be remodelled, old belts that sometimes had decent buckles, sugar sticks the colour of rubies and emeralds that would be a treat for Liam.
And it was as she hesitated, thinking of Liam, touched as so often, and usually at the wrong moment, by the silence and sadness of him which so troubled her, wondering if a sugar stick would lighten it, that she felt herself suddenly surrounded not by the usual ebb and flow of the market day crowd but by something much more purposeful.
Something which she, brought up in a crowded street, could not fail to recognize.
Her pockets, as she well knew, had nothing in them but the stray penny she was thinking of spending on Liam.
Her bag!
Instantly her hands tightened their grip.
Her resolution tightening to match, so that they would have to cut her wrists, she thought, to make her let go.
And since they could hardly do that in so public a place, these ragged youths half her size who were pressing around her, she was not really  afraid.
She'd just box a few ears, knock a few heads together like she did with the Rattries, and chase them off.
Little vermin.
Little weasels.
That was still the thought in her mind as she struck the ground, not knowing how she came to be there, as one never knows, having suffered a blow aimed from behind which came at her like a thunderbolt, felled her in the presence of a hundred indifferent spectators and left her prostrate, struggling as in those terrible lodging-house dreams, to get up, to breathe, while the weasel-pack fell on top of her, shrieking with laughter.
Just another rowdy street game, a half dozen ragamuffins playing rough-and-ready with a woman who was probably a drunken whore, on market day.
Very likely.
Who cared?
No one.
A strength that was not of her body but rooted in absolute desperation got her to her feet rising with the urchins still clinging to her and then shaking them off like the she-bears, once chained in this square for sport, had shaken off the baiting dogs.
She knew her bag was gone.
She had not seen the thief nor which direction he had taken.
She saw only a half-dozen dirty, twelve-year-old faces grinning at her, a half-dozen skinny little bodies beginning to disperse, to lose themselves in the alleys where they would be indistinguishable from dozens more.
She heard a madwoman howling — herself—but on market day, in St Jude's, with the taverns serving gin and strong beer from five o'clock in the morning, who was likely to be disturbed by a little howling?
And madwomen, women in despair, in panic, at the end of their tether, were a common enough sight any day of the week.
Her only slight hope was to catch one of them, any one, and when she had him.?
What?
Time enough to think of that when it happened.
Time now to run, to fix her eyes on that tow-headed lad with the green scarf around his stringy, chicken's neck and never lose sight of him, no matter who got in her way, to catch him and crucify him if necessary to find out where her bag had gone.
Little bastard.
She was going to kill him and enjoy it.
She could taste blood now on her lips where her own teeth had bitten them, could see blood flecking her vision, hear it pounding in her ears as she ran, propelled by the first hot rush of her panic so that when she collided with the rough  corner of a market stall she did not feel it; when she stumbled again and scrambled to her feet she was unaware of her grazed hands and knees; heedless of brewers' drays, the hooves of heavy horses; the outrage of the passers-by she pushed aside; the woman with the heavy market basket she knocked over.
She did not even realize her hair had come down and that she had lost her hat until she found herself leaning against a wall somewhere on the other side of St Jude's Passage, her lungs bursting, her temples and her pulses hammering out their distress, her whole appearance wild and dishevelled and attracting not the least attention in that place which-no matter what might have befallen her — had seen it all before.
She knew, although she did not know for quite how long, she had been running aimlessly.
The boy was gone.
She had refused to believe it at first, her mind so full of him that her eyes kept on seeing him, playing tricks on her, raising false and cruel hopes.
But her eyes were empty now.
He had gone.
And with him had gone Miss Gemma Dallam's brown Chinese satin and every shred of hope Cara had cherished for the future.
Everything.
And so perhaps the time had come just to sit down somewhere on the ground and wait.
Just that.
Hands folded, head bent, to make it easier for the axe, when it fell.
 "All right, are you, love?" 
A man, smelling strongly of spirits put a hand on the wall behind her head and leaned over her.
No.
She would never be all right again.
But, pushing him aside, she gathered her cloak around her, made so bravely from those two old plush tablecloths, and began to walk downhill — the direction she happened to be facing — until she came to St Jude's churchyard where she sat on a gravestone, her head in her hands, and shivered.
No one came near her.
She expected no one.
For why should anyone involve themselves with a stranger when the one thing that everybody had in plenty was trouble?
And what real help could anyone give her?
With a calm she knew to be unnatural it struck her that her life was probably at an end.
Yes.
Very likely.
And those six little gutter-weasels and their heftier accomplice who had pushed her over would  never realize, when they sold Miss Gemma Dallam's valuable satin for a shilling or two, just what they had done to her.
 "Would it not be wise," she heard Miss Linnet Gage's light voice saying, "to have the work done here…?" 
Miss Linnet Gage, who disliked Cara, had already hinted at her dishonesty.
Was it prudent, she had really been suggesting, to put temptation in Cara's way?
Miss Linnet Gage, therefore, would not believe and would not wish to believe Cara's story.
And if she did not, then why should Amabel Dallam, who bent with every prevailing breeze?
Or Gemma Dallam who had her wedding day on her mind?
Or John-William Dallam who was known, in St Jude's Street, as a hard master who believed in keeping his operatives strictly in what he considered to be their place.
Properly subservient.
They would not hate her, if she tried to sob out what would sound to them like a typical housemaid's melodrama.
They would simply raise disdainful eyebrows and say what else could one expect of the lower orders; the Irish?
At the very best they would dismiss her, as Miss Ernestine Baker had done, with an icy reminder that she must never expect to work in Frizingley again.
And since they certainly would not pay her for the work she had already done on the trousseau, where else could she go?
But at worst, and far more likely, they would simply hand her over to a magistrate as a thief.
A necessary precaution — she heard a voice she imagined to be John-William Dallam's say the words-to discourage others of her kind from following her criminal example.
Of course.
For she had learned long ago of the mistrust and fear these upper-class households felt for "her kind" with whom they were surrounded.
Maidservants who had access to storecupboards and the family silver.
Cooks who were being constantly accused of purloining cream and chickens, butlers of watering the claret.
Tradesmen who might overcharge or who might tamper with locks and window-catches to let burglars in.
Dressmakers who might prefer to sell a valuable piece of material rather than settle for the modest profit of making it into a dress.
A short-sighted profit.
But such things did happen.
Feather-headed serving girls who could not possibly hope to go unsuspected did steal from their mistresses.
Milliners'  assistants did take feathers and fancy buttons from their workrooms and told amazing tales when they were apprehended wearing them in their Sunday hats.
An Irish dressmaker from nowhere, called Cara Adeane, might well try to make off with Miss Dallam's satin.
John-William Dallam would give her credit for no more sense than that.
Particularly when it was discovered — as it would be — that she was the mother of a bastard child, the daughter of a man who had left Frizingley heavily in debt, and had already been dismissed by Miss Ernestine Baker for her loose behaviour in a public street.
She could not defend herself against them.
What magistrate would listen to her lame excuses, in any case, if John-William Dallam named her a thief, and Miss Ernestine Baker testified that she was a slattern?
They would take her to York castle, she supposed, and lock her up.
For how long?
She knew of a woman in Dublin who, for the theft of a few pounds, had gone to prison for five years.
With hard labour.
Or they might put her on a prison ship to Australia, as they'd done with two girls from St Jude's a couple of months ago, because — on those farms where the transported convicts worked all chained together — there was a shortage of women.
And if either of these things happened to her then Odette and Liam would be separated and taken away to the work-house, Odette with her heart in pieces and her nerves in tatters, Liam retreating so far into that anxious silence of his that nothing would ever bring him out again.
A length of brown satin would have killed him.
And Odette.
Leaning forward, still shivering, wanting to be sick yet unable to raise anything from her empty stomach but an acrid bile which made her retch again, she attempted to find a chink somewhere in the blank wall, growing granite upon unyielding granite, around her.
Finding none.
Her education had been sketchy, vague in the extreme, but she understood the law as she had always seen it in operation around her.
John-William Dallam's law, according, to which, had she committed an offence against "the person — provided the person in question had been one of her own  kind — then her sentence might well have been light; a leniency by no means extended to offences against" property"which must be strenuously, mercilessly put down.
So that a knife in Mr Rattrie's feckless ribs would have cost her less in penal servitude, if she had not actually killed him, than Miss Gemma Dallam's satin.
The Dallams and Braithwaites and Colcloughs and the rest feeling in no way threatened by skirmishes between one resident of St Jude's and another, yet closing ranks in a punitive fury when it concerned no matter how small a portion of their  worldly goods.
She continued to lean against the gravestone, sick and shaking, her teeth chattering, her stomach as knotted and tormented as it had been in childbirth.
It did not occur to her to ask the police for assistance.
There were two constables now in Frizingley, she'd heard, since Sir Robert Peel had created his "peelers' or his" bobbies' as everybody was calling them, just a few years ago.
But nobody liked them.
Nobody had wanted to be regularly policed as people were abroad, preferring to leave it to the magistrates to swear in special constables as they'd always done in times of civil disturbance, or use the troops.
Cara had seen neither member of Frizingley's force herself; nor was she in the least surprised that two men armed only with truncheons should shirk from attempting to enforce their will upon St Jude's.
Exactly what duties they did perform she was uncertain but in matters of law and order it was Christie Goldsborough, and only Christie Goldsborough, who sat in judgement here.
There was no doubt at all about that.
And even then it took a few more strangled moments before she could force her numbed brain to function with anything more coherent than a scream of anguish.
But something was becoming clear to her, something was emerging.
And, clenching her teeth and her jaw, digging strong, pointed nails into the soft undersides of her arms, she slowly gathered herself, through pain and concentration, into some semblance of order.
Stolen goods required a rapid disposal.
To be taken, in fact, for the perusal of certain pawnbrokers in St Jude's Street, or to the back door of either the Beehive or the Dog and Gun.
And Christie Goldsborough, who owned those pawnshops and those taverns could find out if he so wished just where her satin had gone.
He could recover it.
She jumped to her feet, her brain no longer numb and resigned to her destruction but awash, all over again, with hope and a new blaze of panic.
She could be saved.
Therefore she was no longer willing to be destroyed.
She would not be destroyed.
Christie Goldsborough could save her.
She could think of no reason why he should take the trouble nor of anything he seemed to want from her with which to persuade him.
Yet, if he would, he could.
With his assistance she could return to that blessed, wondrous world of — when had it been?— an hour ago, before disaster had fallen upon her, when she had been blissfully on her way to pin Miss Dallam into the dress that would make both their reputations in Frizingley for elegance.
That earthly paradise, only sixty minutes gone, when Liam had still had the chance of growing up to be a man, Odette of growing old.
Before the prison doors had opened, or she had been stuffed into the hold of that ghastly convict ship, to spend her life scrubbing and cleaning and whoring for rough and dangerous men.
Captain Goldsborough — please.
Blindly she moved forward, panic crashing now through every barrier she had managed, through her twenty precarious years, to erect against it, flooding her whole mind, sweeping away her sense of reason and reality, so that she could already feel the coarse fustian of prison clothing and workhouse clothing against her body as she ran, could feel her skin crawl from every one of prison's basic indignities, her stomach heave with revulsion.
And terror.
No — she didn't want to be locked away to die, yet as she rushed across the square she escaped death by inches from a dog-cart without noticing it, the magnet that was Christie Goldsborough drawing her in a straight line, through brick walls if need be, to get at him.
And what to say to him when she did?
She had not the faintest notion.
Yet, when she found him, more or less alone in the bar parlour although she was aware of Ned O'Mara somewhere nearby, she couldn't stop talking, words rushing out of her, spilling one over the other, over and over"Please, please, oh please, you can help me if you want to, I know you can, and I'll go mad you see if they take my little boy away, because he's not-not just as he should be—more delicate than  he should be.
He cries in his sleep — God dammit — for my mother and if they take her away too then he'll just turn his face to the wall and fade away.
And if I'm on a prison ship at the other end of the world — because that's where they send women, isn't it?
I mean young women, strong enough to breed like the cows every spring time and dig the fields in between— isn't that what they want in Australia, for all those men?
And I can't—I can't-for a length of brown satin I didn't even steal.
I can't.
I won't.
Do something
She knew she was hysterical yet could do nothing to calm herself, could hear her own voice rising higher and higher, going on and on, and could do nothing to make it stop.
She knew that Christie Goldsborough was looking at her strangely and that other people, somewhere in the room — pushing into the doorway to see what was going on — were looking at her too.
What of it?
She had always lived in a crowd, other people's dramas and her own played out through a thin wall for the benefit of anyone who chose to listen.
What could that matter now?
Her voice went on.
It seemed that he was about to slap her and she leaned forward to take it, accepting it as the thing one did for hysteria.
That or a jug of cold water full in the face.
Either.
She didn't care.
He took her by the shoulders and kissed her instead, a real kiss with his tongue and his teeth and a strong aftertaste of brandy.
That silenced her.
Instantly.
"Oh Christ she said, limp suddenly, as if that one contact had drained her of her vital energy, preparing her, weakening her, for what was to come.
"Oh Christ
 "You want Christ to help you now, do you?" 
 "No," she whispered.
 "You." 
And although other people were certainly present they seemed to have faded to some other level of reality, very far removed from herself and this bulky, swarthy man who was letting her know, without a word, not only that he had her, but that should he now refuse to open the trap and let her in she would plead with him to do so.
On her knees, if he required it.
 "You flatter me, Miss Adeane." 
"You can get it back, can't you?
The satin?"
 "I do believe I might." 
"Oh — please say you can.
"I have said so.
Nothing goes on in St Jude's that I don't know about — should I choose to enquire."
 "And will you?" 
 "Will you, Miss Adeane?" 
He kissed her again, several pairs of eyes watching differently as he received her submission.
Ned O'Mara frozen behind the bar.
The other two barmaids, all agog, who would talk about nothing else for the rest of the Gay.
 "I didn't know you wanted me," she said with total sincerity.
Perhaps she would have come sooner if she had.
For, no matter how distasteful this was, one did not die of it.
He smiled, that flash of large, white teeth against his dark, slightly oily skin she had always disliked and which now, quite suddenly, turned her stomach queasy.
"Ah well, I won't pretend to be precisely on fire for you, my dear, like poor Ned over there and one or two others.
But they can't have you, can they?
Whereas I — for a length of brown satin — do believe I can.
Tell me
Yes.
For a length of brown satin, for her life, and Odette's, and Liam's, he could.
She bowed her head.
He nodded.
"Very well.
Then go upstairs, while I set the necessary wheels in motion, and wait for me."
She went, moving like a sleepwalker past Ned O'Mara, who might even be in love with her, past the ginger-haired barmaid who would have been happy to settle for Ned and therefore hated her, past the mousy-haired barmaid who had a good man of her own and could therefore afford to pity her.
She mounted the stairs, entered the captain's sitting-room with its Turkey carpets and leather chairs, sat down, hands folded, mind folded, heart scarcely beating, by the fire to wait for him.
And when he came she went, in passive silence, to his bedroom, took off her clothes at his direction lay down on his bed, her arms above her head, her body outstretched and unresisting, and closed her eyes.
It was of vital importance that she should not think of him.
This was an ordeal which, like all others, would eventually end and although she had made up her mind to suffer it, nothing  obliged her to accord it so much as one shred of thought; or memory.
Whores did this, after all, a dozen times a day and would not recognize the man should they meet him in the street an hour later.
For as long as this lasted she was a whore.
But the shame was his, not hers.
And nothing he did could force her to look at him.
Even if he now commanded her, as he was undressing, to open her eyes she would not see his powerful, barrel-chested body as it came at her.
Feel it, yes.
Endure it.
But that was all.
And when he had done with her, she could wipe him from her mind, obliterate him.
In her own private fashion, destroy him.
 "Miss Adeane," he murmured, somewhere above her, "if this pose of the sacrificial victim is intended to impress me, I ought to warn you that it does not." 
He was laughing at her, of course, as he laughed at everybody.
She had expected that.
But what else?
What more did he want from her?
She put an arm across her eyes and opened them beneath it, seeing him in such a way that he could never be certain whether she had looked or not, naked and hairy and black as she might have imagined, thick-set and arrogant and very ready — that much at least was certain — to take her without any further preamble.
Let him take her then, and have done.
He took her, or began to, in the direct, unsentimental manner in which she had always understood men took their whores, hurting her slightly not from any particular roughness on his part but because her body had turned dry with protest, resisting him as her supple mind did not.
He grunted something she did not catch.
Who should she even listen?
She could not avoid his penetration.
She had agreed to that and named her fee.
But what more could he reasonably expect of her?
Did a bitch do more than submit when she was mounted by a strange dog in the street, held down by his teeth in the loose flesh of her neck to keep her still and ensure his better satisfaction?
What else was this?
She closed her eyes again, wondering how long, and then opened them wide, staring in disbelief as he withdrew from her, his act far from complete, got up and with the purest gesture of impatience she had ever seen, threw an Oriental robe of some kind in garish, tribal colours, around his shoulders.
She sat up, puzzled.
She had had only one lover so far, a  very young man who had taught her little more than caution.
And she was uncertain now whether she was getting off lightly, or had been rejected.
 "Dear Miss Adeane," and once again she saw that unpleasant gleam of white teeth against his dark face.
"Most kind of you.
But I think I shall decline.
Vices I have, but commerce with marble statues — or unfrocked nuns perhaps — is not among them."
She stared at him again, not moving, not really knowing what to do.
He told her.
"Miss Adeane, you have my leave to go.
He had dismissed her, then.
That much was clear.
Very well.
Very good, in fact.
Wonderful.
Unless.?
 "My satin?" she said.
And now she was staring to the full capacity of her vision and her mind, reading him, sensing him, willing him — for God's sake, for God's sake — not to make further sport of her now.
Of her, perhaps, and Ned O'Mara both together.
He had sent her, with Ned and the barmaids and Heaven knew how many others watching, to wait for him in his bed.
So far as they were all concerned he had had his way with her.
Indeed, so he had, for she had stripped meekly for his observation and had allowed him to do everything else he had wanted.
And how were they to know that he had not wanted very much? or was that to be his real pleasure?
Did he mean to let Ned know that he had not found her up to scratch and then, after so much humiliation, deliver her over to the Dallams?
Something seemed to open or to expand in her brain, releasing a cold voice which she had never heard there before, telling her that if he cheated her she might just as well kill him.
Who not?
And then she could go off to Australia with a real crime on her conscience.
Not that it would trouble her overmuch with guilt.
 "My satin?" 
And she was already looking around the room for the gun or the knife that he would surely have about him somewhere.
 "Satin?" he yawned, showing her those wolf's teeth again.
"I think not.
You haven't kept your part of the bargain, have you?
Why should I?"
Whatever it was that had expanded in her head snapped  now, very distinctly, convincing her that no gun would do.
Not even the more intimate destruction of a knife.
And so she threw herself at him, leaping for his throat, a tall, strong, totally desperate girl with nothing whatsoever to lose, who would have been hard for any man to handle, even a man as powerful and totally unchivalrous as Christie Goldsborough, had he not been ready for her.
And had he not been perfectly willing, of course, to hit a woman every bit as hard as he would have struck a man.
And even then she managed to land one blow on the side of his head, to get her teeth, albeit briefly and not very deep, into his shoulder, to kick him a time or two although her bare feet fell short, each time, of a vital spot.
 "That is rather better," he told her.
 "I'll kill you!" she shrieked back at him.
 "I doubt it." 
She tried, not caring how much pain it cost her.
 "I hate you!" 
She meant it, a fierce spike of hatred which seemed to impale her.
She said it again, spitting a cat's venom, a snake's venom at him, menacing him with claws and teeth and a most glorious savagery, her eyes out of focus perhaps but glittering like jewels, her supple, slender, long-legged body having lost all consciousness of its nakedness, her firm, high, amber-skinned breasts rising in their fury; doubly enticing.
 "Hate me," he invited, his eyes on those breasts.
"You might even earn your satin with it.
That's what a clever girl would do."
The surface of her mind rejected his meaning.
At that level it was still murder she desired.
But beneath it she understood, accepted, found it far easier to hate him, when he fought her back to the bed, than to ignore him; the bitings and scratchings of anger coming near enough to passion so that when he entered her again she found it possible, in her loathing, her detestation, her bitter resentment, to wrap her own strong, hard limbs about him in a grip designed to wound and crush him but which could also excite.
 "Dear Miss Adeane — that is really much improved." 
And when something odd began to happen in her own body, a sensation she wished to call ugly because she had never felt it before and did not wish to feel it now with him, she released her temper again, thrashing about quite wildly beneath him to hurt herself and make the treacherous feeling go away.
It went.
Thank God, at least, for that.
She would never have forgiven herself for feeling it, nor him for becoming aware of it.
He might work off his lust on her body and she could despise him for that.
But if any part of any one of those female organs hidden away inside her dared to enjoy it then she would have to despise herself.
Fortunately it had not come to that.
And now what she had to do was maintain her temper at white heat until he had pumped his pleasure into her so that she would not lose her nerve — and possibly her satin — by cringing away from him at that vital last moment — vital for him, fatal perhaps for her — and pleading with him not to make her pregnant.
Better not even to think of it.
Just go on hating him, ill-wishing him until his body reached its natural conclusion.
On a groan and a sigh as men are supposed to attain their pleasure and then — as she remembered from her one other experience — there came his reluctance to move away from her, her panic urgency to be free of him while there might still be a chance that no damage had been done.
And the anger which had sustained her now evaporated, slipped out of her and away, leaving her defeated, used, worn out, unutterably forlorn.
As ready to lie down and die as she had ever been.
So that was that.
He had had what all men wanted, exactly as he had wanted it.
And she would be pregnant now, of course, no doubt about it, which was better than being in a convict ship bound for Australia, where somebody would have made her pregnant in any case.
Better than that.
So she would tell herself when she was sick and retching and dizzy, in a week or two, as she'd been with Liam.
Except that this man, unlike Liam's young father, could afford to give her the money for a clean abortion.
Surely he'd be willing to do that much for her?
And what choice would she have?
What had choice to do with women, anyway?
Men chose.
Women simply did the best they could.
Men took — whatever there was to be taken.
This was what happened to women.
 "The satin," she said.
He got up, flung the strange, savage robe around his  shoulders again and went into the other room where she heard him shouting through the door "Is that little matter sorted out yet, at the Dog and Gun?" 
She was aware of Ned O'Mara on the landing, mumbling a reply, probably hating them both, and then her carpet-bag landing heavily, miraculously, on the bed beside her, thrown by an arm in a garish, foreign sleeve.
"Your property, madam.
All present and correct, with not a stain on it anywhere.
Although no doubt you'll want to check."
Indeed she did, for having sacrificed herself for this damnable dress material it was no more than commonsense to make certain that no part of it had been damaged or soiled, that she could go to Miss Dallam presently, when she found the strength to get up out of this bed and tidy her hair and her cuts and bruises, as if absolutely nothing had occurred.
Yes.
The satin was perfect, had not even been removed from its muslin wrappers.
Perfect.
She could go now about her business.
The clock had been turned back.
She could be as she had been before.
So she told herself.
Although only a damned fool would believe it.
And she had never been that.
Closing her bag with a defiant snap she lay down again, very suddenly, against the disordered pillows, a heavy odour of musk and cigar smoke in her nostrils, a great weight of weariness coming near to sweeping her away.
Had she ever been so tired in her life before?
She doubted it.
Had she ever felt so brittle and so cold?
Or so terrified of what she knew she could no longer hold back?
She had just given her body — so long and so carefully guarded — for a length of brown satin.
Three days ago she had refused her final chance of giving it for love.
And now, before she had to get up again, to go downstairs and face the mockery and malice which awaited her, before she had to compose herself and complete her walk up the hill to see bridal, virginal Miss Dallam, she closed her eyes and thought, with pure agony in her mind, and in her heart, and in her soul, of Daniel.
Gemma Dallam was married on a perfect December morning of silver frost and bright, crystal-clear sunshine.
The bride herself remaining calm throughout, her mother, who had prayed so ardently for this day, finding herself utterly overcome by it; having slept not a wink, of course, the night before and melting into tears — of anxiety, of joy, of overwrought nerves — the moment she got out of bed; unable, no matter how hard she tried, to do her own soft, fair hair to her satisfaction and suffering a sudden and quite dreadful conviction that the powder-blue taffeta she had ordered from Miss Ernestine Baker was somehow not right.
 "There is something the matter with it," she told her maid, her eyes swimming with tears again.
Was the dress too plain?
But when she quickly added a white lace fichu and a long, lacy shawl, the effect reminded her of nothing so much as the icing on her daughter's wedding cake.
Panic overcame her.
What could she do?
Her wardrobes of course, were bulging with dresses but, apart from the evening gowns she had had made especially for Christmas, they had all been worn at least once before.
And how could she go to her only daughter's wedding in an outfit that somebody in that church would surely recognize?
All too clearly she could not.
 "Please fetch Miss Gage," she whispered, her lower lip trembling.
 "Or Mrs Drubb." 
But Linnet Gage, as chief bridesmaid, was already much occupied.
Mrs Drubb with a wedding-breakfast for a hundred guests to organize had more than enough to do.
Even Amabel could not go so far as to trouble Gemma.
John-William?
He came, amiable, assured, and planted himself in her doorway to enquire what all the fuss was about.
 "John-William, I look a frump." 
"What you, Amabel?
Never.
Put your bonnet on.
She did so.
Very pretty.
The same blue as her taffeta gown, the deep brim lined with tiny, ruched frills on the underside, a huge bow at the back with waist-length streamers stitched with tiny blue and white beads.
And then there was the blue velvet pelisse to go over the dress, with its white fur lining and deep fur hem, and a glorious white fur muff on which that clever Miss Adeane had stitched, at the last moment and quite behind Miss Baker's back, a truly enormous blue velvet bow.
 "Amabel, there'll be nobody in Frizingley to touch you," said John-William Dallam, sitting down rather heavily since he had run upstairs a little too quickly at her call and did not want her to see how easily, these days, he could lose his breath.
But she was examining her own reflection far too anxiously to notice.
 "Oh John-William dear, do you really think so?" 
She brightened.
Glowed.
Even simpered, thought her exasperated maid.
And indeed when she reached the parish church she received a moment of instant gratification at the sight of her dear friend Lizzie Braithwaite looking far from her best in a regal but positively strident magenta.
But then, dear Lizzie, for all the money — and it was reputed to be in millions — that her late husband had left her, had never known how to dress; nor did any of the tribe of Braithwaites sitting around her, who had clearly chosen whatever had turned out to be the most expensive and put it on their large, angular bodies just anyhow.
The Braithwaites were like that.
Except for Ben, of course, the eldest son, who had acquired a little polish somewhere and was even quite stylish today, Amabel thought, in his brocade waistcoat with a rather splendid diamond pin in his cravat.
Which was more than she could say for Uriah Colclough, a spare, already balding man in his mid-thirties who, having been torn all his life between a religious vocation and a natural Colclough desire to make money, lived like an industrialist but dressed like a vicar.
Yet Amabel said a very pleasant good morning to his mother, her dear friend Maria, who had been most gratifyingly keen to marry this ecclesiastical son of hers to Gemma.
And if Gemma had chosen, at the end of the day, to bestow her well-dowered hand upon a penniless stranger then Amabel had no apologies to make for it, since the Queen had done the very same; her German Albert, although a prince and full of education and charm, not having two farthings to call his own.
And the Dallams were not expecting the Nation to pay for Tristan.
The church was very full and although Amabel could not speak to everyone on her progress to the front pew she paused before taking her seat and smiled sweetly, generally, at the congregation, hoping that no one would feel left out.
Particularly those dear, good people at the back who, although asked to attend the service, could not be invited to the reception.
People she had known forever, many of them, and had not seen for ages.
How very touching.
Gemma's first nanny.
Various music masters and dancing-teachers.
Miss Ernestine Baker and Miss Cara Adeane, who had managed to sit well away from each other, she noticed.
Senior clerks from the mill and their wives, looking very self-conscious.
Had it been a mistake to include them?
Anxiously she hoped not, although she had had one or two uneasy moments about certain other guests who were not simply here to witness the ceremony like the gentlemen from the mill and the dressmakers, but would have to be entertained to champagne and bride-cake and all the other delicacies Mrs Drubb had prepared for them afterwards, at Frizingley Hall.
Naturally one had wished to invite Mr Adolphus Moon who had just purchased a delightful house with extensive grounds near the village of Far Flatley, where Amabel herself would dearly love to build.
Thereby making Mr Moon her neighbour.
A gentleman of wealth and distinction, most anxious to be agreeable, and forever entertaining large parties of distinguished friends from London.
A highly desirable acquaintance, in fact.
Yet how could one possibly become acquainted with his wife, Marie, a woman who had been on the stage and who, it was known, had lived with him in adultery while waiting to be divorced!
Horror upon horrors.
Amabel had never exchanged a word with an actress in her life and had never even set eyes  before on a divorced woman.
And although the adultery had taken place abroad and several years ago, the Moons having hidden themselves away in Martinique — Amabel was not quite sure where that was — to give the scandal a chance to die down, what was one to do?
John-William had come across Mr Moon several times in Leeds and Manchester, had found him to be a decent fellow, and received a strong impression that for the sake of his children — offspring of his first wife long deceased — he would be glad to get back into society again.
One could not fail to understand that.
One would even be delighted to give him a helping hand.
But Mrs Moon, with those taints of actress, adulteress, divorcee branded so plainly upon her, could not be received by anyone.
Nor could visits be paid to her.
And should Mr Moon ever be encountered by chance in his wife's company then he could not be acknowledged either, other than by a glance of mild regret when no one was looking.
A procedure which anyone with any pretensions to correct behaviour would perfectly understand.
Could Mr Moon, then, be invited to the wedding without his wife, Amabel had wondered?
Certainly.
Linnet had been most positive about it.
Such things were often done, as a woman of Mrs Moon's experience would know very well, being altogether au fait with the social niceties.
She would even be glad — thought Linnet — for her husband's sake and for his children, a woman's love containing, after all, so strong an element of self-sacrifice.
Surely dear Aunt Amabel must agree with that?
Well, yes.
She supposed she must.
But would Mr Moon consent to come alone?
Would she — in Mrs Moon's place — a little saddened if he did?
Yet she was pleased, nevertheless, to see him sitting half way down the church, resplendent in silver grey and the very fanciest of brocade waistcoats imaginable.
And more pleased than ever when Captain Goldsborough, arriving rather late as somehow one had expected, went to sit beside him and keep him company.
So kind.
There had been no hesitation of course with regard to the captain who, despite rumours and only rumours about his taste for low company — which she supposed any military  man might possess — was a Goldsborough of Frizingley with nothing really known against him but his preference for living in a tavern.
That too, perhaps, a throw-back from his regimental days.
And when Amabel had discovered his close relationship to such ancient and noble families as the Larks of Moorby Hall and the Covington-Pyms, she had written out his invitation card at once.
The gentry were allowed to be a little eccentric.
Everybody knew that.
It was because they had been rich and important for so long, generation after generation, rather than just since the invention of the power loom and the spinning frame, like her John-William.
And although some of them were a lot less well-off than they had been, they still seemed to get away with most things, feeling not the least need to prove themselves, she supposed, like herself and Lizzie Braithwaite, and Maria Colclough, and Ethel Lord.
Not that she was in quite so much awe of the Larks since Sir Felix had failed to marry Gemma.
For — while Sir Felix had nothing much wrong with him except a wild look in his eye sometimes and a tendency to go off in fits of what Gemma had called "unstable" laughter—she had heard certain tales of moral laxity about his brothers and uncles and even one or two of his sisters, which had done nothing for her peace of mind.
And she was bound to confess that the Larks had always made her nervous, that she had always dreaded her visits to their crumbling, chaotic, downright shabby ancestral home, with dogs leaping out at one from every chair and all those things they kept on shooting — pheasant, partridge, grouse, poor little scrawny things — hanging up to rot simply everywhere.
Quite ghastly.
No indeed, one never knew quite what to expect from the gentry.
She had resigned herself to that.
Yet they were here today in gratifying numbers, a double row of Larks looking very bronzed and weathered from striding over those ancestral acres, which men like her husband and Lizzie Braithwaite's husband could never possess; and their cousin, Colonel Covington-Pym, Master of Foxhounds, with his rather glorious, highly intimidating wife, a tall, red-haired woman who could be seen in Frizingley sometimes wearing a black riding-habit so tight that she must have been stitched  into it — Linnet said — and mounted on a colossus of a horse very nearly the same colour as her hair.
Amabel had spoken to Mrs Covington-Pym only once and had been completely unable to follow the lady's conversation.
But the Colonel and John-William were both Justices of the Peace, often serving on the same Bench together, and although she had so far shirked inviting them to dine — the prospect of being alone with the Colonel's lady frankly terrifying her — she was delighted to see them here today, feeling that their presence lent great distinction.
And perhaps with Linnet at her side she might pluck up courage, one of these days, to pay them a call.
She smiled once again, and very warmly, at the back of Tristan's pale gold head and then at his truly Grecian profile as he turned to look up the aisle hoping — she supposed — to catch a glimpse of his bride.
Was Gemma late?
Amabel, who never knew even approximately what time it was, looked puzzled for a moment, waiting for someone to tell her.
But John-William — who always knew to the very minute — was engaged in the happy task of bringing his daughter to church to be married.
Linnet, who wore such a pretty little diamond watch pinned to her bosom, ought to be in the carriage ahead of them with such of the Dallam cousins and Amabel's sisters' children who had claimed the right to be bridesmaids.
Surely nothing had gone wrong?
The morning was cold and very frosty.
Had a horse slipped on those treacherous Frizingley cobbles — something she always dreaded — and broken a leg?
Had a horse bolted?
Something she dreaded even more.
Oh dear.
Oh — Good Heavens.
One lived surrounded by dangers.
She could feel them, quite acutely sometimes, pressing in on her, always from the outside.
She could feel them now — dangers everywhere — gathering all around the churchyard wall, biding their time until a door should open, just a crack, and let them in.
John-William.
Would someone please send for him?
There was a flaring of organ music and he came, filling the aisle in his progress, a square, brown man with his square, brown daughter beside him, looking very small in her white satin covered by that additional weight of lace frills and bows and lovers-knots of satin ribbon.
A beautiful dress.
Was Gemma simply not tall enough for it?
Was her waist just a  shade too stiff for so massive a skirt?
Biting her lip Amabel reproached herself thoroughly and sincerely for not having forced her to wear those whalebone stays all night when she had been growing up.
Yet the orange blossom sat prettily on Gemma's head, her hair looking soft and glossy against it.
Her back was very straight, the line of her little nose and chin just glimpsed beneath her veil looking pensive and sweet, as a bride should.
Not studious at all.
Not plain.
Lovely.
Gemma's mother gave a sigh of deep satisfaction and love.
And then, walking behind her at a rather greater distance than might have been thought usual, came Linnet Gage in a dress that fell from her tiny waist as gracefully and naturally as a waterfall, each diaphanous tulle frill overlapping the other with perfect simplicity, her face as delicate and beautiful as rare porcelain, her blue eyes clouded by a dream of remote but tantalizing sweetness, which also touched the corners of her lips, raising them very slightly in a smile of which every man present must have wished to know the secret.
She wore her hair low on the nape of her neck, its weight giving fragility to the long, slender throat, the chignon itself gleaming like spun silver.
She looked exquisite, breakable, so desirable that not a few lustier members of the congregation, whose minds should have been on holier things, found themselves in a sudden, quite ferocious state somewhere between arousal and bewitchment, which could bring any man to his knees.
She looked almost angelic, untouchable.
Yet with a frail woman's tenderness that could surely be touched by the man clever enough to find the way.
She moved slowly, so slowly indeed that for a moment she was alone in the centre of the aisle, a swan gliding on still water abandoned there, waiting to be rescued — creating such emotion in several manly breasts that not everyone noticed that the bride and groom had already reached the altar, waiting the approach of their chief bridesmaid before they could be joined together.
Gemma, in this her last moment of being Miss Dallam, did not notice the stir Linnet was creating and would not have minded if she had.
She knew that the fussy, frilly bridal  gown did not suit her but had accepted it, as she had accepted so much else in her life, for her mother's sake.
In everything concerning the trappings of the ceremony this was Amabel's day, not hers.
and she willingly made a gift of it to her mother in sincere, if perhaps slightly exasperated affection.
Amabel, looking so delightful in her blue taffeta, who had made up her daughter's love-story as she went along, with not the faintest suspicion in her heart that Gemma was marrying for convenience.
And were she now to inform her of it, Gemma knew that her mother, once the shock had abated and the smelling-bottle put away, would only murmur "My darling, I know you will grow to love him." 
Gemma did not think so.
Smiling at her father, who probably did not think so either if he would permit himself to be honest about it, she placidly allowed him to give her hand to Tristan who looked down at her very intently, his face noble and moved and marvellously beautiful in the jewelled light from the stained glass window.
A perfect bridegroom.
Was that even a tear in his eye?
She believed so.
And, oddly enough, there was a tightness in her own throat as they exchanged their promises of loving and cherishing and, in her case, of obedience.
She smiled at him and then, once again, at her father from whose authority these vows released her.
 "Dear father, thank you so much," her smile said — for he had loved and cherished her most tenderly, claiming her obedience as his right, his due.
She had given it with affection, but would have been forced — by custom, by law, and by John-William's iron will — to give it anyway.
Now, with her smile, she withdrew it.
Now her duty was to her husband, who must guide her and guard her and speak out for her on all occasions.
And she had no doubt that Tristan would listen when she explained to him what it was she wished him to say on her behalf, or in which direction she wished him to urge her to go.
As her father would never do.
 "I pronounce you man and wife." 
The organ flared again, the young husband bending to kiss his wife lightly on the corner of her mouth.
She belonged to him.
So said the Church.
So said the State.
But, to all practical intents and purposes, particularly in matters of finance, Tristan himself had merely joined the favoured band who belonged to John-William  Dallam.
Or so John-William Dallam's lawyers had made clear to him when he had signed the marriage-contract a week ago, telling him what his allowance was to be, what it was meant to cover, by how much he could overdraw, to whom he would be answerable if his affairs fell into disarray, making it all sound more like an application for employment than a romance.
Not that he had minded in the least, for if he had a daughter as rich as Gemma and a fellow like Tristan Gage were to come along he'd take all the necessary steps himself to see that she could never be cheated.
But there was no need to worry in his case.
He wasn't greedy and there was more than enough for everyone to have their share.
Enough to satisfy a dozen fellows like him.
And Gemma was surely the most agreeable girl a man could wish for.
A good sort and no mistake.
Sometimes he could hardly believe his luck.
And if she wasn't very pretty And she wasn't.
Well — perhaps white was simply not her colour.
He had no intention of getting himself into a stew about that.
A man couldn't have everything.
One had to add a dash of realism and a great big dollop of gratitude to a situation like this.
And anyway, he didn't suppose for a moment that there could be another girl in the world as lovely as Linnet.
As they all squeezed into the vestry he told her so.
 "What a witch you are, my darling." 
An opinion endorsed by not a few others who whispered among themselves — some of them when Amabel was not listening, others when she very obviously was — that Linnet Gage had stolen the show.
Ben Braithwaite, lusty, thirty years old, his own master and master of a sizeable fortune since his father died two years ago, certainly thought so.
Uriah Colclough, who had seen an angel just like her once when he had been fasting on some religious occasion, thought so too.
And when the bridal party came out into the church porch and stood blinking and smiling in the winter daylight, Sir Felix Lark, his wild eyes excessively unstable, was instantly at Linnet's elbow, topping the suave invitations of Mr Adolphus Moon to meet his artistic friends with offers to mount her for the Far Flatley hunt.
Even Captain Goldsborough, looking rather dangerous and disreputable the ladies were all saying — fascinating in  fact — in a long, dark driving-cape with a black fur lining, had a word or two to whisper in Linnet's—ear, although he did rather more whispering, Gemma noticed, to the Amazonian Mrs Covington-Pym of whom her mother was so terribly afraid.
What a strange man.
What a strange wedding-gift he had given her too, when he came up to the manor the other afternoon, making her feel like a tenant in her own home; which, of course, had once been his.
Yes.
A very odd present.
A large sculpture, primitive in nature and in texture, African she thought, although she had not cared to ask him, fearing he might expand rather more than she had bargained for on the origins of what she suspected to be a goddess of fertility.
And a most disturbing one at that; too disturbing by a long chalk to display on one's sideboard to embarrass one s guests.
A strange man indeed, disdaining now to join the wedding party escorting her and her bridegroom to their carriage but going off on his own down one of the narrow churchyard pathways, towards the dressmaker Miss Adeane.
What could he want with her?
Now that, Gemma decided was a foolish question.
Miss Adeane was beautiful.
And a girl who looked like that must be forever finding herself pursued by men.
Men of the predatory kind, that is, like Captain Goldsborough.
And Ben Braithwaite too she rather suspected.
Not Tristan though, who might like to flirt a little and might not run too fast should he be himself pursued but who was certainly no beast of prey.
And she had no doubt that Miss Adeane could take care of herself.
Smiling at her brand-new husband she slid her hand into his, taking him somewhat by surprise although he responded instantly and correctly by giving her short, brown fingers a squeeze and then, realizing he could do rather better, raising them to his lips.
Thus presenting a most romantic picture as they were driven smartly away to their wedding-breakfast amid a flurry of good wishes and a merry ringing of bells.
Cara had attended the Dallam wedding mainly to annoy Miss Ernestine Baker and, having thoroughly annoyed her, had suddenly lost heart and walked off among the gravestones to contemplate what she was coming to recognize as the end of another rainbow.
Another vision almost but never quite within her grasp.
Another crock of gold that had turned  out to be precious metal all right; but for somebody else.
And winter coming on.
She had tried.
Never harder.
And when the satin had been recovered and she had found — after a painful, dry-mouthed fortnight of dosing herself with cheap gin and jumping down the cellar steps whenever Odette was not looking — that she was, miraculously, not pregnant, she had believed her luck to be on the turn.
But the Dallam trousseau had brought her no further orders but the brown satin dress which, since it had not been worn yet in Frizingley or anywhere else, had given no one the opportunity to enquire the name of its maker.
And could she hold on until someone did?
She was beginning to doubt it.
She had the money Mrs Dallam had paid her for the petticoats and chemises.
Riches: until she had given Luke the money she owed him, paid a month's rent in advance, redeemed a few things from the pawnshop, bought extra coal for the cold weather, taken Liam to a doctor because something had to be done about his cough; looked down the bleak distance of the weeks ahead with no work promised.
Nothing for certain but the dark weather and the bitter cold.
January and February when even rich women like Mrs Dallam and the new Mrs Gage would not be thinking overmuch of new clothes.
Nothing much to hope for, in fact, until Easter-bonnet time.
And how could she last until then?
Particularly now that Ned O'Mara had turned against her, watching her like a hawk so that her source of pies and tarts and bones for her dog had come to an end.
Poor Ned, cruel with his jealousy, who had already made it clear to her that as soon as Captain Goldsborough went away again — as he surely would — to see to his interests in Antigua and Martinique, then she would have to give Ned exactly what he wanted.
Or go.
So she would go.
And since Ned would also be empowered to put up her rent and see to it that she was refused employment at the Beehive or the Dog and Gun, just where she would go had become a constant, gnawing ache never leaving the back of her mind.
So much worse, so much more perilous, because of the winter.
She still had no doubt that she could succeed in Frizingley.
That she could really become that elegant, well-nourished  creature Miss Cara Adeane, Dressmaker and Milliner.
The brave legend she had painted on her hat-box.
But not through January and February.
Not until Easter.
Perhaps only barely by then, until she managed to get something behind her, the reserve, the "something put by for a rainy day" which neither she nor anyone else in her hand-to-mouth world could ever quite hold together.
And the trouble was that she was tired.
Aching sometimes with weariness, bruised with it, yet unable to sleep.
Spending far too many nights staring wide-eyed into the dark, growing hungry for rest, and irritable, so that this morning she had even spoken sharply to Odette.
Not that she was sorry, even now, for what she had said.
She had meant every word of it.
But she did regret making her mother cry.
Would it not have been kinder had she pretended to be glad — since it was Christmas time, after all — when Odette had come rushing to show her that letter from her father?
A few cheerful lines from a man who appeared to have nothing on his conscience, to a family he assumed to be still affectionately his.
He was in good health.
Cara had not been in the least surprised to hear it.
He had taken over the management of his sister's bakery.
That too came as no surprise.
He sent his fondest love.
Would she not send him hers, her mother wanted to know?
No.
She would not.
He might go to hell and rot there for all she cared.
Her mother had her full permission to tell him so, for reasons she had bitterly and eloquently specified.
She had slammed the door as she set out for the Dallam wedding, leaving Odette in tears.
And because Odette had been crying, Liam had been crying too.
And now, having walked all the way across Frizingley in her thin pale blue dress and her dark blue tablecloth cloak she would have to walk back again — and fast — before she froze to death where she stood.
For if that sudden drift of snow in the air a few minutes ago had seemed romantic to the young bride — or the bride's mother — it had not in any way pleased Cara.
Hot spiced wine and log fires for Mrs Dallam and Mrs Tristan Gage, perhaps.
But for Cara and Liam and Odette, it meant sleeping downstairs all together by the fire with the dog and even then not really keeping warm; chipping ice from the water barrels every morning  with blistered fingers; doing something about the worn soles of her boots.
Liam's cough.
Ah well.
Roll on Easter-bonnet time.
And it was then that she saw Christie Goldsborough coming towards her along the path, his spectacular, fur-lined driving-cape swinging loose around his shoulders, his feet encased in the finest quality leather, his carriage — a shiny, high-perch sporting phaeton — waiting for him just there, in the road beyond the church wall, whenever he had a mind to take the reins in his gloved hands and go dashing off to drink champagne and eat bride-cake at Frizingley Hall.
And what would Gemma Dallam — Gemma Gage — think to that, she wondered, if she knew the price he had made another woman pay to recover her brown satin?
He had had little to say to her since then, having turned his attention to the red-headed horsewoman she had today identified, from the servants' gossip at the back of the church, as Mrs Covington-Pym She wondered what he could have to say to her now, not expecting it to be pleasant.
Not much caring.
Since what had been pleasant lately?
What had turned out even half-way right?
 "Miss Adeane, you are looking unwell." 
Was she?
She realized that she was feeling it too, frozen to the marrow in this bitter East wind which kept whipping her cloak off her shoulders as contemptuously as if it had been made of pocket-handkerchieves instead of tablecloths, her stomach hollow and aching, her head feeling light and aching a little too.
But that was only because she had eaten nothing since last night and had been so furious this morning about her father's gall in writing that damnably cheerful letter.
Nothing worse than that.
Just lack of food and bad temper coming together, which never did her any good.
"I'm quite all right, thank you.
Just cold."
 "You are not expecting a child by any chance, are you?" 
She opened her eyes wide and amazed, and then lowered them as she made a rapid calculation.
Since he had troubled to enquire, then he might be willing to help.
Should she tell him yes, he had made her pregnant, and see if he would give her a guinea or two to put it right?
That way she could buy a little warmth and cheer for Christmas and how would he ever know that she had lied?
"No.
I'm cold, that's all."
She felt him watching her and, ill at ease beneath his scrutiny, said quickly.
"Everybody seems to be going off to the wedding-breakfast.
Shouldn't you?"
He gave her the gleaming smile she detested.
 "Are you dismissing me, Miss Adeane?" 
 "They won't be liking it if you're late." 
She'd be there in good time herself, given half a chance, to eat their game pies and their plum cakes and drink their wine, to stand by their log fires to warm herself.
Oh God — it was going to be a terrible winter.
She could feel it coming.
Ice and snow and killing damp, sore chests and feet and hands, the stand-pipe frozen over, coal and candles coming to an end, no water, no heat, no money, from now until March at the soonest.
And Liam's cough.
 "I won't be late," he said and it took her a moment to remember that they were speaking of Miss Dallam's wedding-breakfast.
"I drive rather faster than these upright commercial gentlemen.
Because they tend to worry, you see, about spoiling their Sunday suits and their dignity.
They can t risk a roll in the gutter, can they now, with all their factory-hands looking on?
So they go sure and steady.
I don't.
And perhaps I know a short-cut or two to Frizingley Hall, which ought not to surprise you
 "Oh?" 
She was barely listening to him.
She was just cold.
Cold.
She just wanted to go home and had started to worry about the hour it would take her to get there, the sorry state of her boots, the snow coming on.
"I was born there, Miss Adeane.
They are all very much aware of that."
 "Oh," she said again, not much caring.
And then, remembering it would be unwise to cross him, added quickly, "I don't know where I was born." 
She had never given much thought to it either.
She very much doubted that when she got home, if she ever did, she would think it worth asking her mother.
 "In your case," he said, setting a well-shod foot casually upon a gravestone, his warm and wonderful fur cloak eddying snugly around it, "it can hardly matter." 
"No.
I suppose not.
Any old scrap-heap would do."
He laughed.
"My dear young lady, why so bitter?
Did the fairies take your cradle to the wrong address?
Ought it to have been a palace?"
She shrugged.
If palaces were well-heated, yes.
I'll make you a queen in England, Odette my love.
She heard her father's voice somewhere in her aching head speaking those words, making his wild promises.
Breaking every one.
Had he even married her mother, she wondered, other than by common law, by simply announcing their intention of being together?
Like the Rattries, she supposed, who would never have had the money for a marriage licence or to put in the vicar's collecting plate.
Nor have seen the sense to it if they had.
Marriages then, like palaces and warm fires and good soles on one's shoes, were just refinements for the rich.
Captain Goldsborough, wrapped in his thick, black fur, and with a little time to while away until the road should be clear of wedding-carriages, appeared to be telling her so.
 "Marriage is only a device, after all," he said,"by which property can be inherited.
A man only starts to worry about the virginity of his bride or the virtue of his wife when he wants to breed an heir.
And if he has nothing to leave behind — no counting houses full of money like these pompous millmasters, or no land, no name like those of us who are rather less common — then why take the trouble?"
She didn't really know about that.
But one thing had caught her attention.
"Common?
Do you think the millmasters common?"
He looked very much amused.
"I have met no species commoner.
Nor so clumsy.
The only thing that distinguishes the Dallams from the vulgar, upstart herd of Braithwaites and Colcloughs and the rest is that John-William Dallam had the imagination to buy the manor and leave it relatively unscathed.
Although his wife's chintz chaircovers bring on a certain nausea whenever I am obliged to call."
 "She hates it there." 
Cara realized she had enjoyed telling him that.
"She wants to move to the country.
To Far Flatley, wherever that is
He threw back his head and laughed, very heartily.
The landlord of an unsavoury city tavern.
The owner of every thieves' kitchen in St Jude's.
Goldsborough of Frizingley  Hall.
Contemptuous, in all his guises, of the pretensions of these new-made millionaires.
"It is Lark country.
Covington-Pym country.
Your little Mrs Dallam will never survive it.
The exquisite Miss Linnet Gage may do better.
Her father was a cousin of the Cheshire Bartram-Hyndes, she tells me.
 "Do you know her?" 
Instinctively Cara bristled, knowing her enemies, ready to defend herself.
"Only slightly.
The lady is looking for a husband and she has been about the world sufficiently to know that I am not one of those.
And, in any case, the Bartram-Hynde side of her nature, which might have made her interesting, has been somewhat watered down, one finds, by her mother — a cotton-spinner's daughter with social ambitions, I believe, from some dreary middle-class suburb somewhere or other.
Miss Gage wishes to be respectable."
 "Is that wrong?" 
"Dull.
And timid.
Like all these posturing middle-class women are timid.
So terrified of doing the wrong thing that they do nothing at all— except bleat like sheep about their petty rules and regulations and their morality.
A sorry crew, Miss Adeane.
Setting up their own gods in their own mealy-mouthed image.
Thrift and Economy.
How very thrilling.
One wonders how many symphonies were ever composed or how many masterpieces created with that.
And those castrated accents of theirs, making sure one knows exactly what everything has cost.
Working five-year-old children to death in their mines and mills and breeding their own daughters to swoon at the sight of an injured sparrow.
Believing, as fervently as they say they believe in their Almighty, that money can make up for anything, even bad taste and bad manners.
 "It can." 
If she believed in anything at all then it was that.
 "To you, perhaps, Cara." 
 "Then why do you attend their weddings?" 
"For my amusement.
To see the efforts they make to be ladies and gentlemen and the constant strain it puts them under.
To see how far I can go with them, sometimes.
To watch them pretending not to know all the things about me which I take not the least trouble to conceal.
Things they won't admit so that they can keep on asking me to dinner — because my name is Goldsborough.
And they would like to buy a name to go with the millions.
Felix Lark has put his up for sale, after all.
The first young lady ready to pay off the mortgages on his land can be Lady Lark tomorrow.
 "You haven't got any land left, though have you?" 
But her spite — for such it was — did not dismay him.
"Oh yes — my dear — I have.
There are a great many acres in St Jude's and thereabouts.
Growing a very adequate crop, in their fashion, I do assure you.
"Rents, you mean?
So you don't despise money, really — do you?"
And she had no way of knowing how hungrily her eyes had fastened upon his fur.
"by no means.
When used with style and not exclusively to breed one fortune from another in a bank vault, as these people do.
Money is for decorating life, Cara — one way or another.
For acquiring pleasures.
And powers.
And not being ashamed of them.
For opening doors and not giving a damn about what anybody else has to say to it.
But these people use theirs to make strait-jackets to strangle each other.
Marie Moon did well to stay away.
 "Was she invited?" 
"I am sure she was not.
Could our good Christian Mrs Dallam possibly expose her daughter, and her friends' daughters, to a woman like Marie, who has shown herself on a public stage for money, and lived with one man while married to another?
One quite sees that she could not.
Although Adolphus Moon, of course, is another matter.
He is a drunkard and a profligate and has certain amorous peculiarities which even Marie — and sometimes the law — finds hard to tolerate.
But all our tender young ladies can be exposed to him quite happily because he has never been caught.
At least, not precisely in the act of anything Mrs Dallam would not care to know about.
Or anything he has not been able to hush up.
So Adolphus Moon can be received.
So can Audrey Covington-Pym who is the most accomplished whore of my acquaintance.
Because she has not been caught either, or not so blatantly that one has had to stop pretending to look the other way.
And Audrey has never been on the stage, or left her husband, or made a false move in public in any direction."
 "I am sure Mrs Dallam doesn't know all that." 
"I am sure Mr Dallam does.
And Miss Linnet Gage, who would marry Adolphus Moon herself, like a shot, if she got the chance.
And put up with him, as well— like poor Marie."
 "Poor Marie?" 
"Money again, Miss Adeane?
I don't doubt he pays her well.
Which brings me to what I really have to say to you
You are cold, aren't you?"
She believed she was ready to expire with it.
The churchyard had emptied, the wedding-carriages had rolled away, taking their fragile gaiety with them to another world so far as Cara was concerned.
Here, in her world, an icy wind was gathering force and malice, preparing to freeze the path beneath her feet, aim fierce arrows of hail and sleet at her cringing back, bury her — unless she could drag herself up St Jude's Hill fast enough — in snow.
"Yes.
I'm cold."
At that moment it was all she was.
Cold, and terrified of growing colder, so that when he opened his arms and put them around her, his musk-scented cloak coming with them, ample enough to cover them both, all she felt was the salvation of his warmth, his hard, hot body supporting her as she shook and shivered against him, that blessed, beautiful fur enclosing her as in a nest, muffling her from the killing storm.
A nest, of course, that had a huge, probably wholly malevolent, black-browed spider at the centre of it, King Spider himself warming her up for his dinner she supposed.
But the cold had numbed her senses and all her ingenuity and she could think of nothing at all to do about that.
If she was going to be devoured, well then She was going to be devoured.
She closed her eyes.
"So — Cara Adeane.
Would you care to spend Christmas with me?"
What on earth was lie saying?
Who her?
Surely he had women enough?
 "Ah yes." 
And his breath too was warm against her cheek and down the back of her neck, making her spine tingle.
"But my mistresses go home to their husbands for Christmas, and although I could stay at the Covington-Pyms and ride out with the hunt on Boxing Day morning, and call round  at the Moons on my way back to cheer up poor Marie…
I think not.
Variety, you see…
So — Miss Adeane?
What do you say to Christmas underneath a warm fur blanket with as much to eat and drink and as many logs on the fire as you like?
And anything else I decide to give you — or teach you.
And there are things you really ought to learn, you know."
She didn't know.
Or care.
She felt his hands on her back and her waist and could not manage to care about that either.
Last time it had been for a length of dress material.
This time it would be to stop herself from freezing, or starving, to death.
Only one thing had to be settled.
 "I have my little boy and my mother to think of." 
 "I know." 
She had expected he would.
"I see no difficulty.
Your mother looks after your son, doesn't she?
Perhaps a little money would make her festive season easier to endure.
A cellar full of coal.
A roast goose.
And — shall we say — anything else you can steal in ten minutes from my kitchen and carry home?
You'll enjoy that."
It struck her — thinking of Marie Moon and Audrey Covington-Pym — that if she was going to sell herself, and it seemed she was, then it would be as well not to come too cheap.
 "My little boy has nothing to wear for the cold weather." 
 "Of course." 
 "And it's a decent doctor he needs for his cough." 
 "You may instruct him to send his bill to me." 
 "All right." 
She had agreed to it.
She was a whore then?
Sairellen Thackray had always said she had the makings of it, would come to it one day.
So the day had come, and she was accepting it very calmly.
Who not?
She had seen it happen to others many a time.
No one in St Jude's would blame her.
No one who had ever stood on the edge of that abyss where she had been teetering for so long, that held hunger and cold, sickness that could not be treated for lack of a shilling, children one could afford neither to raise nor to bury, would have a harsh word to say.
No one who had ever struggled in the mire as she had, could fail to understand.
It was not what she had wanted.
He was not what she had wanted.
But he would not keep her long.
And in the  meantime, since he had spoken of things she ought to learn, she would see if he could tell her just what it was that women like Marie Moon and Audrey Covington-Pym did to stop themselves from bearing child after child after child.
That would be worth knowing.
 "Poor little Adeane," he said kissing her ear and her neck.
"Women don't survive alone, I'm afraid.
It entertained me watching you try.
Shall 1 help you to try again?"
 "How?" 
She was growing warmer now, and more alert.
"We might work out a formula — if the next few days go well, that is.
If you continue to entertain me.
What do you want out of life, Adeane?"
She sighed.
How could he understand.
 "Peace of mind." 
 "Oh that." 
She had known he would treat it with contempt.
"You mean money in your bank, don't you.
I can show you how to manage that.
What else?"
She screwed up her eyes, feeling suddenly fierce.
 "Not being at everybody's beck and call." 
She felt his mouth smile against her forehead.
"Well, so long as you remain at mine, I think the rest could be managed.
Nothing else?
Nothing beyond coal and candles and cough medicine — in this your one and only lifetime?"
A fur cloak, she thought, like this one.
Even a ride back to St Jude's in his phaeton would be something to begin with.
But she doubted he would offer either.
She was quite right.
"Very well then, Miss Adeane.
I had better go now and pay my respects to the petty bourgeoisie.
I shall see you tonight.
In my seraglio.
At eight o'clock, shall I?
To make our arrangements?"
The wind, as he moved away from her, was like a knife.
 "Yes," she said, unless I freeze solid on my way back."
He smiled, adjusting his cloak, drawing on his gloves.
"Yes, the wind does have a raw edge to it, I must admit.
May I advise you to hurry home as fast as you can."
She walked with him to his carriage, the reckless high-perch phaeton she had seen often enough outside the Fleece, his horse held now by a wizened little urchin quite blue with cold, to whom he tossed a coin.
He mounted, settled his eddying fur comfortably around  him, the reins loosely in his hands, the horse skittish feeling the cold too perhaps — and ready to be off.
He looked down at her, smiling.
She looked up, clutching her inadequate plush tablecloths, the supple line of her body begging him for a ride.
 "Until this evening then, Cara." 
 "Yes." 
 "Hurry home, now — we can't have you catching a chill." 
 "I won't do that." 
 "Of course not — if you walk briskly, as I told you." 
He drew in his reins, raised his driving whip.
 "You haven't thought of anything else you'd like me to give you — by any chance?" 
 "Yes." 
And she had gritted her teeth to stop them from chattering.
 "Yes, I have." 
A ride to town?
That, surely, was what he was expecting.
Please Captain Goldsborough — I'm so small and poor and cold.
And when she had said it — when she had put so pathetic a value on herself — he would still drive off and leave her standing there, with those steep, chilly miles to go.
To the devil with that.
Many things were becoming clearer to her now.
 "I'll have Miss Ernestine Baker's dress shop," she said.
Shortly before the second anniversary of her wedding Mrs Tristan Gage suffered a miscarriage which kept her in bed for several cosseted days surrounded by every possible luxury and attention, including the embarrassed affection of her husband who had rather more idea how mares and hound bitches might feel at such moments than women, and the deep concern of her mother who, throughout her own twenty-six years of marriage had herself miscarried eight times.
And Gemma had not the heart to tell either of them how much they wearied her.
 "My dear, it is God's will," Amabel kept on saying because that was the thing her own mother and her dear old nanny — both gone now — had always said to her.
"You're looking simply splendid, Gemma.
Isn't she looking splendid, Aunt Amabel?"
Tristan kept on saying because that — surely — was what any woman must want to hear.
 "Oh, a little pale perhaps," murmured Amabel, because paleness seemed essential to the occasion, although with dear nut-brown Gemma it was rather hard to tell.
And she had looked so well since her marriage, so calm and composed and so Well, not matronly, at any rate, as wicked Lizzie Braithwaite had suggested.
Noble was the word which sprang to Amabel's mind.
Regal, even.
Although Queen Victoria, who had married just two years ago like Gemma, had produced the Princess Royal ten months after the wedding service, the Prince of Wales eleven months after that, and was thought on excellent authority, to be expecting again.
And Victoria was even shorter in stature and a whole year younger than Gemma.
Amabel, although hovering on the brink of tears, tried valiantly, in her own fashion, not to mind.
Or not too much.
For she had actually been engaged in the very pleasant task of deciding which room in her new  house at Far Flatley might best be converted into a nursery when a messenger had come from Frizingley with the awful news.
And Amabel could not stop herself from thinking that this dreadful, dirty town must surely be to blame, that if Gemma had been less stubborn about remaining here, in this dark old manor, standing cheek-by-jowl with the brewery and the foundry and those hundreds and hundreds of unwashed, unlettered people who worked in them, then this tragedy would not have occurred.
Oh yes — naturally — a young wife needed a home of her own.
A young couple in the first blissful days of their union needed to be alone together.
Not that Gemma had actually said as much, although"Amabel's tender heart had at once understood.
But John-William had bought so much land at Far Flatley from Colonel Covington-Pym, a whole bank of his river and several fields beyond that there would have been ample room to build Gemma and Tristan a dear little nest.
Although Almsmead, the house they had built, was big enough, she felt quite certain, for half a dozen pairs of newly married turtle-doves to lose themselves in delicious privacy whenever they chose.
She would have been the last person in the world to interfere with that.
And Almsmead was her own dream come true, a medieval castle in pale, newly-quarried stone on the outside, spacious and high-ceilinged and fitted with every modern gadgetry within.
Bigger, wider, grander in all its dimensions than the houses the Colcloughs and the Lords had built, since John-William had cleverly engaged the same architect and told him to produce something similar but much more splendid.
And the dear, good man had designed Almsmead, in the centre of a green field; had surrounded it with a rose-garden; given her apple trees and a lily-pond; a trellised, covered walk down to the river with its clear, clean water in which she could see smooth pebbles and little silvery fishes instead of the slime and gas bubbles and dead cats one saw — if one had the stomach to look — in Frizingley's canal.
There were no rows upon rows of mean, diseased little cottages now to press upon her and worry her.
As they had worried her.
Enormously.
No longer that terrible clattering  of clogs in the street to wake her every morning and start her thinking about all those poor people and those ragged little children hurrying to the mill.
Nor those dreadful factory hooters, Mr Colclough's from the foundry, Mr Lord's answering it, her husband's from the top of the hill, Ben Braithwaite's intruding as stridently as his mother's purple taffeta dresses from the other side of town, each one of them blasting out its five minute warning as to the pains and penalties of being late.
She could sleep now in peace and with her windows open to sweet air and silence, nothing to disturb her in the mornings but birdsong and the lowing of Colonel Covington-Pym's cattle, the barking of a dog that would most certainly be a pedigree animal bred for the retrieving of partridge and pheasant, as far removed from the yapping mongrel-packs of Frizingley as could be.
And when her maids had got her dressed and done her hair and she had breakfasted by her tall windows overlooking her manicured rose-garden and a green, daisy-starred meadow, she had nothing to alarm her throughout the day but the possibility of a visit from the formidable Mrs Covington-Pym or the awkwardness, as she took her carriage-exercise, of encountering the wife of her dear friend Mr Adolphus Moon who had made himself so very agreeable.
Particularly to Linnet.
The house, of course, had been long in the building.
John-William insisting on having everything just so, Amabel herself taking time and immense delight in her choice of furnishings, living a dozen delightful dramas every day over Aubusson rugs and inlaid cabinets, the recklessness of silk damask on newly plastered walls, the sheer extravagances of crystal and china which Linnet — the dear child — had encouraged her to commit.
For years she had cherished Almsmead in her imagination.
For ten months she had watched it grow, had chosen the textures and colours of her own personality in which to clothe it.
For almost six months now she had known the joy of waking every morning in a brand new feather bed like a fluted, pale pink shell in which no other woman had ever slumbered.
It was the most exciting time of her life.
The happiest.
Or would have been had Gemma not insisted on remaining  in the very centre of so much decay and corruption and"horridness', in Frizingley.
She had spoken to her about it, not sharply, of course— she could never do that — but with disappointment to which Gemma had calmly replied,"Mother, I told you all along that I didn't want to live in the country.
 "Oh yes, dear." 
Amabel's chin had quivered.
"But I just never believed you.
How could I?"
How indeed, when Almsmead was so much better in every way than this creaking old hall and the Goldsboroughs' possibly valuable but, in her view, horribly antique furniture which had come with it, held together, she often thought, by little more than the beeswax with which it was polished.
And these tiny, mullioned windows in their deep embrasures which let in the light so strangely, shadows like dark brown varnish suddenly filtered through by thin beams of light which might be any colour from silver to amber.
And the sickening clamour of street noises beyond the cloister wall, the sickening odour of those who made them.
Amabel had worried that Tristan would not like it.
"Gemma dear, he has a right to be considered and I believe he is a fresh-air man — the Gages and the Bartram-Hyndes have all been brought up to that.
And at Almsmead we have everything that a gentleman could possibly require, hunting and shooting and fishing and maypole dancing and cricket on the village green.?"
"Yes, mamma.
I am sure Tristan will enjoy all that."
"But darling — how can he?
If you stay here?"
"Mother, he may come and go as he pleases.
I do not keep him tied to my apron strings."
And Amabel, who never could feel quite safe unless John-William was somewhere in the house or, at most, at the mill where a note might easily reach him, had been scandalized.
"Gemma my love — oh dear — how can I say this without giving offence?
It is just that gentlemen are Well, it does not do, you see, to be too much apart.
And in Amabel's experience it had always been the wife who complained of it, Ethel Lord, for instance, fretting herself into a decline, or very nearly, when her husband had taken to spending so much time in Leeds; Maria Colclough  turning to religion because her man emerged so rarely from his counting house; even strident Lizzie Braithwaite complaining that she had been neglected for the sake of the business.
Yet Gemma had shown nothing but good-humour when Tristan had subscribed to the Far Flatley hunt and stabled a tall bay mare and a chestnut gelding at Almsmead.
She had even bought him a hunting dog as a present, a sleek, golden, sweet-tempered animal from which he at once became inseparable.
And since the dog also resided at Almsmead — Frizingley very clearly being no place for one of his pedigree — so too, for most of the time, it seemed, did Tristan.
While Gemma — still perfectly good-tempered — remained at the old manor, seeing no one of greater significance, so far as her mother could make out, than the spinster lady who ran the mill school, and the mill manager.
Excellent people, of course, particularly that good Mr Ephraim Cook who was so clever about taking care of the business so that John-William could take his rest.
But hardly fit company — an employee, after all, and his rather blunt, not very pretty wife — for Gemma.
Yet Gemma had shown no more than a polite interest in Almsmead while Linnet, who was very dear but not Gemma, after all, had positively thrown herself into all the excitements of housebuilding and furnishing, taking to Far Flatley as if she had been born there.
Particularly after her unfortunate experience with Ben Braithwaite.
Dear Linnet.
Amabel smiled at her now as she sat by Gemma's bedside tranquilly embroidering a cambric handkerchief, patient and beautiful as an angel and so terribly wronged.
That Ben Braithwaite had most ardently desired her was beyond question.
All Frizingley knew it, even his mother who had grown so incensed about Linnet's poverty that she would have poisoned her if she could.
Harsh words had been exchanged, in strident Braithwaite voices, between Lizzie and her eldest son.
Amabel, for the first time in her life, had felt in less than perfect harmony with her John-William when he had declared that Linnet, on the small dowry he was prepared to give her, was aiming too high.
Would he give more?
 "No," he'd said flatly in a manner which meant he  would not change his mind.
 "If the lad takes her then he must take her for passion and hope it stays hot: " 
It had burned a whole year long, and the half of another, the image of Linnet gliding down the aisle behind Gemma like a lovely abandoned swan so engraved on Ben Braithwaite's memory that he would have no peace, no rest — he'd vowed — until he had possessed her.
He was his own master.
He could afford her, God dammit.
He'd have her then.
He told her so.
And grew frenzied enough, more than once, to attempt to take her, a half-rape, half-seduction, to which she appeared to submit and then, at the last moment, eluded him; leaving him more famished and furious and consumed by passion than ever.
A whole year long of hungering and thirsting, and the half of another.
Yet last week he had married Magda Tannenbaum, daughter of Sigmund Tannenbaum of Bradford and Hamburg, a wool merchant of legendary wealth, enormous possessions, and no son to inherit the lion's share of them.
Linnet had attended the wedding, of course, looking exquisite in dove-grey velvet with a swansdown hat and muff, her face calm and remote, betraying not the least flicker of anything which anyone could call unbecoming, even when she saw the bride, thin as a stick and hideously sallow, led to the altar dripping pearls and diamonds and a London-made gown with a train half a cathedral-aisle long.
Amabel, torn between sympathy for Linnet who had loved and lost and this poor little jewelled bride who was unlikely to be loved at all, had suffered a severe headache that day.
Linnet — who could doubt it?— had endured untold agonies beneath her cool, just a shade too persistent smile, finding little consolation, perhaps, but hardly so much as she had pretended, in the renewed attentions of Uriah Colclough.
Gemma had winced slightly — Amabel would never forget It — as they left the church and, later that day, had started to lose her baby.
A day of celebration and a day of tragedy, one superimposed upon the other, so that Amabel, who did not even wish to be rational, found it easy to believe that Ben Braithwaite had broken not only Linnet's heart, but Gemma's.
 "Never mind, my darlings," she said now, bathing them  both in her overflowing affections, Gemma propped up on her pillows looking polite and pleasant — surely that could not be right?— Linnet still remote and very tranquil.
 "Never mind." 
 "About what, mother?" 
And since she could not say, "About horrid Ben Braithwaite for wasting two years of Linnet's youth and having his dreary wedding on a day when Gemma would have been better off staying in bed," she chirruped brightly,"Everything, darlings — because this is what I want us to do.
Just as soon as you are better "— and she meant both of them —" we'll get out the carriage and go down to that sweet little shop of Miss Adeane's to buy bonnets and shawls and order new dresses.
And then we'll just run across the street to Miss Baker's and order some more, so that the dear old thing will not feel left out.
Shall we do that?"
She meant well.
Very well indeed.
 "Yes, mamma," said Gemma.
 "Oh yes, Aunt Amabel — do let's," said Linnet.
 "Can I come too?" asked Tristan, playing his part.
 "To make eyes at Miss Adeane?" enquired Gemma, playing hers.
"Oh, absolutely not, my darling.
Since it is Miss Ernestine Baker who has my heart."
 "Incorrigible flirt," teased his sister.
 "Heartbreaker," teased his wife.
 "Really, girls — how can you?" protested Amabel, dimpling with smiles.
So that when John-William Dallam came into the room it was to find his womenfolk as he most liked to see them, cheerful comfortable, and under his roof safely and securely together.
He knew his arrival would disperse the party, being well aware that his presence made both his son-in-law and pretty Miss Linnet frankly nervous.
 "I think I'd best step outside a moment and see to the dogs," said Tristan.
 "I left them in the stable." 
"Dogs?
What's this?"said Linnet.
 "Have you found a friend for Goldie?" 
"I have.
That pure white bitch Adolphus Moon could never handle."
"But darling — what fun.
How wonderful."
 "Why not go and see?" murmured Gemma.
They went, wreathed in love and kisses for their dear Gemma yet tiptoeing slightly as people do when making an escape.
Mrs Drubb came in with offers of tea.
 "Why not take it downstairs, mamma?" whispered Gemma.
"I believe Mrs Drubb has things to say to you.
She went, leaving John-William Dallam alone, as he wished to be, with his daughter.
Had Gemma sent them all away, then?
He believed she had.
Clever girl, his Gemma.
What a clever man she would have made.
What a useful, reliable, clear-headed son.
And what a trick Fate had played on him by putting the very qualities he had wanted to see in that son in a daughter.
There'd have been no need for Ephraim Cook then to manage the business when he was gone; an upright, Nonconformist — Mr Cook — the kind who never allowed a drop of alcohol, or a smile, to pass his lips and whose well-trained conscience would never allow him to cheat Gemma nor to waste a penny of her money, no matter how hard Tristan tried.
A good man, Ephraim Cook, with a good, strait-laced, sensible wife, a man who'd keep the looms turning and the profits coming in long after John-William himself was in his grave.
No imagination though.
None of that extra quality, whatever it was, which had got the business going in the first place, which had ensured John-William success in those early rough-and-ready days of colossal risks and colossal returns, when so many had failed.
The drive — perhaps that was what he ought to call it?— which Gemma may well have inherited in abundance.
If she'd been a man.
 "Are you happy, lass?" he wanted to say to her.
But one could never speak so directly to a woman.
At least he couldn't.
And so he muttered "Are they treating you all right?" 
 "Of course, father." 
 "Aye — but if there's anything you want that they can't get you.?" 
He would see to it at once.
She knew that.
Yet it gave him pleasure to tell her so.
 "You're not feeling so poorly then — as you were?" 
"Oh no.
I feel quite well.
I'd like to get up.
I'm sure I could.
But they won't have it."
Her father looked shocked.
"I should think not, my lass.
You just stay where you are."
His wife, who had miscarried he was no longer sure how many times, had stayed in bed two or three weeks without setting her foot to the floor on every occasion, and had then spent a week or so more, he remembered, on a sofa in the drawing-room looking not merely untouchable but as if even a heavy footstep across the hall might shatter her into pieces like spun glass.
He felt a twinge of unease even now at the memory.
Poor Amabel.
He had wanted a son and had made her suffer for it.
Not that she had even thought of complaining.
Yet the sight of his daughter going the same way seriously displeased him.
He had no intention absolutely none — of letting any man make her suffer.
And what need had Tristan Gage for a son and heir in any case when he had nothing to leave him?
What need had he, John-William Dallam, for a grandson, he thought grimly, when he would be dead and gone, by the look of things, long before he could teach the little chap how to run the mill?
No.
Let Ephraim Cook keep the business in order for Amabel and Gemma, and whoever came after them must take care of themselves.
As he'd had to do.
For he was no landed gentleman like the Larks and the Covington-Pyms who'd go to any lengths to pass on their noble names.
Names, indeed.
Dallams were ten a penny in the backstreets of Frizingley.
Always had been.
It made no difference to him.
And if young master Tristan, with his fancy education and his airs and graces had any such notions about founding a dynasty then he — common or garden John-William Dallam — would soon put a stop to it.
 "It's not the whole world, you know, Gemma," he said gruffly, having a family, I mean.
Some do.
Some don't.
Some can't.
And that's that.
It was the most intimate thing he had ever said to her.
An acknowledgement of her womanhood coupled with his offer, at all times, to protect it.
 "If that fancy lad doesn't suit you," he was really telling her,"then we'll get rid of him.
Church wedding, marriage settlement, your mother's godson or not, he can have his marching orders whenever you say the word."
She held out her hand to him and smiled.
 "I'm absolutely all right, father — really." 
He hoped so.
He was even ready to believe her.
Although he couldn't understand it.
And if he'd come across any other married woman who kept on buying her husband horses and dogs and fishing tackle and pointing him towards the open countryside while she stayed in town, then he'd have known exactly what to think.
But not Gemma.
His daughter had no taste for flirtation and social high-jinks like Miss Linnet Gage, he was sure of that.
Although just what she had done with all her unencumbered time since he'd moved the rest of them to Almsmead, other than take an excessive interest in the mill-school he'd had to build to keep on the right side of that damned, interfering Factory Act, he was uncertain.
She'd moved the furniture around at the manor, he'd noticed, and got rid of Amabel's chintz chair covers by the look of it.
Thus annoying Mrs Drubb and convincing her that she would be better off at Almsmead looking after Amabel.
Had Gemma got rid of Mrs Drubb too?
Well, in t e old days, two years ago, when she'd been his Gemma, she'd have had no choice but to pack her trunks and live under the roof he provided, wherever he chose to provide it.
No question then of her remaining here, as a single woman, alone.
No question now, married or not, had it been apparent to those who might gossip about it, that she was alone.
But with her husband constantly coming and going between this house and the other and looking so damned pleased with himself, pretending not to understand when John-William had tackled him about it looking odd, then what — without causing a mighty rumpus — could he do?
And John-William, still distressingly short of breath, still tired out far too easily by any undue exertion, was not in the mood for domestic strife.
It had been bad enough, this year that was just ending, without that.
The worst year for strikes and lock-outs and bitterness between masters and men that he could remember since the power-looms had been brought in under armed guard twenty years ago and the Luddites had started swinging their hammers.
But he'd been in his prime then, a match for any King Lud who'd taken it into his weak head to break  into the Dallam weaving sheds, in the dead of night, and start smashing his machines to bits.
As several had tried and been hanged for it.
Hungry lads from the bottom of St Jude's.
One of them called Dallam.
Yes.
He'd been in his vigorous prime then, all right.
As Ben Braithwaite was now.
And that arrogant devil Christie Goldsborough who'd caused the trouble, so far as Frizingley was concerned at any rate, by egging Ben on to cut the wages at Braithwaite's mill.
Not that it was the first time they'd been cut.
Not that John-William himself hadn't done his share of cutting and laying-off, as the state of trade required it.
And nobody's order books had been full this summer.
And what did Goldsborough care about that?
What did he care about getting rid of the Corn Laws either — which was what the whole argument had been about — since they'd been created in the first place for the benefit of his land-owning friends?
But he'd sat there listening, with that sneering smile of his, drinking Ban's claret as if he was doing the Braithwaites a great favour, while Ben, who'd had his share of claret too, lamented the fall of the Whig government, which might have done something for the manufacturing classes, and the election of the land-owning Tories, that bunch of country squires like the Larks, who would not.
The Corn Laws had to go, Ben had been saying, hammering his mother's carved mahogany table.
John-William had been saying the same thing himself when Ben Braithwaite had still been in his cradle.
A squire's trick, the Corn Laws, banning the import of cheap foreign corn — which would have meant cheap bread in the cities — so that the squires, who grew the stuff on those ancestral lands of theirs could charge as much as they liked for it.
And since an expensive loaf caused havoc in St Jude's and trouble in everybody's weaving sheds, with demands for higher wages keeping profits down at a time when trade was far from good — when it would probably never rise again to the level of those early, heady days when the machines first came in — then Ben Braithwaite and his dinner guests had reason for their anxiety.
Except Christie Goldsborough, who'd sat watching them, as supercilious as if he found their accents comical or difficult to understand which, when one remembered what he must  be accustomed to hearing in St Jude's, he certainly did not.
And then, leaning back in his chair, lounging like all the gentry seemed to do, as if they were permanently half asleep and just about to put their spurred and booted feet on the table, he'd said, "If the new government won t play your way then you'll have to stir it up a little, won't you?" 
 "How's that?" 
Ben Braithwaite, who could never stand being told what to do, particularly by the landlord of a common tavern, even if he did have a diamond on his swarthy hand and his name was Goldsborough, had spoken sharply.
 "I'll tell you." 
And Goldsborough's voice had been like velvet.
"Don't avoid trouble.
Cause it.
If your employees are hungry then make them hungrier.
Don't worry about them coming out on strike.
See to it that they do.
After all, if your order books are as empty as you say they are, then how can you lose?
So long as they're on strike you can keep their wages, can't you?
And if they get very famished and very desperate and enough of their mates come out to join them, then how can Sir Robert Peel and his Tories fail to listen when you tell him it's all because of the Corn Laws?
If the trouble spreads far enough and he thinks he can buy peace with a cheap loaf of bread then I should think he will.
Wouldn't you?"
It had sounded very plausible through the claret and the brandy and the smoke of Ben Braithwaite's excellent cigars.
Less so the next morning when, his stomach seriously disordered and his head aching, John-William had started to wonder why a man like Goldsborough who was "gentry" through and through despite his odd goings-on at the Fleece, should be making revolutionary suggestions as to how the"squires' government might be brought down.
Not that John-William was particularly opposed to revolution if he thought he had a chance of winning.
He'd threatened to withdraw his money from the Bank of England in 1832 like all the other manufacturers of his acquaintance, and to withhold his taxes, in a bid to force the government's hand so that the new industrial cities could elect their own MPs.
Giving the vote, in effect, not only to men like Goldsborough who had always had it as a birthright, but to men like himself and Ben Braithwaite's father who had come up the hard way.
And remembering how furiously the Larks  and the Covington-Pyms — and no doubt Goldsborough himself — had opposed the opening of parliament to the new and much despised middle-classes, he wondered afresh why the captain should now be murmuring against his own kin.
Or was he?
Might he not be playing a far deeper game although not a new one, since it would not be the first time that the man who hatched the plot and encouraged others most ardently to join it, should be the very one to turn his fellow conspirators over to the magistrates.
For money.
Or for his own twisted amusement.
Both, John-William had concluded, in the case of Goldsborough.
But, by that same morning, Ben Braithwaite had started to believe that he had thought of the cut in wages all by himself.
Uriah Colclough, unable to see beyond his pious nose-end, had at once cut his to match.
So too did many others, on both sides of the Pennines, not all of them obeying the mischievous hints of Captain Goldsborough, of course— since even he could not have been in so many places all at once — but intent on stirring up trouble nevertheless.
A commodity never difficult to find, in John-William's experience, particularly now when the Chartist leaders, who had been locked up after the troubles of 1839, were all out of prison again; except for that Sheffield lad, of course, who'd died at twenty-seven, from the hard labour he'd been put to at Northallerton jail.
John-William, who knew that he would have been a Chartist himself had he remained a poor man, felt sorry about that death.
But he was not a poor man and had been naturally and sensibly alarmed to hear of the 50,000 — disgruntled people who had attended the"martyr's' funeral in Sheffield, which had given the Chartists something to build on.
Something — he wasn't sure just what — which had caused the entire north to rise like yeast in sudden and furious ferment, the whole of industrial Lancashire and Yorkshire seething with militant men and women — highly militant, those women — on the march, carrying banners and loaves of bread on the end of sticks, singing hymns and psalms and chanting that it was no longer a matter of wages.
Although most of them were being paid so little that employment had become a farce, an irrelevance.
Nor even a matter of starvation.
Although many of them had starved in the past and were therefore well  equipped to recognize starvation now that they had met it again.
No.
It had become less simple and at the same time less complicated than that.
They were on strike for the Charter which, in its six points, would give them the power to redress their own wrongs.
They were on strike for the right to vote, to elect men like themselves to positions of authority as the gentry and the millmasters now did — who would make laws not only to suit the needs of squires and of the middle-classes — but of the common man.
They were on strike for the Charter and only for the Charter, a multitude of them, coming like the tributaries of a great river, from everywhere.
Pouring across the Pennines from Lancashire to be joined by eager exalted crowds from Bradford, Halifax, Barnoldswick, Huddersfield, Frizingley, some of them carrying sticks and flails and home-made pikes, most of them empty-handed and full-hearted, singing their Chartist hymns of freedom and justice and brotherhood and stopping every mill they passed on their way by the simple process of removing the plug from the boiler, letting off the mill-dam, and drawing the workers into their ranks with the irresistible attraction of a ragged, hundred-handed Pied Piper.
In one day's march thirty-eight mills had had their plugs drawn in Dewsbury, the masters standing amazed in their empty sheds while the workers streamed out to join what to some had become a Crusade, to others a Pilgrimage; an opportunity for revenge; an exciting chance for a holiday.
Every mill in Hebden Bridge had been shut down.
Leeds and Cleckheaton had been cordoned off by troops to stop the crowds from getting in.
Halifax and Frizingley had been invaded from all directions, the streets sprouting Chartist placards like weeds from every chink in the cobbles, demanding what John-William himself had once demanded.
Democracy.
Dignity.
His right to govern himself by his own vote, which he had fought for and wrestled from the grip of the landed gentry himself only ten years ago.
Well, they hadn't got their Charter.
Not this time at any rate.
They'd got themselves arrested, in dozens, and sentenced to terms of hard labour and transportation to Australia, as always happened.
But most of them had come back to work reasonably cap-in-hand, preferring to be half-starved  on half-pay than to starve altogether on none.
That always happened too.
Although quite a few had subsequently been dismissed, both Braithwaite and Colclough having had their spies in the Chartist ranks, men who had sung those Chartist hymns about freedom and justice the loudest as they had been memorizing names and faces to sell afterwards to Uriah and Ben.
As Christie Goldsborough, the sardonic, black-skinned devil, had no doubt whispered Ben's name, and Uriah's, and John-William's own, into some haughty, land-owning, Corn-Law-loving ear.
Thus swelling the crowd of bitter, hungry men forever hanging around St Jude's with time on their hands to plot their treasons.
Thus adding to the number of women and children already in the workhouse, already overburdening the rates.
And the Corn Laws had not been repealed.
Would they ever be?
Would it even matter, if this rabble of which he had himself once been a part, managed to get their vote and fill the House of Commons with men who would pass Factory Acts galore, including that damnable Ten Hours Bill of Richard Oastler's, so that no man would be able to control his own affairs?
And small good it would do any of them.
Because there had never been enough of anything to go around, and never would be.
John-William had always known that.
Dog ate dog And man ate man.
Not just in the alleys of St Jude's, where John-William had taken good care never to be devoured himself, but everywhere.
And when these poor fools won their vote what would it really mean to them but the right to choose their own oppressors?
John-William had not cut his wages this time, and no one had thanked him for it.
They'd taken the plug out of his boiler just the same and let off his mill-dam without a thought for what it was going to cost him — and them, he'd see to that — in the long run.
And now, to set the seal on this disastrous year, the member of parliament for Frizingley, old Charlie Bowen, who had been John-William's man and Ben Braithwaite's man and knew exactly what he had to do to earn the money they paid him, had fallen off his horse — the damned fool — and broken his neck.
Which meant all the hullabaloo of a by-election, with a new man of their own to find, and the Larks and the Covington-Pyms trying to get  their own man in.
And a Chartist candidate too, he'd heard, if one could believe the insolence, bringing his Chartist banners and his hymns to Frizingley again; with not a hope of winning, of course, since the men who would like to elect him had no votes to do it with.
But since those men were numbered in thousands — with every opportunity in the world for rekindling those ugly sparks of revolution.
Thank God he had taken Amabel safely away to Almsmead.
Leaning back in his chair John-William was unaware of the sleep which abruptly overcame him, an old man's sleep from which he would wake presently with a start and in great confusion.
But Gemma saw it and smiling at him, her affection undiminished, closed her own eyes gratefully.
Not to sleep but simply to think, freely and unobserved, without the burden of her mother's solicitude, the obligation not only to look cheerful but to go on repeating how well she felt so that Amabel — always unnerved by silence — should not weary her further by growing alarmed.
She was, of course, quite well in the sense of feeling no actual grief or pain.
She was, in fact, all right: not unhappy, not dissatisfied, not anything in any way so definite as that.
She was very much as she had expected to be, having found in her marriage nothing to surprise her nor to cause her the least distress.
Tristan had been — well, Tristan.
Amiable, agreeable, never making a fuss, trained as carefully — by Linnet, she supposed — in the arts of correct behaviour as he himself had trained his dogs.
A charming if somewhat absent-minded companion.
Undemanding as a lover, she was beginning to realize, but so beautiful, of course, that few women could have objected to his touch.
She did not object to it.
She had not known what to expect from this side of marriage since there was no literature available to her on the subject and her mother had told her nothing.
Nor would it have been possible to ask, nor even to rely on any information which might have been forthcoming, since Amabel, who always retired to bed for the duration of her own "monthly curse" had said nothing more to the point than,"Darling, I must beg of you never to speak of this to anyone, when Gemma at the age of fourteen had first seen evidence of hers.
While Mrs Drubb, with no more  explanation than that she was a woman now and had better keep well away from men, had then scolded her for upsetting her mother.
She had taken to her marriage-bed, therefore, a certain natural innocence and all the ignorance considered essential to her station, of which Tristan had relieved her as gently and pleasantly as he had been able, his passion lacking the intensity which might, on those honeymoon nights, have alarmed her; being, instead, a lighthearted matter, full of the nonchalant reflections of the man himself.
A gentleman, in fact, of sporting rather than truly amorous inclinations who would never dream of forcing his attentions on anyone but was always absolutely delighted to oblige.
 "Gemma, you must be the most agreeable girl in the world — a rattling good sort." 
Those were the words he spoke to her as she lay in his arms in the vulnerable moments following his pleasure when only a lout — in his opinion — would turn away from a woman without a word and go to sleep.
In her opinion too, although she had no idea how other men behaved, nor any way of measuring the depth of Tristan's desire for her; whether it came easily and naturally to him, as any stallion would mount any mare, or whether it required a degree of effort he chose to conceal.
Certainly there had been times when he had started to caress her and then, with a certain boyish sweetness, had turned lovemaking into conversation, letting the moment pass.
But more often than not, whenever they were under the same roof together, he shared her bed and, now that her initial awkwardness had abated — for she had never seen a naked human being of either sex before and had always been discouraged from looking too closely at herself — he made love to her with a straightforward vigour she found attractive.
Perhaps he did not touch her very deeply but he did not shock her either, her body moving easily, without apprehension, beneath his; her mind remaining open to the possibility of sensation, observing his pleasure with affection — glad that he should have it — yet wondering more and more frequently if a similar capacity for such joyful sensuality lay concealed somewhere within herself.
Other women, who now spoke to her freely as a married  woman among married women, certainly thought not.
 "You will find" all that "very wearisome, my dear," Amabel had murmured, blushing like a girl, on her return from honeymoon.
"But do bear it patiently.
It is so important to the gentlemen.
And when you have a dear little baby to show for it then I expect you will think it worthwhile."
And she knew now that the worst accusation to be levelled against such women as Marie Moon was that they found "all that" much more than simply worthwhile.
They enjoyed it.
The wantons.
Like men.
Her own mother contemplated such depravity with sorrow, convinced that it could do the poor creatures no good.
Her mother's friends, Lizzie Braithwaite and Maria Colclough and Ethel Lord were incensed by it, having used the act of sex all their wedded lives as something to bargain with, employing their very contempt for it as a punishment regularly meted out to husbands who lusted after the nasty performance far too much.
And if one started to lust after it oneself, as much as the men — and let them see that one lusted — then what weapon had one left?
So said Lizzie and Maria and Ethel, whose marriages had always been conducted along the lines of a pitched battle.
 "Do bear it patiently," Amabel had continued to urge.
"They do not mean any harm, you know.
It comes quite naturally to them."
Gemma was beginning to believe, contrary to all her expectations and her mother's teaching, that it might also come naturally to her.
 "What a rattling good sort you are, Gemma — absolutely first class." 
Yes, that was all very pleasant.
Very much, in fact, according to plan and she had no wish to complain.
He had done everything she had asked of him.
He had taken to life at Almsmead with all the enthusiasms she had hoped for.
He had joined her, with all the whimsical mischief of a schoolboy, in her small conspiracy against her father with regard to the manor.
He had never questioned either her motives or her decisions, allowing her a most aristocratic freedom of movement far beyond anything her middle-class upbringing in general and her life with her father in particular had encouraged her to expect.
And if the only deep emotion she had ever seen in him had been on the day of Ben  Braithwaite's engagement to Magda Tannenbaum, then she felt no right and no reason to be astonished at that.
He had taken his sister to town that morning, to Miss Baker's and Miss Adeane's where all the gossip would be flowing free and strong, and bought her a new hat and gloves and a flask of the perfume Miss Adeane kept hidden discreetly away for customers who wished it to he believed that they smelled naturally of lavender or roses.
Two exquisite thoroughbreds, she supposed they had looked, chatting to one another in their high-pitched, well-bred "London" voices, filling each shop in turn with their faintly tittering laughter, making Frizingley aware — whatever it chose to whisper behind their backs — that the dynastic alliance of one trading "and therefore" common"fortune with another could mean nothing at all to them.
And that night when Linnet, face to face with her own reflection in her solitary looking-glass and the stark realization of how much it had really meant to her, had been unable to sleep Tristan had walked with her for hours in the manor garden, Gemma watching them from her bedroom window as they paced beneath the chestnut trees, engrossed, almost entwined, like turning to like, intent wholly and exclusively upon one another.
So had she once walked and talked herself in that same garden — or so it now seemed to her — with the young Irishman who had recovered the amethyst and diamond cat which she still wore, very often on her collar and which she had longed — very badly, she remembered — to give him as a keepsake.
She had been unable to do so.
Tristan's arrival had prevented her and she would never have found the right words to accompany the gift in any case.
It would have appeared to be charity and she could not have borne that.
Yet, whenever she pinned the brooch to her dress, she remembered him, pleasantly, wishing him well, not in the least distressed by the absolute conviction that he would never once think of her.
He had been going to France, she recalled.
Or Italy.
Anywhere in the wide world which happened to call his name.
And she hoped he had answered freely, fortuitously, and had found his heart's desire at the end of the road.
Whatever it had been.
While as for herself, surely she already possessed as much as it would be sensible for her to desire?
And she had always set great store by common sense.
She had the manor and with it a great many pleasures which were negative perhaps but no less welcome for that.
No need to gossip every afternoon away at Amabel's tea-table with Amabel's friends.
No need to accept every one of the invitations which kept on being delivered because of Amabel's fear of giving offence.
No need to be constantly laying down her book in case Mrs Braithwaite should catch her reading and name her"studious' again.
No Mrs Drubb, or not for much longer.
No need to go to bed when Amabel went because she did not like to keep the servants sitting up and had had nightmares, ever since Gemma's birth, about accidents with bedtime candles.
No need to explain one's reasons for suddenly looking out of the window.
The sheer, exhilarating wickedness of going out, if she had a mind for it, in the rain.
The socially useless companionship of Mrs Ephraim Cook, the mill-manager's wife, a plain-faced, plain-spoken woman, who had aroused Gemma's interest in the mill-school and the somewhat ineffective spinster lady who ran it.
The school, of course, had existed for some years now, ever since the Factory Act which her father could not mention without turning purple, had thought it advisable for factory children to be given some education, feeling that an hour or two a week per child, perhaps, of reading, writing and arithmetic, would not go amiss.
Like the Braithwaites and the Colcloughs her father had not agreed with that.
But being steeped, like them, in the philosophy that if one did a job at all one might as well do it splendidly — or at least a good deal better than the Braithwaites — he had built a very decent stone school with a walled yard and a tiny house attached for the use of the teacher, where anyone who paid him rent for his mill-cottages or any of his other employees who resided elsewhere might send their children — to suit the convenience of the teacher — free of charge.
Not that many came on any sort of regular basis, much preferring the excitement of the streets to the acquisition of learning for which even the teacher herself, who had known far better days, considered they would have little use.
Mrs Ephraim Cook did not agree with her, believing that every child should learn to read as firmly as she believed they should wash behind their ears every morning and not relieve themselves, like dogs, in the street.
While Gemma, who had never thought very much about it, her own education having come to her just as easily and plentifully as soap and hot water and extremely private sanitary arrangements, had found it something to think about now, when any new thought would have been welcome.
Something useful.
Something which could interest her without being thought so eccentric or so socially damaging that it would upset her mother.
Something to do.
Particularly now when there was after all, to be no baby.
Better luck next time, everyone had said.
Yet it occurred to her now, as she lay quietly on her pillows, listening to the fire crackling in the winter chimney and her father peacefully snoring beside it, that such a time may never come.
She had wanted her child.
Badly, in fact.
More, far more, than she had cared to show.
Yet her body had rejected it so soon, with a firmness which had seemed quite final.
Almost as if her body did not find it natural to bear a child.
 "Nonsense," the doctor had muttered gruffly when she had attempted to explain her fears to him.
"You ladies have strange notions at times like these.
Well known for it.
You'll be laughing, Mrs Gage, at the very idea — this time next year, perhaps.
Or the year after."
She had not believed him.
She did not trust him either, considering him to be little more than a teller of comforting lies, her mother's doctor oozing reassurance from every pore.
Yet she had smiled obediently, taken her tonic, eaten her nourishing broth, allowed him to earn his fee.
 "Yes, doctor." 
But her own body told her a different story which, lying here for the long days of rest which had been prescribed for her, she had heard clearly enough through the bird-twitter of Linnet and her mother, and Tristan's determined joviality.
Perhaps she would never have a child.
Perhaps — in fact most certainly — it would be sensible to face the possibility.
She faced it, therefore.
Wept over it a little whenever her  mother was safely out of the way.
And then found her thoughts, which desperately needed a new direction, turning slowly towards the mill-school.
No child of her own.
But there were other children.
Ragged urchins, of course, sitting on those school benches on the occasions of her visits.
Cleaned up for her inspection she supposed and even then many of them very far from tidy.
But intelligence could not possibly be reserved for the washed and  moneyed classes.
Far from it, indeed, when one remembered Felix Lark who would have been thought half-witted had he not been a baronet, or Amanda Braithwaite who, no matter what her mother said, had never really learned to read.
Certainly in that plain, square classroom there would be bright, quick minds behind not a few of those dirty faces, and budding abilities, potential, which she — with so much leisure and ease and money — could surely discover?
Some clever little girl full of hope and fun and joy of living as Cara Adeane, the Irish dressmaker, must once have been.
And what would one have made of Miss Adeane, Gemma wondered, had her talents been properly nurtured from the start?
Any one of a dozen useful, exciting, challenging things.
Just as there might well be a dozen little Cara Adeanes waiting up there.
Something to do.
It was what she most urgently craved for.
 "Father -?" 
His moment of waking was often the best one, sometimes the only one, in which to approach him with any certainty of success.
"What? what is.?
I wasn't asleep…
Just resting my eyes…
She was content to let him believe it.
"Father, there is something I would like so much And she had spoken deliberately with the voice of Amabel.
Still half asleep he smiled indulgently, scenting a victory, since he had wanted to be generous all day and had been feeling mildly irritated with her for not giving him the opportunity.
So now, after all, there was something she had set her heart on.
He just hoped it would be difficult to come by and very expensive.
 "I would like full responsibility for the running of the mill-school." 
What had the girl got into her head now?
"Although I'm not sure you can do it, father What was that?
He could do as he liked with his own property, couldn't he?
Who challenged him?
"Mrs Ephraim Cook has taken it under her wing, father
The manager's wife?
He'd make short work of her.
"And I would so enjoy turning it into the best school of its kind in Frizingley.
In the West Riding even.
Because if a job's worth doing, then its worth doing well, father.
Very well.
That's what you've always told me, haven't you?"
 "Aye, lass." 
And John-William closed his eyes again, squeezing them tight shut to force back the painful, incredible start of tears.
What a damn shame, he thought, what a tragedy that she was a woman instead of what she ought to have been.
A useful, sensible, hard-headed man.
Daniel Carey returned to Frizingley as its Chartist Candidate entirely by chance, the gentleman who had originally been selected to fight the by-election having taken up a longish residence in jail on charges of plug-drawing and helping to demolish a workhouse near Rochdale.
A substitute had been required, therefore, in haste — and Daniel, who had never reached France or Italy after all but had spent the last two years at the London office of the Chartist Northern Star, had seemed as good a choice as any.
Better than some, in fact, since he had once had West Riding connections and, as young political agitators went, possessed a relatively unblemished reputation, with not so much as a single term of imprisonment, as yet, to be used against him at the hustings.
A pleasant, very nearly a respectable, young man, it seemed, which was far more than could be said for the fellow they had put up for Bradford in 1841, an Irishman of the wilder variety who had served his apprenticeship to the political trade in such select establishments as Northallerton House of Correction and the castle jails of Lancaster and York.
Yet the disreputable William Martin had won an enormous following in"Worstedopolis', culminating in a mighty show of hands at the hustings which had left no one in any doubt that, had those hands possessed a vote apiece, he would have been elected overwhelmingly as a Bradford MP.
Could Daniel Carey do the same in Frizingley?
Better even?
Could he ruffle the smugness of manufacturing Whigs and land-owning Tories alike by reminding them of what hands such as these had done in France?
Of the Liberty and Equality too long denied which had been so bloodily taken?
Very likely he could.
And so they had sent him North, not to win, of course, perhaps not even to poll a single vote, but to lay the Charter once again before the people, to let them  know what could be done in a land where every man had his vote and the freedom to use it without intimidation, as he and he alone thought best.
To Daniel it was a battle worth fighting, an opportunity to be of service which he had long desired.
And if he would have preferred it not to be Frizingley, to be, in fact, anywhere else but there, he managed to quell his initial misgivings by the grim reminder that he would be unlikely to know anyone in St Jude's now.
No one at all.
Two years had passed.
A long time by any standards.
Longer than ever by his — and hers.
She would not be there.
And even if he did find her what more had he to offer her than before?
What, indeed, might he discover except ills that he still could not remedy, and wounds — both hers and his — that still could not be healed?
Better then — far better — not to look.
Safer to close his eyes and his mind to her and give his entire concentration to the matter in hand; a resolution to which he firmly held, even when, after a tumultuous welcome at Brighouse — the nearest railway station to Frizingley — he was escorted, with an appropriate accompaniment of banners and Chartist hymns, to a lodging-house at the top of St Jude's street where the landlady, Mrs Sairellen Thackray, had offered to accommodate him free of charge.
He had expected to stay at the Dog and Gun, a tavern well known for its radical associations, where unstamped, illegal newspapers had always been laid out openly on the bar-counter for the perusal of anyone so inclined.
But, when certain pressures had been brought to bear upon the landlord
Daniel had not been told why or from where — the redoubtable Mrs Thackray had come forward at once to make her contribution to the cause.
A good woman, someone had explained to him on the road from Brighouse, the widow of Radical Jack Thackray, something of a local hero, who had been cut down by a sabre at St Peter's Fields in Manchester, asking for rather less in the way of electoral reform than Daniel himself was demanding now.
A woman who was afraid of nothing and who would feed him, starch his linen, give him peace and quiet in which to compose his speeches, until the campaign  should be over.
And it was not until Mrs Thackray's tall, craggy fair-haired son had shouldered his luggage and led him to the top of St Jude's Street that he had realized his peril.
Yet — just the same — she would not be there.
And he had not come here as a lover, in any case.
He had embarked on a serious and very likely dangerous undertaking which, until its conclusion, must precede anything and everything in his life.
He was the Chartist Candidate for Frizingley.
That was what he meant to Mrs Sairellen Thackray as she served him the first of her good dinners of boiled beef and potatoes and onions towards which the town's Chartists had all made their contributions.
That was what he meant to Luke Thackray, her son, who was to sleep in the kitchen so that the "candidate" might have the privacy of his tiny but spotless room.
And so it was as the "candidate" that he spoke to them, his accent so neutral by now that he could have come from anywhere and everywhere, his green broadcloth jacket still shabby but worn as jauntily as if it had been lined with ermine, his lean, dark face handsome enough to please the women and hard enough to reassure the men.
Young, of course.
Or so he seemed to Sairellen Thackray who preferred her leaders to have the mature dignity of a Richard Oastler, whom she had followed on foot those ninety miles to York and back when they had been campaigning for the ten hour working day.
But Richard Oastler was still in his debtor's prison, more than a thousand pounds short of the repayment of his debt, despite the money which Luke and thousands like him kept on collecting, week after week, from their wages.
Nor had the ten hour day yet come to pass.
And so when Luke had brought home a copy of the People's Charter and read it aloud to her she had listened; considered; believed.
"If we could all vote, mother, then we'd get our way.
And if this candidate they're sending should be more interested in Home Rule for Ireland than our Ten Hours' Bill then what of it?
With the Charter we could have both."
So be it.
Although, despite her principles and her ingrained reluctance to compromise, she could not suppress a pang of gratitude even now — as she dished up her broth and herb dumplings for the candidate — that an attack of the low fever, caught as usual from terrible, tormented Mrs Rattrie who, this time, had died of it, had kept Luke in bed during that wild week last summer when the plugs had been drawn from Braithwaite's boiler and all Luke's brave young friends who had got into the habit of gathering to smoke their pipes and set the world to rights of an evening in her hen-run, had gone marching off to join their"brothers' from across the Pennines.
And thence to Halifax where they had entered the town in their thousands, led by the women, Sairellen had been pleased to hear, walking four and five abreast, empty-handed and bare-headed as she had herself once walked to York, singing the psalm she too had sung on that day.
"Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.
Serve the Lord with gladness,
Come before His presence with singing.
We are His people and the sheep of His pasture."
And like sheep they had eventually been ridden down by soldiers as her husband had been ridden down at Peterloo, the crowd dispersed and then hunted over the open fields like running hares, so that of Luke's companions one had crawled into a hedge with a leg that might have been mangled in a bear trap and had bled t death there; two or three others had taken refuge in haystacks and barns; two had been arrested and sentenced to hard labour.
While those who had gone back to Braithwaite's mill had been picked out of the crowd by wild little Oliver Rattrie, the eldest Rattrie boy — nineteen or twenty she supposed he'd be by now— the twisted, crook-shouldered lad who had done more talking of pikes and pistols and bloody revolution than anybody else at the meetings in her back-yard.
A betrayal which had secured their dismissal from Mr Ben Braithwaite himself who had branded them as troublemakers with no hope of employment anywhere in Frizingley again.
Not that it had done Oliver Rattrie any good, since he'd been caught the day after by those same Chartist women who had marched into Halifax singing the One Hundredth Psalm; sheep no longer but howling Furies who had seized him, puny little thing that he was, and thrown him in the canal where, in his struggle to keep himself from drowning, he had lost every last shilling of the blood-money in his  pockets.
Unless it was true, as he'd alleged, that the women had robbed him before tossing him in the stinking water.
Perhaps they had.
With husbands in prison, or disabled, or thrown out of work by Oliver's treachery, who could blame them?
But when he had had the effrontery to go whining to the constable, attempting to get back the money for which he had, after all, sold his twisted little soul, no one in St Jude's Street could remember seeing or hearing anything about the accident at all.
Sairellen herself had met the constable on her doorstep and kept him there, her arms folded across her impassive chest, her eyes like chips of granite.
Oliver Rattrie?
Had he fallen into the canal?
Well — and what of it?
He'd have been drunk, she supposed.
Like his father.
In her opinion anybody with any sense would let the matter rest there.
There it had rested.
But Sairellen knew all too well that had Luke not been delirious with fever that day he would surely have marched to Halifax; not with a pitchfork or a flail or a home-made pike in his hands, since he had never been a "physical force" man but there, just the same.
A voice for moderation and good order — like many others — but his head as bare as the rest when the bricks started to fly, his body as vulnerable to sabre cuts as his father's, his countenance indistinguishable to those young and possibly nervous soldiers from the real "physical force" brigade they were supposed to be looking for, who had raised everybody's temperatures by ambushing and stoning a military escort at Salterhebble.
And if Oliver had betrayed him, as he had betrayed all the others, what would she have been able to do for the Chartist candidate then?
Was it even safe to be helping him now?
But she would be a sheep indeed to be ruled only by that.
 "You'll take some treacle tart," she told Daniel, the set of her pugnacious jaw warning him that she was not asking a question so much as issuing a command.
 "So I will." 
He gave her a slanting, quite roguish smile, cleverly designed to appeal to her both as a woman and a mother.
A charmer, she thought, although she had long passed the season for such things.
And a wanderer, a political vagabond as she would permit no son of hers to become.
An Irishman too which was not, in her eyes, the best of recommendations.
What would he be likely to know or care of children worked half to death in English factories?
 "You'll be after Home Rule for your own country, I expect," she said.
 "I'll be after justice and freedom for everybody, Mrs Thackray." 
"Aye.
I reckon you will."
She had heard those words too many times before to be impressed by them.
"My husband died at Peterloo for that, my lad.
Twenty-four years ago.
Had it really been so long?
Sometimes it seemed another lifetime.
Sometimes no farther than yesterday.
But Luke, she remembered, had been four years old, tall for his age but thin as a stick and pale with excitement, that day, at the journey to Manchester, the speeches, the exalted, psalm-singing atmosphere of the crowds.
Was he outgrowing his strength, she'd wondered, as her other children had done, her vague fears of wasting fevers and rickety limbs vanishing to be replaced by incredulous horror as the soldiers on their tall horses had begun to charge.
Who had she brought him here?
She ought to have known there would be trouble.
She had known it.
There had simply been nowhere to leave him.
And Jack, her husband, had had some high-flown notion of dedicating the lad to the cause.
In blood, it seemed.
 "Damn you, Jack Thackray," she'd screamed.
 "Now you've killed us all." 
Even now, in the night, she was sometimes startled from sleep by the sound of those words; that scream.
She had thrown Luke to the ground, herself on top of him, and when the yelling and the thudding and the terrible, high-pitched howling of collective terror had been over, when the cavalry had charged through the crowd like a scythe through a cornfield and silence such a silence had fallen, she had opened her eyes and seen blood everywhere, in her hair and her hands, all over the stupefied, half-suffocated child.
Jack's blood.
Jack, who had thrown himself across them both and had died in her arms, an hour later, without speaking a word.
Radical Jack Thackray.
Her last words to him had been a curse yet she had felt him at her side on the day she had marched to York with Richard Oastler.
It was for him that she had raised Luke to be the man he was.
It was for him  that now she was entertaining this arrow-straight, dark-eyed young scoundrel who would be likely to repay her by seducing her daughter, she thought, if she still had one, and who would probably forget everything he'd ever heard about hunger in St Jude's, or in County Kildare for that matter, should he ever find himself well-fed in Westminster.
Handsome young rascal with hands that had never lifted anything heavier than a pen by the look of them.
She would prefer to put her trust in a plainer, simpler, hard-handed man.
Like Luke.
 "You'll like your tea strong." 
Once again she had given him an order.
 "I would." 
And then, giving no sign of either self-disgust or — self-betrayal, although he was feeling both in full measure, he very casually mentioned.
"I knew an Irish family once who lived nearby.
Just across the street from here, I think — although after so long I may well be mistaken.
A mother and daughter and the daughter's little boy?"
He found, to his immense distress, that he could not persuade his tongue to pronounce "Adeane" , much less the simple, lovely name of "Cara" .
Sairellen felt no such restriction.
 "You'll be meaning the Adeanes." 
It did not surprise her.
She had judged him, all along, as one of their kind.
"Yes.
That was the name.
They will have moved on by now— surely.?"
And having asked the question it now occurred to him that with this woman's shrewd, sharp eyes upon him, he may be unable to bear the answer.
"Aye, you'd think they'd have moved on, wouldn't you?
Folks like that.
But no.
You'd be wrong.
 "They're here?" 
He would have given a great deal to have sounded less incredulous.
"They are.
Odette and the bairn still across the street just where they used to be."
 "And — Miss Adeane?" 
He still could not trust himself to say "Cara" .
"Come up in the world.
Or so the world calls it.
She has a shop in Market Square.
Miss Cara Adeane.
Dressmaker and Milliner.
Like she always said she'd be."
 "Yes," he said very quietly.
 "I see." 
Clearly, in fact.
Beyond all possibility of error.
For she could not have risen so far on her own.
He knew that.
It was a condition of life in St Jude's.
A condition of life everywhere, to one degree or another, for a woman.
And he would just have to learn, and quickly, to be glad of it.
To accept that whatever she had done or promised or performed to maintain her position in Market Square then her choice could only have been that or the workhouse.
Or the brothel.
Or to become the pregnant drudge of a working man.
No choice at all.
 "Are they — well, Mrs Thackray?" 
He knew she was watching him very keenly.
"Marvellously well, I'd say.
Never better.
 "And Miss Adeane lives over her shop, does she?" 
"Aye., She finds it more convenient, I reckon — for her visitors.
 "Mother." 
Luke Thackray's warning served only to increase the sarcasm in his mother's face.
"I'm telling no secrets, Luke lad.
You'll not be denying what everybody knows for certain?"
He put down his knife and fork tidily, his rough-hewn, overcrowded face completely calm.
"No.
But I won't be judging either, mother."
"Then I reckon it's high time you did.
Where Miss Cara Adeane's concerned, at any rate.
He shook his head, unperturbed it seemed, not in the least put out yet altogether immovable, a man whose quiet strength struck Daniel suddenly as impressive, a steadily burning, dogged persistence which would be likely to endure far longer than his own vivid bursts of fire.
"She does the best she can, mother.
And, considering the alternatives, I'm not much inclined to blame her."
"I've never seen her crying over her lot, Luke my lad — whatever we might choose to call it.
Nor hanging her head with shame."
He looked up at her, with a sudden, whole-hearted grin.
"No mother.
I reckon you never will."
No more was said.
Having finished his dinner the candidate retired to the spick and span little room no bigger than a cubbyhole they had placed at his disposal and, when he had  put his thoughts and his speeches in good order, stepped out for a breath of air, a short stroll which led him — as he had known it would — to the newly painted door of Odette Adeane.
His memory of her had been indistinct, a little French woman speaking only in soft whispers, so frail and quiet and hesitant that she had seemed almost transparent beside Cara, hardly there at all.
An old woman, anxious and harassed half to death, wearing some colourless kind of garment which had seemed to hang on her, fitting where it touched.
Shabby, he'd thought, and plain, so that he was taken aback by the neatly-rounded woman who answered his knock, a most presentable person in a dark, well-cut woollen dress with what looked like a gold brooch at the neck, her smooth oval face miraculously ironed of the creases he remembered, her mouth smiling the serene welcome of a woman who has no reason to expect trouble from a knock at her door, a woman who eats well and sleeps well and can settle all her bills.
A contented woman, subject to no alarm.
Until she recognized him.
 "It is Mr Carey, isn't it?" 
"Yes, Mrs Adeane.
May I speak to you?"
 "Of course." 
For when had Odette ever resisted an appeal?
"Do come in.
Please do.
Please be at ease."
Although she was not at ease herself and did not expect to be until she had told him all the painful things he would surely wish to know.
Until she had wounded him, perhaps.
And then carried the news to Cara.
He no longer recognized the room into which she bade him enter, a bare place once furnished with the haphazard gleanings of pawnshops and charity, now beautified beyond anything in St Jude's by rugs and armchairs and a chintz-covered sofa, heavy red plush curtains at the window, a table with a fringed, red plush tablecloth to match, pictures on the walls, china ornaments, a good fire burning, something savoury and appetizing in the coal oven beside it.
The wages of sin, he supposed, trying to be glad, for Cara's sake, that they appeared to be so good.
No dog, he noticed, but Cara's son, the silent child who had always made him feel so ill at ease, still sitting by the hearth as if he had grown there from a morose three-year-old  into a clean and tidy, almost dandified five.
A handsome child, Cara's bold image, it seemed, with Odette's timid spirit, apparently engrossed in a book or was he?— from which he did not lift his eyes.
 "Daniel," said Odette, already faltering.
 "She is not here, you know." 
"I know.
I have come from the Thackrays."
 "Oh yes.?" 
Her face was blank.
"I am here for the by-election, Mrs Adeane.
I shall be here for a little while.
As the Chartist candidate.
I thought you would have been gone, all three, long ago.
"And so we would, had she not
"I know.
Is she — well, Mrs Adeane?"
"Oh yes.
Yes.
I am sure she is.
She has the shop, you see.
Nothing grand, as yet.
Quite small, indeed — and there is still Miss Ernestine Baker across the street, making all the trouble she can.
But Cara is so clever and she works so hard.
She never stops working.
It is all she thinks of.
I supervise the workroom for her and keep the girls in order as best I can
"Yes-to be sure.
She smiled at him a little wildly, not knowing what to say except that it seemed best to keep on talking.
"Yes indeed, because dressmakers can be very excitable, you know.
Someone must keep them calm or the scissors soon start to fly.
One wonders that murder is so seldom done.
And I do the fine embroideries.
And teach others, which I find very pleasant…
I live here, with the child because Well, it is not suitable for a child, is it, to be too much in a workroom among so many foolish women?
He goes to school now, of course.
She insists upon that.
And then he comes home with me.
She finds it convenient to live above the shop…
Naturally one cannot leave business premises unattended.
But the accommodation there is too small for the three of us
He was unprepared for the pain the room gave him, the fierce memory of the last time he had been here, when only that impulse of chivalry, or folly, had prevented him from taking her, as he could have done, from making her his own instead of handing her over to whoever had got her now.
From forcing her, by an act of love, to follow him through  the world, not barefoot as she'd accused him but in no great luxury, instead of "obliging" the man who had given her her chance.
Was she happier this way?
Through clenched teeth he hoped so.
He had no right to do other than wish her well.
Yet it scorched him that he had been unable to give her that chance himself.
Unable to give her anything but the bitter regret which struck out at him afresh, raising a sting of tears behind his eyes, an abominable tightness in his chest.
He must get out of this house and out of these memories as quickly as he could.
 "I am so sorry," whispered Odette.
He could not answer her quite at once.
It took a moment.
And then, rapidly, he said,"I understand.
I do realize…
Mrs Adeane, there is someone — of course— who helped her — a man
"Oh yes.
I am so sorry.
"No.
Please.
Please don't distress yourself."
"My dear boy, it is you who are suffering
 "Yes." 
Who hide it?
She had seen it in any case and she was not Sairellen Thackray who would look down her granite nose at him and sneer.
This gentle little lady would sit down and suffer at his side.
He could not bear that.
 "But I must bear it," he said.
"It is my own fault.
And I have no right — none — to criticise.
No rights of any kind.
I want — I would be happy if you could tell her
"Oh yes-anything
"Just that.
That I could not ever blame her.
For anything.
Could you tell her so in a manner she would tolerate?"
Odette shook her head and smiled sadly.
 "I will try." 
 "And should she wish to see me.?" 
Her narrow, fluid hands came apart in a wide, pitying gesture which said"My poor boy.
I do not think so."
"I cannot suppose she will.
But I cannot hide my presence from her either, Mrs Adeane.
I am here to make speeches and take part in processions.
She will be bound to hear of me.
Of , why should she care?I cannot imagine she does."
Odette had nothing to say to that.
"But
 "Yes, Daniel?" 