

Investment
Although only around one-third as important as consumption in total aggregate demand, investment is arguably one of its most significant components.
It is highly volatile, and through its impact on productivity affects both supply and demand sides of the economy.
After briefly reviewing the definition and measurement of investment, this chapter considers the theory and evidence for a number of factors allegedly affecting fixed investment.
The rate of interest, the Accelerator Theory, the Capital Stock Adjustment Model, profitability, ‘crowding out’, uncertainty, public policies and inadequate financial provision, are all considered.
Following a brief look at inventory investment, the chapter concludes by assessing the role of investment in economic growth.
Resources in an economy can be used to produce goods and services for immediate use (consumption), or to add to the stock of fixed capital or inventories (investment).
This chapter concentrates on the latter two, i.e. fixed capital investment and inventory investment.
In one sense consumption and investment are quite distinct.
The act of investment usually involves abstaining from current consumption in order to acquire assets, which raise the productive potential of the economy, and therefore the possibilities for future consumption.
Yet in another sense they are similar, both being components of aggregate demand, i.e. types of spending which create income for others in the economic system.
We noted in Chapter 13 that consumption was around 50% of total final expenditure (TFE) in 1991.
Although smaller, fixed capital investment was 13.2% of TFE in 1991, with inventory investment in that year recorded as -0.6% of TFE.
The figure for inventory investment can be positive or negative; positive when inventories are being added to, negative when they are being depleted.
The total value of both fixed capital and inventories at any time is a ‘stock’ concepts.
The rate of change of that ‘stock’ is a ‘flow’concept.
Investment in the National Accounts is entirely a ‘flow’ concept, as it is the addition to the stock of fixed capital or to the stock of inventories in any given year.
This helps explain why purchases of shares, paintings or antiques, although often termed ‘investments’ in everyday speech, are not regarded as such in the Accounts.
Usually they merely represent a transfer of ownership from one person or institution to another, rather than an addition to the stock of assets.
The difference between stock and flow valuations is often substantial.
Whereas the total value of inventories held was 27% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at factor cost in 1991, the annual change was -0.9% of GDP.
‘Gross’ investment, though a flow concept, overestimates the change in size of the stock of capital or inventories in the year.
In the course of the year some fixed capital will have worn out or become obsolete, and some inventories will have become unusable.
A part of ‘gross’ investment will therefore be needed simply to replace these assets used up in the course of production.
If we subtract this ‘replacement’ investment from ‘gross’investment, then we are left with ‘net investment’.
Net investment is then the estimate of the addition, in any year, to the stock of fixed capital and inventories, having allowed for depreciation of that stock during the year.
Of course, quantifying depreciation presents a number of problems.
Estimating the loss in value of a machine in a year is difficult in itself, and may be guided less by the physical state of the asset than by the possibility of tax concessions.
Also different accounting conventions will yield different measures of depreciation.
For instance, historical cost accounting yields much lower figures for depreciation than does inflation accounting.
The majority of investment expenditure is on fixed capital formation rather than inventories and it is to this that we now turn.
Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation (GDFCF) is defined in the National Accounts as ‘expenditure on fixed assets (buildings, plant and machinery, vehicles, etc.), either for replacing or adding to the stock of existing fixed assets’.
This apparently clear-cut definition turns out to be rather arbitrary in application.
For instance, ‘investment’ in the National Accounts is restricted to the firm sector.
If a household purchases a typewriter for personal use, it is classified in the National Accounts as ‘consumption’, yet the same purchase by a firm is classified as ‘investment’, even though in both cases the capital asset yields a stream of useful services throughout its life.
This is because the National Accounts treat the household purchase as self-gratification, but the firm purchase as producing a flow of marketable goods and services.
The arbitrariness of this classification is well illustrated when an individual chooses, for tax purposes, to be regarded as self-employed.
The purchase of a car by a teacher for travel to work as an employee is classed as ‘consumption’ expenditure.
Should the teacher change his designation to self-employed and engage in privately contracted teaching, then the purchase of that same car could be classed as ‘investment’ expenditure.
Despite problems of classification, it is important to gauge changes in GDFCF through time, both in total, and by sector and type of asset.
Table 14.1 presents data for selected time periods since 1979.
Given the problems we noted in measuring depreciation, the ‘gross’ concept is perhaps the most useful for purposes of comparison, whether through time or across countries.
In fact, by 1991 GDFCF had grown by more than 15bn in real terms since 1979, although this was some 10bn smaller than the figure recorded for   1989.
Closer examination of the data does, however, indicate that with the onset of recession in 1979/80, GDFCF actually fell for two years before an upturn in world economic activity led to the recovery of investment.
Similarly, GDFCF has fallen substantially in the recession years of the late 198()s and early 1990s.
The components of GDFCF have changed substantially over the last decade.
There has, for example, been a significant shift in investment from the public to the private sector.
Since 1979, public sector investment has fallen by around 4bn.
This is partly due to the privatization programme which has been implemented in recent years and has reduced the number of public corporations.
However, it also reflects the desire of government to cut back on spending initiatives.
Because of difficulties involved in cutting back on current expenditure plans, capital projects have been sacrificed in a bid to fulfil this objective.
In contrast private sector investment has risen by almost 20bn.
The public sector now only contributes around 17% of GDFCF, yet as recently as the late 1960s, it accounted for over 50%.
Investment by type of asset has also changed since 1979.
Investment in plant and machinery has grown most rapidly, increasing by nearly 50%.
It now accounts for around 41 % of total GDFCF.
There has also been a healthy rise in the real level of investment in new building and work which in 1991 contributed 36% of GDFCF.
The level of investment in dwellings and in vehicles, ships and aircraft has been rather more modest, in fact both categories experienced lower real investment in 1991 than in 1979.
Indeed within the housing investment component (dwellings) there has also been a significant transfer of resources from the public to the private sector.
Investment in public sector housing has fallen from 27% of total dwelling investment in 1979 to only 18% in 1991.
If we disaggregate further to the industrial sector, we find that it is investment in manufacturing that has been most volatile.
In real terms, gross investment in manufacturing fell by more than a third between 1979 and its lowest point in 1983.
For much of the 1970s investment in manufacturing had remained fairly constant, but with the onset of recession in 1979 it declined sharply, making the largest single contribution to the overall fall in GDFCF.
Although economic recovery led to a resurgence in manufacturing investment after 1983, it was only in 1988 that it finally surpassed the level achieved at the end of the 1970s.
In 1979 manufacturing investment  accounted for around 19% of GDFCF.
By 1989 its share had fallen to 13%, reflecting the diminishing importance of the manufacturing sector to the UK economy.
Even this level of manufacturing investment has proved unsustainable in the recession years of the early 1990s, with the real level of manufacturing investment in 1991 some O.75bn below its 1979 figure.
Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation is so heterogeneous that any explanation must address itself to particular components.
For instance, investment in dwellings is influenced by population trends, expected lifetime income, the availability and cost of mortgage finance, etc.
Most attempts at theory and empirical work have, however, tended to concentrate on investment in plant and machinery, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
Here we review the factors which allegedly affect this type of fixed investment.
The rate of interest.
The earliest theories of investment placed considerable emphasis on the importance of the rate of interest, seen here as the compensation required for forgoing current consumption.
Fisher used the rate of interest to derive the present value (PV) of an expected future stream of income.
By calculating the PV of various alternative investment projects they could then be ranked against each other.
This approach can be taken a stage further by introducing the marginal efficiency of investment (MEI).
The MEI was defined as that rate of discount which would equate the PV of a given stream of future income from a project, with the initial capital outlay (the supply price): where S = the supply price; PV = the present value; R = the expected yearly return; and i = that rate of discount necessary to equate the present value of future income with the initial cost of the project.
The curve relating the marginal efficiency of investment (i) to the level of investment in Fig. 14.1 is negatively sloped, for two main reasons.
First, the earliest investment projects undertaken are likely to be the most profitable, i.e. offering the highest expected yearly returns (R), and therefore having the highest marginal efficiencies of investment (i).
As more projects are initiated, they are likely to be less and less profitable, with lower expected yearly returns, and therefore lower MEIs.
Second, a rise in the level of investment undertaken is, at least in the short run, likely to raise the supply price (S), which in turn will reduce the MEI.
This could follow if the capital goods producing industries faced capacity constraints in their attempt to raise output in the short run.
The decision on whether to proceed with an investment project will depend on the relationship between the rate of interest (r) and the marginal efficiency of investment (i).
If r is less than i, then the annual cost of borrowing funds for an additional project will be less than the expected annual return on the initial capital outlay, so that the project will be   profitable to undertake.
In Fig. 14.1, with interest rate r 1 , it will be profitable to invest in all projects up to I 1 , with I 1 itself breaking even.
The MEI schedule is therefore the investment demand schedule, telling us the level of investment that will be undertaken at any given rate of interest.
Expectations play an important role in this theory of investment.
If, as is often the case, expectations are volatile, then the expected yearly returns (R) on any project will change, causing substantial shifts in the MEI schedule.
At any given rate of interest investment demand will therefore be changing, which will reduce the closeness of any statistical fit between the interest rate and investment.
In fact, it may be via expectations that interest rates exert their major influence on investment.
A fall in rates is often a signal to investors of better times ahead, raising expected returns, shifting the MEI curve to the right, and raising investment (and conversely).
Although this may dilute the statistical fit between r and I, there may still be an underlying linkage between the two variables.
Evidence.
One problem in testing the influence of interest rates on investment is the selection of an appropriate interest rate.
The average yield on debentures is a rate frequently used, as this broadly indicates the cost of new borrowing for a company at any point in time.
Most UK studies have failed to show any close connection between interest rates and investment, suggesting that the latter is interest-inelastic.
Feldstein and Flemming (1971) carried out a study of investment in all the major industrial sectors of the UK, using as their interest rate variable a weighted average of equity and debenture yields.
They found that a tax allowance variable played a far more important role than the interest rate in affecting investment.
The interest rate variable turned out to be statistically insignificant with a positive rather than a negative sign.
In fact, Savage (1978) in reviewing econometric evidence over a wide range of studies, concludes that the interest rate has been found to have little significance in influencing UK fixed investment.
The few studies which found some relationship had to  resort to extensive and differing lag structures, using interest rates which hardly reflected the rates most companies have to pay for borrowing.
Hines and Catephores (1970) and Nobay (1970) both found a significant link between manufacturing investment and interest rate.
However, the former lagged the change in interest rate by six quarters and the latter by five quarters, and both used the (perhaps unrealistic) rate on long-term government bonds.
More recent data on aggregate investment and the average yield on debentures again show little correlation during the past twenty years or so.
For instance, GDFCF rose steadily between 1978 and 1979 despite upward movements of interest rates during these years.
Again, between the first quarter of 1990 and the middle of 1992, GDFCF fell by over 11 % despite a 3% reduction in the cost of long term corporate borrowing.
Even when we use ‘real’ rates of interest, i.e. the nominal rate adjusted for inflation, the correlation is still far from clear.
In 1975, when the real rate of interest was around -10%, investment fell, yet in 1984 and 1985, when the real rate of interest was around +8%, investment rose by more than 11%.
A more recent analysis of the relationship between the real rate of interest and gross fixed investment in plant and machinery in manufacturing was conducted by Turner (Turner 1989).
He found only a weak negative relationship between the two variables.
In contrast to the rather weak relationships noted above, the Bank of England's most up to date model suggests a much stronger impact of the interest rate on gross fixed investment (Easton 1990).
It appears to show that a rise in interest rates of 1% would result in a fall in investment by 1.3% after four months, and 2.8% after twelve months.
However most of the impact of the interest rate rise was on the residential investment (housing) component of gross investment, which fell by 3.2% and 4.1% over the same lagged periods.
The Accelerator Theory relates net investment to the rate of change of output.
If the capital stock K is fully utilized, and the capital/output ratio v is a constant, then net investment (I) can be expressed in the following way: where Y is output and t and t-1 are time periods.
Net investment in year t is then a constant proportion of the change in output during that year.
For example, if output rose by 2m for the economy (), and each extra 1 of output needed an average of 5 of capital equipment to produce it (v = 5), then I t = 5.2m = 10m.
A number of criticisms have been levelled at the Accelerator Theory.
First, the assumption that there is no excess capacity is particularly suspect.
If there is spare capacity then a rise in output  Y t can be met from the existing capital stock, with no need for new investment.
It has been estimated by the CBI that in the period 1979–91 an average of only 40% of firms were working at full  capacity.
Such a large amount of excess capacity must severely impair the effective functioning of the accelerator.
Second, the assumption of a constant capital/output ratio, v, is becoming less and less plausible.
The advent of new generations of microelectronic technology is progressively reducing capital/ output ratios (see Ch. 12).
Third, it is also likely that prior to making an investment the firm would want to be sure that any upsurge in demand and in output is not a temporary phenomenon.
Expectations of future demand, and therefore future changes in output, will then be important.
Evidence.
Even when varying lag structures are introduced into more refined versions of the Accelerator Theory, the evidence in its support is far from convincing.
McCormick et al.(1983) found that changes in real GDFCF by firms between 1962 and 1980 were not strongly related to the previous year's change in real consumer spending or demand.
Black (1982) related changes in net fixed investment to changes in GDP over the previous three years.
Again, the results were rather disappointing, with only 39% of the observed variation in net investment ‘explained’ by his equation.
Black had already excluded investment in dwellings, in the social services, and in North Sea oil, on the grounds that investment in these sectors was unlikely to be affected by an accelerator principle.
This was developed to overcome some of the problems of the simple Accelerator Theory.
It states that investment is positively related to the expected level of output and negatively related to the existing capital stock.
Any rise in investment will consequently depend not only on the expected level of output (demand) but also on the current size of the capital stock.
Specifically, where I t = gross investment in the current year; b and c = constant coefficients; Y t-1 = last year's level of output; K t-1 = the capital stock at the end of the preceding year.
If it is assumed that the expected volume of output is roughly equal to that experienced in the previous year,, then the higher is , the greater will gross investment tend to be.
However, the greater the inherited capital stock,, the less need there will be for adding to the capital stock, or even replacing worn-out equipment.
Evidence.
A variety of studies have introduced capacity utilization variables on the lines of the Capital Stock Adjustment Model, with encouraging results.
Panic and Vernon (1975) ran a series of tests in the mid-1970s relating GDFCF in six manufacturing industries to a number of variables.
Their results confirmed the importance of capacity utilization in determining investment, in that investment tended to take place only when output increased sufficiently to stretch current capacity.
Nobay (1970) came to a similar conclusion, and found a relationship between the change in output beyond ‘capacity’ and manufacturing fixed investment.
Kennedy (1986) notes  that the Capital Stock Adjustment Principle was useful in explaining manufacturing investment in the UK between 1955 and 1970, though less so since then.
Similar support for a modified accelerator theory as a determinant of investment has come from the recent studies of Catinat (1991) and Ford and Poret (1990).
There are at least three reasons why changes in profitability might be associated with changes in private sector investment:
1.
Higher profits indicate a more favourable return on capital, which may encourage companies to reinvest any surplus rather than devote it to alternative uses.
2.
Higher profits may improve business confidence and raise the expected future return on any project.
An outward shift of the MEI schedule (see Fig. 14.1 above) might then raise investment at any given rate of interest.
3.
Higher profits may raise investment by reducing its cost, as funds generated internally are cheaper than those obtained from the capital market, whether equity or debenture.
Evidence.
Table 14.2 indicates a rise in the rate of return on capital in the business sector in all five countries during the latter part of the 1980s as all the major economies experienced boom conditions.
The table also shows that the net rate of return has been consistently lower in the UK than in the other countries.
Glyn and Sutcliffe (1972) argued that low profits have been a major factor in low levels of investment in the UK.
In their view a major cause of the decline in profits has been the ability of labour, during the post-war years of high employment, to increase its share of value added at the expense of profits.
Panić and Vernon (1975) also found the rate of return on capital employed to be a significant variable in affecting investment in five of the six manufacturing industries studied.
Similarly, in a major study of investment in the EC over the period 1961–90, the relation between net investment and the rate of profitability per unit of capital stock was found to be highly significant.
Indeed variations in profitability were found to account for some three-quarters of the variations in capital stock during this period (European Economy, 1991).
In this study the profitability variable was lagged one period in order to take into account the unavoidable delays between changes in profit conditions and the effective realization of resulting investment decisions.
Bacon and Eltis (1976) pointed to the growth of the public sector during the 1960s and early 1970s as a major factor behind low levels of investment in the UK during this period.
Central to their approach is a sharp distinction between the ‘marketable’ sector of the economy, such as manufacturing industry, and the ‘non-marketable’sector, such as state provision of many services.
The ‘marketable’ sector produces goods and services which are sold on established markets, generally makes a profit, and can therefore be regarded as self-financing.
On the other hand, the ‘non-marketable’ sector provides a range of social and administrative services which are not sold on markets, and which therefore must be financed ‘externally’, the necessary revenue for this having then to be raised by taxing the output of the marketable sector via taxes on both profits and wages.
The growth of the non-marketable state sector has, in this view, required progressively more finance, increasing the pressures on the marketable sector.
This can be well illustrated through the following identity.
For simplicity we assume a closed economy (no trade): i.e. that investment in the marketable sector I m will depend on the level of consumption in the marketable sector C m , and the levels of investment and consumption in the non-marketable sector I n C n .
The growth in non-marketable state expenditure is represented by increases in both I n and C n .
Its ‘finance’ must then come from a reduction in C m and/or I m m.
Bacon and Eltis went on to suggest that labour had been successful in protecting itself from erosion of C m , so that adjustment had fallen largely on I m i.e. investment in the marketable sector.
The only difference when we open the economy to foreign trade is that some relief for I m could occur if an additional part of C m now comes from abroad.
In other words, imported goods and services help maintain consumption levels in the marketable sector.
The pressure then is on the balance of payments, via extra imports, as well as on private sector investment.
Evidence.
Bacon and Eltis provided considerable empirical evidence to support their argument.
Prior to 1969, non-marketable consumption C n and investment In grew from around 34% of the value of marketed output in 1961, to around 37% in 1969.
This growth in the non-marketable sector was largely financed by workers in the marketable sector.
For instance, consumption in this latter sector C m fell from 56% of marketed output in 1961 to around 52% in 1969.
Productivity of market sector workers was rising at about 3.7% per annum, but the extra taxes required to finance the growth of the non-marketable sector meant that the increase in their real incomes was much less, only 1.2% per annum .
It was around 1969 that Bacon and Eltis allege that the situation changed, with the strength of organized labour becoming more apparent.
The squeeze  on consumption prior to 1969 now led to trade unions adopting a more militant posture in wage negotiations.
As a result, although between 1969 and 1974 the share of the non-marketable sector in the value of marketed output continued to increase (from 37 to 44%), this time consumption by the marketable sector C m remained roughly constant at around 52%.
Higher wage demands were submitted to cover any increase in tax, which consequently squeezed profits and reduced investment in the marketable sector I m .
However, Hadjimatheou and Skouras (1979) not only reject the empirical observations of Bacon and Eltis but are particularly critical of the theoretical underpinnings of their model.
They assert that the years selected for comparison of profits and investment correspond to differing points in the business cycle, making comparison misleading.
In their own study, they divide the period under consideration into four cycles, and take averages within each cycle.
They point to the remarkably slow growth in the share of the non-marketable sector in the value of marketed output, rising from around 31% between 1955 and 1960 to only 33% between 1969 and 1973.
Although there was a small reduction in post-tax profits in the marketable sector during this period (11.6 to 10%), it was not sufficient to deter market sector investment I m from increasing.
This analysis is therefore totally at variance with that of Bacon and Eltis.
During periods of uncertainty (for example, after a shock rise in oil prices) it has been argued that firms will reduce the value they place on expected future returns on investment projects.
In terms of the earlier Fig. 14.1, the MEI will shift leftwards and less investment will take place at any given rate of interest.
Faced with such uncertainty, therefore, businessmen and women become more inclined to delay any planned capital spending.
Evidence.
The limited empirical work on the importance of uncertainty as a variable affecting investment decisions yields some support for this argument.
For example, Ford and Poret (1990) compare actual investment expenditures with investment intentions as reported in various surveys.
The expectation here being that revisions in investment intentions (i.e. the differences between planned and actual investment expenditures) would be greater in periods of low economic activity and greater uncertainty than in periods of high economic activity and greater certainty.
Certainly Table 14.3 provides a measure of support for this view.
Revisions in investment intentions were generally smaller in the more stable and buoyant economic environment of the mid to late 1980s than in earlier periods of greater uncertainty.
The additional uncertainty implicit in certain types of public policy (e.g. ‘stop-go’ policies) has also been linked in empirical work to reduced levels of investment (see below).
The post-war period until the late 1970s witnessed governments playing a positive role in stimulating demand through reflation of the economy.
Booms were, however, generally interspersed with balance of payments crises.
This prevented the application of reflationary policies over long time periods, since deflation of demand, to reduce spending on imports, was often used to correct balance of payments deficits.
The uncertainty of such stop-go policies arguably reduced business confidence and discouraged investment.
Other public policies may also influence investment in the private sector.
For example, changes in the rate of taxation of company profits, or in the capital allowances which can be set against tax, are believed by many to significantly affect levels of investment.
Evidence.
Nobay (1970) in his econometric study concluded that low profits were not so much the cause of low levels of investment, but rather the result of slow expansion of manufacturing output, accentuated by stop-go policies.
Panić and Vernon (1975) also concluded that long-run instability in demand seriously undermined investment in the six manufacturing industries studied.
Studies on the impacts of the reform of corporation tax and the phasing out of accelerated depreciation allowance on UK investment have been undertaken by Sumner (1988) and Devereux (1989).
The results suggest that such policies have relatively little impact on investment demand over the longer term.
It has been suggested by Carrington and Edwards (1981) that inefficiencies in the banking system and in the capital markets have prevented industry from obtaining the finance it requires for investment.
Amongst the criticisms of UK financial institutions are the allegations that UK banks place too great an emphasis on lending to consumers, whereas overseas banks are primarily concerned with long-term industrial finance.
Another criticism is that UK banks tend to concentrate on short-term lending, causing a shortage of long-term funds for investment.
Evidence.
It is certainly true that UK banks have, in the past, tended to lend less to industry than their foreign counterparts.
In 1980, UK bank-lending to industry was only around 22% of GDP, whereas in France the figure was 30%, in West Germany almost 34% and in Japan around 51%.
However, Vittas and Brown (1982) suggest that because of the differing financial structure of comparative economies, it is necessary to compare all institutions involved in providing finance for industry, and not just the banks.
When this is done there is little to choose between the UK, France and West Germany.
In the early 1980s total lending to industry was around 35% of GDP in the UK, 36% in France and 43% in West Germany.
Vittas and Brown also defend the UK financial institutions against the criticism that their loans are of shorter maturity than those in other countries.
A shorter maturity date raises the effective annual yield required to justify the investment, since it must cover capital pay-back as well as interest.
They found that less than one-half of total lending to industry in the UK had a maturity of less than one year in 1980, with a similar percentage for France and West Germany, and an even higher one for Japan.
The deregulation of the financial sector over recent years has led to a significant increase in bank lending to industry.
Despite this, the soothing pronouncement of the Wilson Committee on the adequacy of UK financial provision, and the counter-attack by economists such as Vittas and Brown show that the debate is still not over.
Chapter 17 provides further background to this alleged cause of low levels of UK investment.
Before turning to the issue of the importance of investment, and providing cross country comparisons, we briefly consider investment in inventories.
These include materials and fuel, work in progress, and stocks of finished products.
Investment in inventories, or stocks, is the change in the value of all stocks held during the period.
In any single year investment in inventories can be negative or positive, and can have an important effect upon national output.
The change in inventory investment was -1.2% of GDP in 1981 and -0.9% of GDP in 1991, but +0.7% of GDP in 1989.
Firms hold stocks for a variety of technical reasons, some intended, such as promoting the smooth flow of production, and some unintended, such as unplanned deviation between actual and expected sales.
To pinpoint single factors affecting inventories has proved difficult, although Kennedy (1986) notes that a modified stock-adjustment principle on the lines above helps explain changes in manufacturers' inventories during much of the 1960s and 1970s.
Investment has a dual role to play within any economy.
In the short run, investment may be seen mainly as a component of aggregate demand which, if increased, will have the effect of stimulating the economy and, through the multiplier, substantially raising the level of National Income.
Fixed and inventory investment together made up almost 13% of TFE in 1991.
In the long run, investment will also affect the supply side of the economy, raising its productive potential and thereby pushing outwards the production frontier.
Economic growth is sometimes strictly defined in this way, being that increase in GDP which results from raising productive potential.
More usually it is loosely defined as any increase in GDP, even when that is within the existing production frontier.
There have been a number of studies into the importance of investment as a generator of growth, though the results have not been conclusive.
For example, Kuznets (1961), using time-series data for a number of countries, found little relationship between the share of investment in GDP, and the growth in output over time.
Similarly, a 1970 OECD survey based on cross sectional data found no clear well-defined relationship between investment  shares and growth in output.
Table 14.4 suggests that there may be some linkage between growth of investment (GDFCF) and growth in output.
It could, of course, be argued that the growth in output is the cause, rather than the effect, of the growth in investment.
To expand production may require additional capacity, giving rise to extra investment!
Whatever the validity of these arguments, Table 14.4 clearly shows that the share of gross investment in total output and expenditure (GDP) in the UK is lower than that of most other major economies.
Nevertheless, the UK has experienced a more rapid growth in both investment and output in the past decade than in the previous decade.
Not all economists accept that investment in the UK was sluggish even in the 1970s.
Vittas and Brown (1982) reject the use of GDFCF as an appropriate measure of productive investment.
The OECD (1985) country report on the UK adopted a similar argument, i.e. that GDFCF includes forms of non-productive investment which are irrelevant to economic growth, residential investment being a prime example.
Table 14.5 shows the situation for the seven countries in Table 14.4 when residential investment is excluded from private sector GDFCF.
In terms of annual average growth rates in non-residential investment, the UK fares reasonably well throughout the period, contrary to some of the arguments put forward earlier.
Another criticism of the use of GDFCF as an appropriate measure of productive investment concerns its failure to take any account of variations in the rate at which past investment is ‘scrapped’.
A recent report by stockbrokers UBS Phillips and Drew (1992) draws attention to this factor, suggesting that actual rates of depreciation of capital in the UK have been well in excess of official assumptions as to rates of depreciation, aided by an overvalued exchange rate.
In this case the true productive potential of the UK economy will be less than that implied by official gross or net investment data.
The report points to the existence of a large deficit on non-oil current account in the middle of a recession (see Ch. 25) as evidence of a more serious shortfall in the UK productive potential than could be gauged from official data on investment.
The level of investment is not the only factor contributing to growth.
Peaker (1974) sees investment as a necessary, but by no means sufficient condition for economic growth.
Growth also depends on the efficiency with which any investment is utilized.
One method of measuring the efficiency of investment is through the gross incremental output/capital ratio.
Table 14.6 presents incremental capital/output ratios for five major economies.
It demonstrates what appears to have been a major weakness of the UK economy, namely that the UK has required over the last twenty years a higher rate of gross investment to produce a given increase in output, than did West Germany, France, Japan, the USA or Canada.
If we move from the marginal to the average, a similar picture still emerges.
We can see from Table 14.7 that the UK produced less output per unit of net capital stock, for both the ‘whole economy’ and ‘manufacturing’, than either West Germany or the USA.
Tables 14.6 and 14.7 suggest that increased capital intensity within the UK may not necessarily lead to proportionate increases in output.
An example of this at the level of the firm was provided in Chapter 1 where, despite having similar plant and equipment in both Halewood and Saarlouis, the Ford Motor Company's productivity in the latter plant was much higher.
It was pointed out by Wragg and Robertson (1978) that total factor productivity  must rise if growth is to be sustained.
It follows that increasing the efficiency of labour, and improving the organizational structure of UK firms, may be at least as important in generating economic growth as raising the level of investment.
Recent evidence does indeed suggest that total factor productivity has increased during the 1980s.
After averaging just 0.6% per annum through the 1970s, total factor productivity grew at a much faster rate of 1.6% per annum during the 1980s.
Moreover, in a study by Smith-Goosne and Bennett (1988), it was suggested that there has been a major rise in work-effort in recent years.
Hourly work effort in the latter part of the 1980s has increased by some 5% compared with the average between 1973–79, and by more than 7% when set against the recessionary years of 1980/81.
Investment occurs in so wide a variety of assets and sectors that it must be disaggregated substantially if any close statistical fit is to be found.
However, even when we concentrate on fixed investment in manufacturing, no single theory ‘explains’ much of the variation in investment.
What evidence there is certainly suggests that UK investment is relatively interest-inelastic, reducing the effectiveness of the interest rate as a policy instrument.
Nevertheless, in so far as changes in interest rates affect expectations, lower interest rates may still contribute to higher investment.
Although much less important than consumption in aggregate demand, investment has, through the multiplier, a significant effect on National Income, and is the most volatile element in aggregate demand.
It also affects the productive potential of an economy.
Even though the link between investment and growth is in some ways tenuous, it is interesting that the increased level of fixed investment in the UK in the 1980s has been accompanied by a much stronger growth performance.
Some have also suggested that the observed increases in labour productivity suggest that UK investment is now being more efficiently utilized.
However the rise in the capital/output ratio noted in Table 14.6 certainly casts some doubt on this suggestion.
Public expenditure
The 1979 Conservative government was returned on two major policy platforms.
The first was to cut public expenditure as part of a monetarist approach to inflation control, and the second was to reduce the apparently deadweight burden of (income) tax upon incentives.
These policy objectives were regarded as inseparable, with excessive public expenditure allegedly leading to high levels of taxation, borrowing and (via money supply growth and high interest rates) inflation.
In this chapter we consider the first of these problems: the growth of public expenditure and the difficulties surrounding its control.
The next chapter will examine the burden of taxation.
Here we look at public expenditure, its form, size and apparently inexorable growth.
Problems of definition and calculation are considered for instance, current estimates for the ratio of public spending to National Income vary from as little as 25% to over 60%.
Resolving such ambiguities is extremely important since entire economic and political platforms rest upon the outcome.
Attempts to control public expenditure are nothing new; they began long before Gladstone.
However, the 1961 Plowden reforms were the watershed for modern planning, monitoring and control of public expenditure.
These were initially in volume (i.e. real opportunity cost) terms, but since 1976 management techniques have increasingly been based on cash, i.e. what has to be paid out at current prices.
Although the Conservative government was pledged to cut back public expenditure, the evidence suggests that so far successive Conservative governments have failed.
Real public spending since 1979 will have shown an average growth rate of 1.4% per annum compared with an annual rate of 1% under the previous Labour administration.
However, public expenditure has fallen as a proportion of GDP.
In 1982/83 public expenditure was 47% of GDP; in 1992/93 it was only around 42% of GDP.
This fall is largely because of the high growth rates of GDP in the mid-to late 1980s.
In fact public expenditure fell to as low as 39% of GDP in 1988/89, but in the recessionary years of the early 1990s the percentage has started to rise once again.
Until April 1971 public expenditure included spending by central and local government and gross investment by the nationalized industries.
This led to the rather strange practice of including estimated values for capital depreciation by the nationalized industries as public expenditure, even when neither actual expenditure nor borrowing took place.
Since April 1977 only net investment (new capital) by the nationalized industries, financed by actual borrowing from the National Loans Fund, has  been included in public expenditure totals.
This alteration brought the UK into line with OECD accounting practice.
It is worth noting that current UK totals of public expenditure would have been still higher had the pre-1977 definition been retained.
In recognition of this change, a new concept called ‘general government expenditure’ was introduced to replace the older terminology of public sector expenditure.
The 1989 Autumn Statement and the 1990/91 Expenditure Plans were the first to use a new definition of the planning total.
This change, however, does not effect the overall definition of ‘general government expenditure’.
This new ‘planning total’ brings together all the elements of public expenditure for which central government is responsible.
The change in definition does, however, affect the treatment of local authority expenditure; the old definition included all local authority expenditure, whereas the new definition covers only the support for this expenditure provided by central government, i.e. it excludes expenditure which local authorities finance themselves.
The new definition of planning total thus covers the following:
central government's own expenditure;
most of the grants, current and capital, that central government provides to local authorities;
the credit approvals issued by central government authorizing local authorities to incur capital expenditure financed by borrowing and other forms of credit;
non-domestic rate payments;
the financing requirements of public corporations.
With few exceptions this is the external finance of the public corporations;
a reserve which provides a margin for uncertainties and is intended to cover any future additions to items within the planning total, whether these result from policy changes, new initiatives, contingencies or revised estimates of demand-led programmes such as social security; and
privatization proceeds.
The ‘planning total’ of cash limits to control spending by government departments will be 226.7bn in 1992/93, up from 205bn in 1991/92.
The ‘general government expenditure’ for the two periods respectively will be 256.2bn, up from 236.5bn.
In late 1992, much political debate centred around the government's determination to keep expenditure plans for 1993/ 94 within the specified ‘planning total’ of 244.5bn.
Table 15.1 and Fig. 15.1 show current plans, presented in a number of ways that are helpful for policy analysis.
In 1992–93, central and local government intended to spend approximately 226.7bn, divided between twenty programmes (roughly equivalent to the responsibilities of the main government departments) outlined in Table 15.1.
Figure 15.1 reveals that health, personal social services and social security plans dominate expenditure by programme, with almost 43.7% of the total general government expenditure in 1992/93.
The next most important item is   Education and Science with 12.7% of the total, followed by defence with 9 4% of general government expenditure.
Law, order and the protective services account for 5.4%, Transport 4%, Environmental services 3.3% and Housing only 2.4%.
Debt interest can be seen to take a sizeable portion of   general government expenditure (7.1%) especially during times of high interest rates.
A large proportion of the expenditure in areas such as transport, law and order and education is carried out by the local authorities.
However, central government expenditure is increasing its share of total spending on areas such as education (opted-out schools, F.E. colleges and sixth forms centrally funded) and housing (grants to housing associations).
These programmes include capital spending (e.g. school buildings) and current spending on both goods (e.g. school books) and services (e.g. wages of policemen/nurses/teachers).
The expenditure plans revealed in January 1992 showed that increased resources had been made available for health, housing, education, and law and order.
At the same time estimates of demand-led expenditure on social security have been increased still further.
Rising unemployment during the recessionary years of the early 1990s had already caused social security expenditure to rise as a proportion of general government expenditure, from 26.4% in 1989/90 to 28.4% in 1992/93.
The defence budget was tightened in 1986/87 with the end of the government's NATO commitment to raise defence spending by an annual 3%.
Political developments in Eastern Europe have increased pressure to cut defence still further.
The phrase ‘peace dividend’(see Johnson, 1990b) has been coined to express the hope that a new era of disarmament and detente will result in major savings in defence expenditure.
The Gulf crisis, the civil war in Yugoslavia and troubles elsewhere of course, quickly dampened ‘excessive hopes on this count.
The above plans for public spending are an integral part of the  government's medium-term financial strategy aimed at reducing inflation and maintaining the conditions for sustained growth, the creation of jobs and higher living standards.
Within that framework, the government's objective for public spending is to hold its rate of growth at some 1.25% per annum below the growth of the economy as a whole and thus to reduce public spending as a proportion of National Income (see Fig. 15.2 below).
As we can see from the diagram, the ratio of general government expenditure to GDP fell sharply during the growth years of the mid-to-late 1980s.
The government has failed to sustain its objective during the early 1990s as the ratio has risen, with social security and other demand — led expenditures placing upward pressure on public spending, and GDP falling relative to trend.
Nevertheless the government has reiterated its determination that, over time, public expenditure should continue to take a declining share of National Income (Treasury, 1992b).
The government believes that the result of this will be lower borrowing which, combined with lower taxation, will mean that enterprise and efficiency will be encouraged and output and employment will grow.
A further way of presenting the above data is to divide public spending between goods and services (purchased by the state) and cash transfers (to individuals or industry).
This particular classification is, as we note below, an important element in the debate on the size of the public sector and is reflected in Fig. 15.3.
This figure reveals that around 49% of general government expenditure involves public sector pay plus the purchase of goods and services for consumption by the public.
Over 32% is absorbed by the ‘disadvantaged’ in the form of pensions, unemployment and supplementary benefits, etc. (transfers to personal sector).
A further 2.8%  goes into transfers to industry (the corporate sector).
Capital spending is seen to total some 7.8% of general government expenditure and covers spending on new construction, land, building and other physical assets, as well as grants to the private sector, the nationalized industries and other public corporations (see also Fig. 15.5).
A further way of viewing public expenditure is to look at who spends the money (see Fig. 15.4).
Central and local government dominate the total, with central government responsible for almost three-quarters.
Figure 15.5 indicates a dramatic fall in capital expenditure (including lending to nationalized industries) as a percentage of general government expenditure, compared with other components which continued to grow steadily.
For instance, since 1975 capital spending has fallen by around thirteen percentage points, whereas current grants and subsidies, mainly for welfare purposes, have risen by ten percentage points and current spending on goods and services, by around two percentage points.
The Government's Expenditure Plans acknowledge that there will be further small reductions in real terms in capital spending.
This is mainly because of privatization, but the government also notes that there is no clear dividing line between capital and current spending.
For example, expenditure on training in the employment programme, which is an investment in the future labour force and has grown rapidly, is classified as current spending.
There are also other definitional problems making the line between capital and current spending hazy.
From December 1993 onwards, the government spending accounts are to be drawn up to make a ‘proper distinction’ between current and capital transactions.
So far we have looked at changing shares within total public spending, but has the absolute level of public spending grown as fast as critics suggest?
Such people usually point to a single statistic for evidence; for instance, that the public sector employs about 30% of the labour force or, as with Milton Friedman, that public expenditure at around 60% of National Income threatens to destroy freedom and democracy.
Actually, estimates for the ratio of public spending to National Income vary widely, depending on the definitions used for each item.
Figures for 1992/93 put general government expenditure at around 43% of GDP at market prices (see Table 15.2 below).
If, however, transfer payments are excluded from government expenditure, as they are from the measurement of National Income, then general government expenditure falls dramatically to less than 33% of GDP at market prices.
What, then, is the truth about the size of public expenditure?
An examination of data from the Central Statistical Office (CSO) suggests  that as many as ten measures could be used for estimating the size of public expenditure.
The measure selected will depend on the question at issue.
If the intention is to assess the financial resources passing through the hands of government, then a ratio involving general government expenditure might be appropriate.
However, the CSO's definition of National Income in the Blue Book excludes current grants and other transfers.
Strictly, therefore, these same items should be excluded from government expenditure.
They do not represent additional demand for resources, they are merely transfers of purchasing power from the taxpayer to other sectors of the community.
Using this argument, a ratio of general government expenditure on goods and services of approximately 32% of National Income would appear to be the most appropriate measure.
No single measure of public expenditure has met with universal agreement, and even when one has been widely used for some time, it can be subject to change for a variety of reasons.
In April 1977 general government expenditure was redefined to bring the UK into line with OECD accounting methods, and resulted in an apparent overnight reduction of some 6% in measured public expenditure.
Again, what was previously tax relief may be reclassified as government expenditure, as with child tax allowances being replaced by child benefit in 1977.
Public expenditure will also be affected by changes in the degree of ‘privatization’, or by changes in public sector pricing.
The National Income aggregate used for comparison will also influence our impression of the size of the public sector.
Some ratios use domestic product, which measures resources produced entirely within the domestic circular flow.
If, however, our interest was in the resources produced by UK nationals, wherever they happen to be located, then our ratio should use national product.
Yet again, both domestic and national products could be valued ‘gross’(including depreciation) or ‘net’(excluding depreciation); at ‘market prices’, including the effects of taxes and subsidies, or at ‘factor cost’, excluding them.
For all these reasons, public spending ratios must be treated with caution when used in policy analysis.
No matter what the definition, statistics show that the government sector of the economy has expanded over the last 150 years (see Fig. 15.6), both in money and real terms, and as a percentage of National Income.
Brown and Jackson (1982), quoting a variety of sources, show a dramatically rising trend of government spending as a proportion of GNP at factor cost up to 1976.
The trend (using a different statistical series) continued upwards for data after 1976, excluding privatization proceeds.
Since the early 1980s there has been a sustained fall in government spending as a proportion of National Income (see Table 15.2).
By 1990 this ratio had fallen to 39.7%, but in the early 1990s it has risen again, to some 43% in 1992/93.
The 1979 government was returned with a mandate to cut public expenditure.
Initially the results were very disappointing as public expenditure continued to grow.
It was only in the late 1980s that public expenditure as a proportion of the national product fell below that which the government had inherited in 1979.
The explanation of the above trends and the difficulties involved in controlling public expenditure are based on two types of analysis: microeconomic and macroeconomic respectively.
Microeconomic analysis Explanations based on microeconomic analysis suggest that additional public spending can be seen as the result of governments continually intervening to correct market failure.
This would include the provision of ‘public goods’ such as collective defence, the police, and local amenities.
An extra unit of such goods can be enjoyed by one person, without anyone else's enjoyment being affected.
In other words the marginal social cost of provision is zero, and it is often argued in welfare economics that the ‘efficiency’ price should, therefore, be zero.
Private markets are unable to cope with providing goods at zero price, so that public provision is the only alternative should this welfare argument be accepted.
Microeconomic analysis would also cover extra public spending due to a change in the composition of the ‘market’, such as an ageing population incurring greater expenditure on health care.
Macroeconomic analysis There are also explanations of the growth of public spending based on long-run macroeconomic theories and models.
The starting point in this field is the work of Wagner (see Bird 1971), who used empirical evidence to support his argument that government expenditure would inevitably increase at a rate faster than the rise in national production.
Wagner suggested that ‘the pressures of social progress’ would create tensions which could only be resolved by increased state activity in law and order, economic and social services, and participation in material production.
Using the economists' terms.
Wagner was in effect suggesting that public sector services and products are ‘normal’, with high income elasticities of demand.
Early studies in the UK (see Williamson 1961) tended to support Wagner, indicating overall income elasticities for public sector services of 1.7, and for public sector goods of 1.3, with similar results in other advanced industrialized countries.
In fact, a study by the OECD (1982), found that the proportion of GNP absorbed by public expenditure between 1954 and the early 1980s on ‘merit goods’(education, health and housing) and ‘income maintenance’(pensions, sickness, family and unemployment benefits) had doubled from 14 to 28%, as an average across all the advanced industrialized countries.
That same report concluded that high income elasticities and low price elasticities had played a major part in this observed growth.
Surveys of less developed economies were, however, more confusing, with econometric studies suggesting that little of the growth in public spending could be explained' by rising incomes (or low price elasticities).
Peacock and Wiseman's ‘displacement theory’, covering the period 1890–1953, suggested that public spending was not rising with the smooth, small changes predicted by Wagner, but that it was displaced (permanently) upwards by social upheavals associated, for instance, with depressions or wars leading to demands for new social expenditure (Fig. 15.6 above indicates the displacements of 1914–18 and 1939–45).
Displacement theory has, however, been criticized for giving insufficient weight to political influences on the level of public expenditure.
A further criticism of ‘displacement’ theory is the fact that for the UK there is little evidence that ratchet increases in public spending are long lasting.
In fact, where the ratio of public expenditure to National Income has continued to rise in the 1970s and 1980s, it has been more easily explained by downward deviations of trend National Income in recession, with consequent increases in spending on unemployment benefits and social services, rather than through any upward revision of government expenditure plans.
The conclusion that must be drawn from reviewing such work is that there is no definite micro- or macro-explanation of the growth path for public expenditure.
It then follows that there is no inevitable ‘law’ ensuring that public expenditure becomes a progressively rising proportion of National Income.
However, should the recession of the early 1990s continue, increased spending on unemployment and social services may indeed cause a sharp increase in the share of public expenditure in National Income.
Demographic changes may also conspire to raise the share of public expenditure.
There was considerable debate in the mid-1980s of the mounting ‘burden’ on the working population likely to result from the  growing number of pensioners in the second and third decades of the next century.
National Insurance reforms (such as the modifications to the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme — SERPS) were therefore introduced as part of a broader review of the Welfare State in 1985/86, with the intention of reducing the cost to the state and the taxpayer (see Ch. 16).
Given that public expenditure has grown over time in the UK, how do we compare with other countries?
Conclusions based on OECD surveys indicate that UK public expenditure patterns are similar to those in most other advanced industrialized countries, although inferences drawn from international surveys must be treated with caution.
The OECD definitions are frequently different from national ones, public sector boundaries vary between countries, and fluctuating exchange rates compromise any attempt at a standard unit of value.
Table 15.3 indicates that the growing share of UK public expenditure in National Income has been paralleled in other countries.
If anything, public expenditure has grown less quickly in the UK; in 1964 it was joint third highest, with Germany, of the fourteen countries shown in Table 15.3; by 1989 it was only eleventh highest of those same fourteen countries.
Again, whereas the government outlay ratio averaged 47.8% across all the EC countries in 1989, the UK at 41.2% was considerably below that average.
In comparative terms it would appear that there is little cause for alarm at the growth path of UK public expenditure.
Arguments for controlling or reducing the size of public expenditure are wide-ranging but not always convincing.
One argument is that excessive government expenditure adversely affects individual freedom and choice.
First, it is feared that it spoonfeeds individuals, taking away the incentive for personal provision, as with private insurance for sickness or old age.
Second, that by impeding the market mechanism it may restrict consumer choice.
For instance, the state may provide goods and services that are in little demand, whilst discouraging others (via taxation) that might otherwise have been bought.
Third, it has been suggested that government provision may encourage an unhelpful separation between payment and cost in the minds of consumers.
With government provision, the good or service may be free or subsidized, so that the amount paid by the consumer will understate the true cost (higher taxes, etc.) of providing him with that good or service, thereby encouraging excessive consumption of the item.
The Conservative government has long believed that (excessive)‘public expenditure is at the heart of Britain's economic difficulties’(HMSO 1979).
It regards the private sector as the source of wealth creation, part of which is used to subsidize the public sector.
Sir Keith Joseph clarified this view by alleging that ‘a wealth-creating sector which accounts for one-third of the national product carries on its back a State subsidized sector which accounts for two-thirds.
The rider is twice as heavy as the horse’(Joseph 1976).
Bacon and Eltis (1978) attempt to give substance to this view.
They suggest that public expenditure growth has led to a transfer of productive resources from the private sector to a public sector producing largely non-marketed output, and that this has been a major factor in the UK's poor performance in the post-war period.
Bacon and Eltis noted that public sector employment increased by some 26%, from 5.8 million workers to 7.3 million between 1960 and 1978, a time when total employment was largely unchanged.
They then alleged that the private (marketed) sector was squeezed by higher taxes to finance this growth in the public sector — the result being deindustrialization, low labour productivity, low economic growth and balance of payments problems (see also Ch. 14).
Another argument used by those who favour restricting public expenditure is that it must be cut in order to limit the growth of money supply and to curb inflation.
The argument is that a high Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) following public expenditure growth, must be funded by the issue of Treasury bills and government stocks.
Since there are inadequate ‘real’ savings to be found in the non-bank private sector, these bills and bonds inevitably find their way into the hands of the banks.
As we will see in Chapter 18, they may then form the basis for a multiple expansion of bank deposits (money), with perhaps inflationary consequences.
A related argument is that public expenditure must be restricted, not only  to limit the supply of money, but also its ‘price’— the rate of interest.
The suggestion is that to sell the extra bills and bonds to fund a high PSBR, interest rates must rise to attract investors.
This then puts pressure on private sector borrowing, with the rise in interest rates inhibiting private sector investment and investment-led growth.
A major policy aim of the government has, therefore, been to reduce public sector borrowing.
There are also worries that increased public spending not only pushes up government borrowing to fund a high PSBR, but also leads to higher taxes, thereby reducing the incentives to work, save and take risks.
The evidence linking taxes to incentives is reviewed in Chapter 16.
Suffice it to say here that the evidence to support the general proposition that higher taxes undermine the work ethic is largely inconclusive.
A further line of attack is that the growth of public expenditure may have destabilized the economy in the 1970s and early 1980s.
This was implied by the Cambridge Economic Policy Group (CEPG), who used an accounting identity (see Ch. 27) to demonstrate that a higher PSBR must lead to a deterioration in the balance of payments.
The common sense of their argument is that higher public spending raises interest rates and attracts capital inflows, which in turn raise the demand for sterling and therefore the exchange rate.
A higher pound then makes exports dearer and imports cheaper, so that the balance of payments deteriorates.
These various lines of reasoning have been challenged by, amongst others, the New Cambridge School which suggests that the relationships between the public sector and economic management may by no means be so simple.
In fact, one adherent of the New Cambridge School, Lord Kaldor (1980), went so far as to say that there is no empirical support for a high PSBR leading either to substantial growth in money supply or to high rates of interest.
Similarly, the claim that resources liberated by the public sector will automatically find their way into the private sector was hardly supported by the rising unemployment trend of the early 1980s and 1990s.
Another criticism is that public expenditure cuts, rather than helping to control unemployment (by cutting inflation in a monetarist model), have either caused or exaggerated current unemployment (see Ch. 20).
The debate on the role of public expenditure continues.
Nevertheless, the present Conservative government believes, as a cornerstone of its medium term financial strategy, that it should squeeze inflation progressively out of the economy, through cuts in both the level of the PSBR and the rate of growth of the money supply.
Reductions in public expenditure are seen as essential for achieving each of these financial targets (indeed, by the end of the 1980s, the government achieved a short-lived switch from PSBR to PSDR, i.e. public sector debt repayment).
Continuing fiscal rectitude is seen as important, growth targets not withstanding, for a government still committed to the Maastricht criteria for fiscal convergence (see Ch. 28).
These include a 3% target for the overall ratio of Public Sector Borrowing (PSBR) to GDP, and a 60% target for the ratio of public debt to GDP.
As  we saw in Table 15.2 above, and shall subsequently see in Table 15.4, the UK is currently outside these target ranges.
This inevitably brings into focus the procedure for the planning, monitoring and control of public expenditure.
Public expenditure control has a long history dating back to the early eighteenth century.
Restraint was initially the responsibility of the parliamentary opposition using a system of procedural checks on estimates and expenditure payments.
In the nineteenth century, Gladstone introduced auditing through the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General, a Crown appointment independent of Parliament.
The comptroller's scrutiny of items of expenditure helped promote Treasury and parliamentary control of public expenditure.
Subsequent developments of importance included the establishment, in 1924, of the Commons Public Accounts Committee (PAC) to investigate abuse.
This gave Parliament still more control in that the comptroller's report need no longer be taken at face value, but could be subjected to detailed investigation by the PAC.
Prest (1967) concluded that this system was successfully grounded in procedural tradition dating back to the 1860s.
It provided a full and comprehensive check against dishonesty and speculation as, for example, with the existence of a single Exchequer account into which all receipts were paid and from which all payments were drawn.
Criticisms within and without Parliament made it clear that this audit model of control was beginning to falter in the post-war period.
Since 1945, the traditional functions of Parliament had expanded rapidly and had become more technical and complex.
The PAC uncovered many scandals, but as its investigations were post-mortems it was accused of ‘only shutting the stable door after the horse had bolted’(see Pollitt 1977).
The quality of government and parliamentary information and expertise in both monitoring and control was clearly inadequate.
It was as a result of such criticisms that the Plowden Report was published in 1961 (Plowden 1961).
Plowden inaugurated modern public expenditure management.
It was intended to provide a comprehensive view of public expenditure planning and control.
Previously the framework had been rather piecemeal, with departments presenting separate estimates at different periods of the year.
Often, when out-turn was greater than planned expenditure, Parliament had meekly acquiesced to supplementary estimates.
There was neither a global view of spending, nor effective control, in the system prior to Plowden.
Plowden established the principle that decisions involving substantial future expenditure should always be taken in the light of surveys of public expenditure over a number of years, and in relation to the prospective resources.
The model adopted was a largely Keynesian one, concerned with the opportunity cost of resources used, rather than with the monetary value of spending.
The new system depended upon annual surveys being published each year, together with five-year plans, rolled forward one year at the next annual planning round.2 In this pattern of five-year plans, the first two were to be in detail, and the next three in outline.
A critical element in these surveys was that data for past and future plans were to be presented at constant prices, as it was almost impossible to interpret a time series of expenditure for a period in which prices fluctuated significantly.
This meant that planned changes were presented in real or volume terms (i.e. the number of roads or teachers), an important point in subsequent criticism of Plowden.
Another feature of Plowden was that expenditure had to be presented by function (i.e. by programme, so that social and political priorities could be debated), by type of expenditure (current and capital), and by relevant spending authority (central/local government).
The system of control established by Plowden was to be known as the PESC system, since the Public Expenditure Survey Committee was to be its centrepiece.
Plowden was seen as providing a medium-term strategy for economic control, though to function satisfactorily it required an adequate institutional structure.
The PESC, a body of high-ranking finance officers from the spending departments, was to be at the heart of this structure.
They, together with the Treasury, were to be responsible for presenting an ‘up-to-date’ costing of existing programmes.
However, one year's public expenditure was heavily predetermined by previous decisions, so that changes were by and large only possible at the margins.
The full circle of control might start up to eighteen months prior to the beginning of the financial year in question and involve discussions between the PESC and the government departments over initial estimates, and present them to Cabinet in the November preceding the start of the financial year (April).
Policy changes and ‘horse-trading’ could then be considered in Cabinet on the basis of firm figures.
A curious but important feature of the PESC system was to define ‘constant prices’ as being those prevailing at the beginning of the exercise: they were not updated in the light of subsequent price changes.
Thus the 1981–82 White Paper on Public Expenditure (the last year for this procedure) used the prices prevailing in autumn 1979.
Such a definition of ‘constant prices’ meant that no effective financial control was exercised in the inflationary 1970s.
Departments, having planned the number of schools, hospitals, etc. at ‘constant prices’, could purchase these even if inflation in the current year was higher than anticipated.
The Treasury recognized the additional expenditure implications of this planning defect by including in the White Paper a financial allowance (normally positive) called the relative price effect (RPE).
They did not, however, attempt to restrain this extra spending, although to highlight the use of what became known as ‘funny money’ in the planning process, the PESC at least monitored the amounts spent in terms of‘current money’.
Effectively, therefore, the PESC system used three types of money, i.e. constant (or survey prices) for planning, constant prices plus RPE for spending, and current prices for monitoring.
This system taxed the intelligence and understanding of all but a few.
It helped to bring the system  into disrepute and played a major part in the eventual breakdown of the Plowden structure.
There were other criticisms of the system.
Volume analysis did not encourage economic efficiency; for example, it avoided the question of substitution between individual programmes when cash was short.
Nor did it assist macroeconomlc management.
Volume targets were planned partly on the basis of growth projections for National Income, and partly on political judgement as to how much of National Income should be absorbed by the state.
Government growth projections for National Income have been notoriously unreliable, often excessively optimistic.
Despite this, public expenditure programmes were rarely revised downwards (see Pliatisky 1982), creating inevitable economic problems.
As Wynn Godley pointed out, public expenditure during 1971–75 increased by 5.5bn more than could be accounted for by announced policy changes, i.e. by an extra 5% of GDP.
He alleged that at least 4.75bn had occurred because of inflation.
Individual government departments also created problems for the use of volume analysis.
Most notorious were the cost overruns in defence and civilian aircraft R&D.
The estimated government cost for Concorde in 1962 was 160m, but by 1982 it had soaked up over 1bn (around 250m at 1962 prices).
Nationalized industries created additional difficulties; volume planning often led to overcapacity and excessive output, with huge losses having to be written off.
The most dramatic difficulties have, however, been created by local authorities.
In 1982–83 they spent around 1.5bn in excess of central government plans, i.e. an extra 7% on the planned total.
In defence of their position, local authorities pointed out that much of the upsurge in their expenditure occurred because of statutory demands for new or expanded services placed on them by central government.
The local authority increase in manpower, particularly ancillary and health workers, could largely be explained by such statutory obligations.
In retrospect, the public expenditure crisis of the early and mid-1970s appears to have been mainly due to high inflation exposing weaknesses in the Plowden structure of volume planning.
Modifications to the system of planning and control of public expenditure became inevitable.
Microplanning — programme analysis and review The 1970 White Paper on Public Expenditure argued that the PESC system needed strengthening.
Its conclusions were based on the Fulton Report (1968).
This argued that micromanagement of spending projects had developed on an ad hoc basis, and was failing to provide enough information for a detailed analysis of the efficiency with which resources were being used in existing programmes and policy options.
The Fulton Report therefore suggested that the PESC system should adopt programme analysis and review (PAR)— a technique by which individual programmes selected by Cabinet could be systematically analysed.
Programme analysis and review was really nothing more than a method of asking basic questions about programme resources and outputs, such as what is being done and why?
What methods are being used, and what results are being obtained?
The success of this technique has been limited.
Governments have tended  in the main to be more interested in macro-rather than micro- (individual programme) problems.
Allegedly, most PAR reports have been too long and complicated, suffering from data and conceptual problems.
The Civil Service mandarins have often refused to allow their publication, even when they were concerned with such ‘innocuous’ subjects as road safety, rural depopulation or fertilizers.
In the end only one or two small sub-programmes have been investigated each year.
It has been alleged that at this rate it would take 300 years to examine all the programmes outlined in Table 15.1 above.
By 1979 The Economist was implying that the government's new cost control team under Sir Derek Rayner (head of Marks and Spencer) had effectively killed PAR, though it was anticipated that this body would do similar work by introducing business methods of accounting into government.
However, even this cost control team was subsequently absorbed by the Treasury in 1983 because it was politically unpopular and had met with mixed success.
The Treasury team still exists and has continued to have some ‘success’.
Planning and control in ‘real money’— cash limits The first significant change from PESC volume control which was broadly recognized as having failed, came with the widespread introduction of cash limits.
Initially these had applied to some building programmes in 1974/75, but the new controls were extended and grafted on to volume control in 1976.
The Treasury hoped that they would be an answer to inappropriate volume targets, and to criticisms that PESC allowed the cash content of public expenditure to rise too fast; often even faster than the general rate of inflation, since public sector inflation usually exceeded that in the private sector.
Cash limits were initially fixed to reflect volume decisions, but once set they, not the volume decisions, were to be the determinants of expenditure.
In other words, cash limits were not expected to be adjusted during the subsequent year to take account of inflation.
Cash limits now cover directly some 60% of public expenditure and have been used in different ways throughout the public sector.
Central government generally has cash limits imposed on clearly defined blocks of expenditure.
However, there are some major exceptions, such as‘demand-related services’, specifically social security, together with debt interest and a few subsidies.
These exclusions have restricted the overall effectiveness of cash limits as a device for controlling public expenditure.
This was particularly true during the economic recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s, when rapidly expanding social security payments, high interest rates and substantial debt interest payments meant that public expenditure totals continued to rise as a proportion of National Income.
Local government capital expenditure is ‘cash limited’, but current expenditure is cash limited only as far as the overall total of the Rate Support Grant (RSG) 3 is concerned.
Local authorities still have the right to decide individual items of expenditure within this overall block, and also to resort to local sources of finance.
These loopholes stretched government control of local spending, so that the 1981 ‘local government reforms’ were introduced.
Whilst retaining the right of local authorities to allocate the overall block between individual programmes, block spending grants were now related to  ‘optimum’ levels of expenditure, with financial penalties imposed on errant authorities.
A cash limit is also applied to nationalized industries to restrict their ability to borrow from sources other than the government.
The technical term used for this cash limit is the external finance limit (EFL), reflecting its rather different status.
The EFL is not directly imposed on wage and industrial costs, so that these have sometimes risen within the total EFL at the cost of lower investment, higher prices or a reduced quality of service.
Cash limits are expected to encourage cost-cutting and to make managers think about the quality and the quantity of the service they provide.
Cash limits have had some ‘success’, even leading to an undershooting of the limits, as financial managers treat the new system with excessive caution and spend well below their targets.
However, there are still problems: cash limits will only be ‘successful’ if the government has the political will to set effective limits in the first place, and subsequently to keep to them.
A number of public sector pay awards have been treated leniently through supplementary estimates being granted, or have even been placed outside the limits.
Other pay settlements for powerful groups of workers have been preceded by promises to adjust the limits if necessary.
Again, the contingency reserve and the block method of funding of grants provide means by which it is possible to accommodate limited extra calls, as in the case of the Falklands war.
A further weakness in the system is that the government, when setting limits for expenditure which can be as far as two years in the future, has to make realistic assumptions about projected inflation.
Usually these projections for inflation have underestimated the out-turn so that‘unintended’ cuts have been imposed in programmes.
We have already noted in Chapter 8 that nationalized industries have often side-stepped their ‘cash limit’(the EFL) by actually cutting investment and the quality of service rather than by cutting costs.
Finally, there is the criticism that cash limits tend to ignore the fact that specific volumes of goods and services may be required to meet specific needs.
Cash planning Cash limits did constrain most spending programmes, but PESC planning was still undertaken in volume terms (‘funny money’).
The logical step, agreed in 1981, was therefore to shift planning itself away from volume and into cash.
The year 1982/83 was the first in which public expenditure was planned, monitored and controlled in cash.
Although the advantage of real volume planning, an assured outcome, is lost by the new technique, it was expected that cash planning would mean that government expenditure could more easily be related to expected government revenue.
This would mean that the PSBR could be more accurately forecast, to the benefit of macroeconomic control.
The clear implication is that greater weight is being given to macro-planning, in the hope that greater effectiveness here will indirectly benefit individual projects.
With further anticipated rises in the PSBR for the early and mid-1990s, the government sought in late 1992 to introduce still further constraints on the rise in public spending.
Each year the government will set a ‘control total’, with real spending (excluding cyclically affected items such as unemployment benefit) rising rather less than the underlying real rate of growth.
There will also be a new negotiating procedure between ministers in charge of the spending departments.
Until 1992 these ministers would seek to agree on spending limits for their department in bi-lateral negotiations with the chief secretary to the Treasury.
The agreed sums would then be added together and announced in the ‘autumn statement’ on public spending plans.
From late 1992 the procedure has changed.
The spending ministers must now also meet face-to-face in Cabinet in October or November to fight for a share of the set total.
Any extra given to one spending department must be at the expense of another spending department.
In addition, from December 1993 onwards the Budget and the public spending statements are to occur together, reinforcing the linkage between revenue raising and expenditure.
In 1979 the government announced that it was determined, unlike the previous Labour administration, to control and reduce public expenditure.
In practice this has not been achieved, even allowing for the fact that the Conservative government inherited from Labour plans entailing growth in expenditure of some 2% per annum.
After 1979, the Thatcher administration announced wide-ranging cuts, yet the ratio of general government expenditure to GDP increased from 41% in the last year of the Labour government to 46.8% in 1982/83.
Since then, as indicated in Table 15.2 above, the government reduced government expenditure as a percentage of GDP.
By 1989/90, public expenditure comprised only 39% of GDP, the lowest ratio since 1965/66.
As we noted in Fig. 15.2 and Table 15.2, the ratio has risen since then under the influence of recessionary conditions.
The government's initial failure to hold spending down in the early 1980s was not for lack of trying.
The recession was much deeper than forecast, so that social security payments expanded as unemployment rose to over three million.
In addition, high interest rates raised debt interest, policy decisions raised grants to individuals, as with child benefit replacing family allowances, and demographic pressures increased expenditure on retirement pensions.
Cuts in subsidy forced the nationalized industries to increase prices more than the going rate of inflation and pressure was put on them to restrain borrowing.
The government was heavily criticized for allowing cuts to fall more heavily on ‘productive’ capital investment rather than current spending (see Fig. 15.5 above).
The Treasury sought to justify itself, arguing that some of the alleged cuts in capital spending are more apparent than real.
Definitional convention means that many items are classified as current expenditure (e.g. R & d and industrial training) when they are, in fact, capital items.
In any case, the Treasury has argued against any a priori assumption that capital spending is ‘productive’.
Why should investment in prisons and unemployment benefit offices be considered productive?
Why should more capital spending on hospitals make the National Health Service more ‘productive’ than more current spending on nurses?
Since the rise in ratio of public spending to National Income peaked in 1982/83, we have seen that the ratio steadily declined to the end of the 1980s.
This does not, however, mean that all the problems of ‘control’ of public spending have been resolved, a fact brought home by renewed rises in the ratio in the early 1990s.
For instance the 1970s concern remains that public expenditure pay may neither be under control for particular groups of workers nor spent wisely or efficiently for others.
This criticism arises from the fact that, search where you may through the White Papers, nowhere will you find detailed information about what public service workers have been paid, how their pay has changed or what they will be paid in the future.
If, therefore, public spending increases we have no idea whether the rise went in pay or in improved services.
This is a crucial element when debating the merits of improvements in the National Health Service or education.
Similarly re the expenditure of particular departments.
The Commons PAC (Hencke 1988) revealed that the post-war problems of lack of control and bureaucratic delay still remained within the Ministry of Defence.
They stated that it cost taxpayers 3bn to 4bn per annum in overrun defence contracts.
One area where the government can claim some success as a result of public expenditure control involves debt repayment (Table 15.4).
Public Sector Debt Repayment (PSDR) was 14.5bn in 1988/89, i.e. some 3% of GDP.
However reductions in tax revenue, linked to rising unemployment, and higher demand-related expenditures on social security, have restored the need for net public borrowing.
The Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) is expected to be almost 6% of GDP in 1992/93.
The local authorities spend over a quarter of public expenditure and have been a major source of control problems.
In most expenditure programmes they have considerable discretion over totals and priorities.
Only in one major area, capital, has Parliament or central government set detailed rules reducing this freedom.
The government has thus attempted to restrict local authority discretion by reducing the level of income received from the central government via cuts in the RSG and through rate capping.
However, the Audit Commission, a government efficiency agency, has still criticized some local authorities for spending excessively and for wasting resources, e.g. some 700m has been ‘inefficiently’ spent in one year on council house maintenance repairs.
(See Ch. 16 for recent moves to curb local authority spending, e.g. uniform business rate, rate capping, etc.)
The Conservative government has also used the policy of privatization to reduce the size of public expenditure (Treasury 1982).
In 1979 the state sector accounted for 11.5% of GDP.
Since then, more than one-third of that has been moved to the private sector.
In total this has involved the transfer of around 650,000 employees, the majority of whom (some 90%) have become shareholders in the companies they work for.
The privatization programme  has reduced net lending to the nationalized industries (part of total government expenditure in Table 15.1 above) and has provided a (temporary) boost to Treasury funds.
It is too early to make a full assessment of the impact of such privatization on industrial efficiency.
The government, however, believes that it has improved company performance by making public sector industry subject to market forces, and by breaking state monopolies (see Ch. 8).
They also believe that their programme is working as most privatized companies are reporting increased turnover, investment and profitability.
They maintained the momentum of the privatization programme in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the privatization of electricity and water.
Other minor reforms have been suggested for reducing public expenditure.
The Treasury has merged the manpower division of the Civil Service into the public expenditure section of the Treasury, bringing manpower control into public expenditure planning.
However, fundamental ways of reducing the size of public expenditure would require the government to find new ways of charging for the services it provides, or to dismantle the Welfare State.
Changes in the monitoring and control of public expenditure since Plowden have not meant that planned levels of expenditure can be painlessly reduced.
The definition of public expenditure is by no means clear-cut and must depend upon the question at issue.
Since National Income also has many variants, any public expenditure/National Income ratio must be treated with caution.
The estimate for 1992/93 puts general government expenditure at around 43% of GDP at market prices.
If, however, we subtract grants and transfers from public expenditure, as we do from all the National Income measures, then the figure falls substantially to around 32%.
Whatever the definition chosen, the proportion of government spending in National Income has risen steadily throughout the twentieth century, including the early period under the present Conservative government.
The reduction in the growth of National Income played an important part in raising the ratio in the early 1980s; both directly, by restricting the denominator, and indirectly, by causing unplanned increases in expenditure on social security.
Whether a growing public sector ‘crowds out’, or otherwise adversely affects the private sector, is a matter of deep controversy.
Certainly in comparative terms the UK is by no means exceptional, with the share of UK government spending in National Income below the average for the EC countries.
More ‘rigour has been imposed on procedures to plan, monitor and control public expenditure.
This, together with renewed growth in National Income, helped to reduce the ratio of government spending to National Income well below its peak in 1982–83.
However, the return of recessionary conditions in the early 1990s has pushed the ratio up some 4% above the ‘low’ of 39% reached in 1988/89.
Higher public spending, together with lower tax revenues, mean that the UK is now outside the Maastricht target range for EC fiscal convergence, namely a PSBR no higher than 3% of GDP.
The move, in late 1992, towards a new ‘control total’ for public spending, makes it clear that  the government will continue to seek a tight fiscal stance.
Of course in so doing there may be consequences for growth potential.
For example, the IMF calculates that the public spending curbs required if EC governments are to meet the 3% PSBR: GDP target by 1996, will slow growth across the EC by 0.4 to 0.8 percentage points a year between 1993 and 1996 (Wolf, 1992).
1.
In fact, prior to 1970, these surveys were not published for public debate — a serious criticism of the PESC.
2.
The pattern of five years (the first two in detail and the next three in outline) has subsequently been modified as circumstances have dictated.
The Conservative government, arguing economic planning difficulties, has usually planned in three-year blocks.
3.
The RSG is a block grant provided by central government.
It aims to finance a minimum level of services, to equalize taxable resources between different local authorities, and to relieve the domestic ratepayer of part of the local tax burden.
Taxation
This chapter looks at the existing pattern of UK taxation and the changes that have taken place in recent years.
We examine the degree of progressiveness of the UK tax system and the effects of the recent switches between direct and indirect taxation.
The changing burden of taxation in the UK is charted, and international comparisons are presented.
We then consider the effect of higher taxes on incentives to work, save and take risks, and on the rise of the ‘black economy’.
After a more general treatment of the direct vs indirect tax debate, we conclude with a brief look at recent reforms of local taxation and social security benefits.
Taxes may be classified in a number of different ways.
Taxes may be grouped by the administrative arrangement for their collection.
Income tax is paid directly to the Exchequer by the individual taxpayer (mainly through Pay As You Earn — PAYE), on the full amount of income from employment and investment in the fiscal year.
The same is true of corporation tax, paid by firms on company profits.
On the other hand, value added tax (VAT), though paid by consumers, reaches the Exchequer indirectly, largely through retailers acting as collecting agencies.
Taxes may therefore be classified as either direct or indirect, according to the administrative arrangement for their collection.
From Table 16.1 we see that direct taxes — in the form of income tax, capital taxes, corporation tax and petroleum revenue tax — are expected to produce 35.0% (80.4/229.8) of total government receipts in 1992/93.
Income tax is by far the most important direct tax, alone contributing almost 26% of government receipts.
Strictly speaking we should add the various National Insurance contributions to the total for direct taxation.
These are a compulsory levy on employers, employees and the self-employed, expressed as a fixed percentage of total earnings, and paid directly to the Exchequer (shown under the ‘Social Security receipts’ heading).
They total some 38.7bn in 1992/93 and provide around 16.8% of government receipts.
They are not, however, included in the Consolidated Fund revenue tables.
Indirect taxes — VAT, a range of excise duties on oil, tobacco, alcohol and motor cars, and import duties — were expected to produce 29% of total   government receipts in 1992/93.
Of these VAT (17.4% of total receipts) was the most important.
The indirect taxes are collected by Customs and Excise.
This Consolidated Fund revenue (169.8bn), together with Social Security receipts (38.7bn), local authority and business rates (some 14.1bn) and the community charge (8.0bn) plus other miscellaneous receipts, including those from privatization, are necessary to pay for the government's expenditure plans of around 258bn in 1992/93.
Details of the main items of government income are to be found in Fig. 16.1 and information on the income and expenditure in Table 16.2.
Between 1985 and 1989, government income was particularly buoyant.
Indeed the growing economy helped contribute to increased tax revenue and the creation of budget surpluses from 1987/88 to 1990/91.
However, these surpluses or PSDR (Public Sector Debt Repayment) shrank rapidly after 1989 as government revenue suffered in the wake of the most protracted    period of recession since the Inter-War years.
By March 1992 the Treasury was projecting an increase in the budget deficit (i.e. the PSBR) from 14bn in 1991/2 to a high of 32bn by 1993/4, as can be seen in Table 16.2.
However, by the autumn of 1992, both the government and other experts were predicting that the continuing recession would lead to a still more rapid slow down in the growth of government revenue.
This, together with higher recession-related expenditures on unemployment and social security benefits, was projected to result in a revised PSBR of between 40bn and 50bn by 1993/4.
Such anticipated outcomes were a far cry from the Conservative government's long term objective of a balanced budget.
The tax base is essentially the ‘object’ to which the tax rate is applied.
Excluding National Insurance contributions, taxes are usually grouped under three headings as regards tax bases: taxes on income (income, corporation  and petroleum revenue taxes); taxes on expenditure (VAT and customs and excise duties); and taxes on capital (capital gains and inheritance tax).
Figure 16.2 shows that for 1992/93, taxes on income were expected to yield around 52% of the Total Tax Revenue of 169.8bn; taxes on expenditure 32% and taxes on capital less than 2%.
In addition to these taxes (not in Fig. 16.2) there were compulsory levies in the form of Social Security receipts (National Insurance contributions) from individuals and companies of 38.7bn and community charges of 8bn, raising the burden further on income.
Classifying taxes in terms of tax base, rather than method of collection, is often of more interest to economists, especially when calculating tax incidence (on whom the tax falls)!
However, using the tax base does present problems of definition.
For instance, Lord Wrenbury, in a legal judgment in 1925, defined income tax as being that which is ‘within the Act, taxable under the Act’.
National Insurance contributions, because they are based on calculations by actuaries, are not classified as a tax on income, yet they are levied as a percentage of income.
Whatever the tax base, the taxes levied can be one of two types, either specific (lump sum) or ad valorem.
Specific and ad valorem taxes.
A specific tax is expressed as an absolute sum of money per unit of the good.
Excise duties are often of this kind, being so many pence per packet of cigarettes or per proof of spirit.
An ad valorem tax is a percentage tax, levied not on volume but on value; e.g. in 1993 VAT is 17.5% of sales price, and corporation tax is 33% of assessable profits for larger companies and 25% for smaller companies.
Another useful classification is between progressive, proportional and regressive taxes.
Tax is imposed as a rate or series of rates; e.g. income tax is levied at just 20%, 25% and 40% of taxable income whilst VAT items that are not exempted are zero-rated or pay 17.5%.
These tax rates can be regarded as progressive, proportional or regressive, though such terms must be defined strictly as they are often used loosely.
For a tax to be regarded as progressive, its rate structure must be such that the tax takes a rising proportion of total income as income increases; a proportional tax takes a constant proportion, whilst a regressive tax takes a declining proportion.
Since a progressive tax means that the rich pay more, not only in an absolute sense, but as a proportion of their total income, we need to know more than that the marginal rate of tax rises with income.
If, for instance, tax allowances and exemptions are more easily acquired by higher-income groups (as with mortgage repayments, etc.) then, despite a rising marginal rate, the individual may pay a smaller proportion of a higher total income in tax.
In fact, it is the average rate that is the best guide to whether the tax or tax system is, or is not, progressive.
If the average rate is rising with income, then the tax is taking a higher proportion of higher incomes, i.e. the tax is progressive.
As we know from any game, say cricket, only when an individual scores more on his last (marginal) innings than his average for all previous innings, will his overall average actually rise.
In the same way, only when the marginal rate of tax is higher than the average rate, will the average rate rise as income rises, and the tax be progressive.
If the marginal and average rates are equal, then the average rate will be unchanged as income rises, so that the tax is proportional.
If the marginal rate is below the average rate, then the average rate falls as income rises, and the tax is regressive.
Figure 16.3 shows that, for the UK, direct taxes (the unshaded area in each bar) are progressive, taking a larger proportion of the total (gross) income of richer households.
Indirect taxes are in contrast regressive, taking a declining proportion of such income.
Overall, taking both direct and indirect taxes together, the UK tax system is broadly proportional to income.
Although indirect taxes as a whole are regressive, there is some variation between different types of indirect tax.
As we observe from Table 16.3, VAT is essentially a mildly regressive tax, whereas other indirect taxes are strongly regressive.
We have seen that indirect taxes are more regressive than direct taxes.
Here we chart the substantial changes that took place in the direct/indirect tax ratio during the 1970s and early 1980s.
As Fig. 16.4 indicates, throughout the 1950s and 1960s taxes on income (direct) and expenditure (indirect) maintained a steady relationship, with taxes on income yielding around 10% more revenue.
During the early and mid-1970s, however, the balance changed in favour of direct taxes on income as revenue providers for central government, due in part to inflation raising money incomes (and therefore direct tax receipts) and in part to fiscal drag.
Fiscal drag is the extra tax yield which results from the fact that changes in both tax allowances and tax bands may not occur until after inflation has had its impact on money incomes.
By 1975 direct taxes on income had peaked, providing some 60% more revenue than taxes on expenditure.
The ratio fell substantially after that, and by 1986 direct taxes only provided some 10% more revenue than taxes on expenditure.
After 1986 the ratio began to edge upwards again as incomes increased, with growing prosperity in the economy raising the yield from direct taxes.
However, in 1988/89 the Chancellor once more reversed the trend by permitting a substantial over-indexation of tax allowances.
This, together with the increase in VAT rates to 17.5% in the 1991 Budget, have caused the ratio to continue its downward path.
Income taxes are more ‘visible’ to individuals than expenditure taxes, which to some extent are hidden in product prices.
This may well have contributed to the feeling that the UK was overtaxed, despite the fact that this is contradicted by the evidence (see Table 16.5 below).
It may be helpful to look further into the factors helping to establish the pattern shown in Fig. 16.4.
With the slowing down of inflation in the mid-late 1970s, the ratio of direct to indirect taxes in total revenue began to fall.
The new Conservative government in 1979 then made a deliberate switch away from direct income taxation towards indirect taxation, cutting the standard rate of income tax from 33 to 30%, and raising VAT from 8 to 15%.
We might have expected this switch to reinforce the downward trend in the ratio of direct to indirect tax receipts.
In fact, higher inflation in the early years of that government prevented the ratio falling.
Since the early 1980s, the receipts from direct taxes on income have fluctuated around an average figure some 10% above those from indirect taxes on expenditure; we have returned to the broad pattern of the 1950s and 1960s.
The restored importance of indirect taxes, whatever its source, must, in the context of our earlier analysis, have made the UK tax system less progressive than it would otherwise have been.
We have seen that the structure of UK taxation has changed in recent years.
What about the level of taxation?
The ratio of total tax take to National Income is a frequently used measure of tax ‘burden’.
We can see from Table 16.4 that between 1964 and 1970 the total receipts from all taxes (including National Insurance) rose sharply as a proportion of GDP.
Between 1970 and 1974 the tax ratio fell from 37.5% to 33.75% but has risen since then.
Even the substantial income tax reductions of 1988/89 have left the total tax burden in 1992/93 at 35.75%, which is higher than when the Conservatives came into office in 1979.
The fear that the tax burden will continue to rise rapidly, to finance growing public expenditure on a population with more old people, led to recent proposals for radical changes in the Welfare State.
Despite the rise in UK tax burden, and contrary to popular public opinion, the UK is only a middle-ranked country in terms of tax burden.
From Table 16.5 we see that in 1976 the UK was only the tenth-ranked country out of eighteen in terms of tax burden, below the Scandinavian countries and close to France.
OECD data in 1989 gave the UK a slightly higher ranking of equal ninth.
Despite a rise in tax revenue as a proportion of GDP of 4.0% over this thirteen year period, the UK tax burden in 1989 continued to lie well below that in the Scandinavian countries, where over half of GDP was taken in tax and social security contributions in that year, and below other major competitors such as France and Germany.
Tax burden and economic growth.
It can be concluded from the evidence of Table 16.5 that there is little relationship between low tax burdens and faster economic growth.
Norway, with the third-highest tax burden in 1989, had an annual average growth rate of 3.1 % in the period 1976–91, nearly 25% above the OECD average of 2.5% per annum, and ranked as high as second     in terms of growth rate.
On the other hand, Switzerland, with the lowest tax burden, had only the tenth-fastest growth rate of 1.8% in that period, well below the OECD average.
Tax schedules and tax rates.
We should, however, bear one or two cautionary points in mind before lapsing into complacency!
A study by Messere, Owen and Teir (1982) suggests that published tax schedules are a greater disincentive to effort than the ‘effective tax rates’(i.e. the tax actually paid after all personal and other allowances have been calculated).
The argument here is that it is tax schedules as shown in Table 16.6, widely publicized in newspapers and annual tax returns, which form the basis for the ordinary citizen's notion of tax burden.
In analysing tax schedules, the Messere study found that a higher proportion of taxpayers (over 95%) paid the basic rate in the UK than elsewhere, and that both the initial and top rates of tax on earned income were higher in the UK than elsewhere.
Nevertheless, the taxpayer on average income in the UK paid a marginal rate no higher than in other OECD countries.
Since 1987/8 the Conservative government has simplified the tax structure and reduced the tax rates (as shown in Table 16.6 and Fig. 16.5) in order to try to encourage incentives.
By 1992 the Treasury could safely claim that the UK's top rate of income tax at 40% was below that of its major competitors, as can be seen from Fig. 16.6.
A further reason for taxpayers believing that the burden of taxation is higher than it actually is may arise from a failure to understand the method of collection of income tax.
Income tax is not collected on the total amount of income.
Each individual is granted allowances or exemptions that reduce the total amount of income liable to tax.
In 1992/93 each single person was, for example, given an allowance of 3,445; married couples were given an additional allowance of 1,720 over and above the single allowance and pensioners were given even higher allowances.
These allowances, plus a few others, are deducted from the total income to produce the taxable income.
Tax rates of 20%, 25% and 40% (on taxable incomes over 23,700) are then applied to this taxable income.
Further tax relief is also given to mortgage payers.
Such mortgage relief on interest payments to banks and building    societies is worth some 15% of the gross monthly payments.
Thus the average burden of taxation for the average taxpayer is considerably below the main 25 and 40% seen in the tax schedules.
Overall there appears little evidence that the UK has an excessive burden of tax in comparison to other countries.
Although the proportion of GNP taken in tax has risen in the UK since the early 1970s, the UK is, in comparative terms, only a middle-ranked country in terms of tax-take, with tax (excluding community charge) amounting to 35.2% of GNP in 1990.
However, particular groups of UK taxpayers at the lowest and highest taxable income scales did suffer unusually high marginal rates during the 1970s and 1980s.
This, together with the growing ‘visibility’ of the income tax and social security payments system in the UK, may have created the impression of a comparatively high tax burden, but this impression was, in fact, misleading for the average taxpayer.
The 1988/89 reduction in tax rates and simplifications of the system have done little to improve the tax burden on low income earners, due in part to  the continued regressiveness of National Insurance contributions (NIC).
However, the introduction of the new lower 20% tax band on the first 2,000 of taxable income in March 1992 should help improve the position of some 4 million people who are thought to be at the lowest end of the income scale.
Clarke suggested in 1945, with the support of Keynes, that when taxation of all kinds was more than 25% of National Income, damaging pressures would follow.
In fact, most industrial countries passed this figure over twenty-five years ago, with tax ratios of over 40% for some countries in the 1970s, yet they experienced low inflation and rapid growth of real incomes.
However, perceptions of the benign nature of taxation have begun to change in more recent years, reverting back to those of Clarke and Keynes.
Two of the major criticisms of a high tax burden relate to its (alleged) erosion of economic incentives and its encouragement of tax avoidance and evasion.
We now consider these criticisms.
As the reader familiar with indifference curve analysis will know, a higher tax on income will have two effects, which pull in opposite directions.
First, an ‘income effect’, with real income reduced via higher taxes, which means less consumption of all items, including leisure, i.e. more work is performed.
Second, a ‘substitution effect’, with leisure now cheaper via higher taxes, since less real income is now sacrificed for each unit of leisure consumed.
The substitution effect leads to cheaper leisure being substituted for work, i.e. less work.
On grounds of theory alone we cannot tell which effect will be the stronger, i.e. whether higher taxes on income will raise or lower the time devoted to work rather than leisure (where, of course, the worker has some choice).
The only general conclusions that can be drawn from indifference analysis are the following:
1.
Progressive taxes have higher substitution effects, and are therefore likely to cause a greater increase in leisure consumption (i.e. less work) than if the same sum of money were raised via a proportional tax.
2.
Taxes on savings create a strong disincentive to future savings via their double-taxation effect.
Since saving takes place out of real disposable (net) income, to tax the returns on savings is to impose a further tax on net income.
3.
Taxes on investment may discourage high-risk projects.
Investment projects involve combinations of risk and yield, those with more risk usually providing more yield.
If yields on investment income are more heavily taxed, then this may discourage high-risk investments, such as North Sea oil-prospecting, and encourage low-risk investments (including cash-holding).
Theory can take us little further than this general analysis.
Beyond it we must look at actual behaviour to assess the impact of higher taxes on incentives.
Empirical studies have taken three forms:(a) controlled experiments, usually observing how selected persons respond to higher benefits (negative taxes);(b) questionnaires based on random samples, and (c) econometric studies using data on how people have responded in the past to tax changes.
Studies up to 1970.
Brown and Dawson (1969) conducted an exhaustive review of tax studies in the UK and USA from 1947 to 1968.
They concluded that higher taxation had a disincentive effect on work (income <substitution effect) for between 5 and 15% of the population.
These were mainly people who had the greatest freedom to vary their hours of employment — those without families, the middle-aged, the wealthy, and rural workers.
In contrast, higher taxation had an incentive effect on work (income> substitution effect) for a rather smaller percentage of the population, who were characteristically part of large families, young, less well-off, urban dwellers.
From a national viewpoint the small net disincentive effect on the population of higher taxes was regarded by Brown and Dawson as of little significance; over 70% appeared neutral (income = substitution effect) in their work response to higher taxes.
As regards the UK, two of the most important studies reviewed by Brown and Dawson were those based on questionnaires by Break in 1956 and Fields and Stanbury in 1968.
In 1956, Break found a small net disincentive effect, with an extra 3% of the population claiming higher taxes to be a disincentive to further work than claimed it to be an incentive.
In 1968 Fields and Stanbury updated Break's UK study and found the net disincentive effect to have grown to 8% of the population.
In both studies the net disincentive effect was greater for higher-income groups, as one might expect with these paying higher marginal taxes (stronger substitution effects).
This small growth in overall net disincentive effect between 1956 and 1968, and its being more pronounced at higher-income levels, was really all the empirical support there was in the UK for those suggesting that higher taxes discouraged work effort.
Studies after 1970.
Controlled experiments and questionnaire results after 1970 gave no clearer a picture than those before 1970.
If anything, they again pointed to a slight disincentive of higher taxes.
For instance, Brown and Levin (see Beenstock 1979) found that an increase in marginal tax rates for 2,000 Scottish workers in 1974 reduced hours worked, at least for higher income groups.
Fiegehen and Reddaway (see Brown 1988) conducted a study on incentives amongst senior managers at board level in 94 companies in 1978, just before the large tax cuts introduced by the (then) newly elected Conservative government a year or so later.
Similarly to Break, and Fields and Stanbury (see above), they showed that 12% of managers reported an incentive effect of high taxation on hours of work, while an equal percentage reported a disincentive effect.
The most common response from 41% was ‘no reply or don't know’.
Fiegehen and Reddaway concluded: ‘it is clear that, in total, any disincentive effects that operated on senior managers had a minimal impact on the activities of British industry’.
Such studies were hardly a basis for advocating that tax cuts would lead to an upsurge in work effort!
An important study by the Institute of Fiscal Studies (Dilnot and Kell, 1988) tried to assess the effects of the 1979/80 reduction in the top rate of UK income tax from 83% to 60% on tax receipts.
The argument used to support these top-rate tax cuts was that the lower income tax rates should provide extra incentives to work harder and thus boost tax revenue.
The study found that the subsequent increase in tax revenue during the period to 1985/6 could be explained mostly by factors such as employment growth, growth of earnings and growth of self-employment rather than by any ‘incentive’ effects.
Dilnot and Kell felt that any ‘incentive’ effect which may have been present could only account, at most, for 1.2bn or 3% of the total increase in tax revenues over the period studied.
The Laffer curve.
Professor Laffer derived a relationship between tax revenue and tax rates of the form shown in Fig. 16.7.
The curve was the result of econometric techniques, through which a ‘least squares line'3 was fitted to past US observations of tax revenue and tax rate.
The dotted line indicates the extension of the fitted relationship (continuous line), as there will tend to be zero tax revenue at both 0 and 100% tax rates.
Tax revenue = tax rate x output (income), so that a 0% tax rate yields zero tax revenue, whatever the level of output.
A 100% tax rate is assumed to discourage all output, except that for subsistence, again yielding zero tax revenue.
Tax revenue must reach a maximum at some intermediate tax rate between these extremes.
The London Business School (Beenstock 1979) has estimated a Laffer curve for the UK using past data.
Tax revenue was found to reach a peak at around a 60% ‘composite tax rate’, i.e. one which includes both direct and indirect taxes, as well as various social security payments, all expressed as a percentage of GDP.
If the tax rate rises above 60% then the disincentive effect on output is so strong (i.e. output falls so much) that tax revenue (tax rate x output) actually falls, despite the higher tax rate.
The Laffer curve in fact begins to flatten out at around a 45% composite tax rate.
In other words, as tax rate rises above 45%, the disincentive effect on output is strong enough to mean that little extra tax revenue results.
Econometric studies of this type have given support to those in favour of limiting overall rates of tax.
It is interesting to note that shortly after this study, the top rate of tax on earned income in the UK was indeed reduced from 83% to 60%.4
The reduction in the top income tax rate to 40% in 1988/89 was inspired by the Laffer curve and supply-side economics.
The Chancellor of the  Exchequer believed that the tax cuts would increase revenue.
He based his tax cuts on American research by Lindsey that concluded that reductions in the top tax rates to the American Government in 1981/82 were costless as the top 170,000 taxpayers ended up paying $26.6bn under new legislation instead of $26bn under the old.
Lindsey argued that the tax cuts were not only incentive creating but they also increased the cost of tax avoidance.
This research has been criticized partly because it is American evidence and partly because the American rates were slashed by 23% over three years with the top personal rate being reduced from 70 to 50% whilst the UK moved from 60 to 40% in just one year.
Finally, Lindsey and other tax experts have consistently argued that as tax rates are cut, economic efficiency is raised by reducing tax breaks and shelters at the same time.
This was done to only a very limited extent in the UK in 1988/89 (Huhne 1988).
However fresh evidence on the impact of cuts in high rates of British taxation has been provided by Minford and Ashton (see Brown 1988).
The latter study concludes that the cut in the higher British tax rates to 40% will increase hours worked by 8%.
In summary, those who advocate ‘supply side economics’, with tax reduction a key instrument for improving economic incentives, leading to an upsurge of productive activity, receive limited support from empirical studies.
Only a small net disincentive effect has been found from studies using questionnaires, such as those by Break and Stanbury.
This conclusion was reinforced by the later study of Dilnot and Kay.
On the other hand, the Laffer curve constructed for the UK by the London Business School, and work by Minford in the UK and Lindsey in the US, do indicate that reductions in the composite rate of tax below 60% and down as far as around 45%, have strong incentive effects on output — the converse of rises in tax rate between 45 and 60% having strong disincentive effects.
However, we noted in Table 16.4 that the UK composite tax rate is currently less than 40 (10, and reductions below this level receive little support from econometric studies.
Owens (1985) regarded the empirical evidence to be insufficient to support a general proposition that the tax system is undermining the work effort.
Poverty and unemployment traps.
One area where the facts do strongly suggest that the current level and type of taxation may have eroded incentives, concerns the ‘poverty’ and ‘unemployment’traps.
The families in these traps are enmeshed in a web of overlapping tax schedules and benefit thresholds, developed and administered by two separate departments (Department of Social Security and the Treasury) with differing objectives in mind.
The low-paid worker in the ‘poverty trap’ may gain nothing, or even lose, from an increase in earnings, when these cause benefits to be lost and tax to be paid.
For example, a family with two children and with a gross income of 150 per week could actually be worse off than one with only 50 per week an implicit marginal tax rate over this range of over 100%.
Before 1988 the implicit tax rates associated with the poverty trap were also, in some cases, greater than 100%.
Attempts were made in 1988 to resolve this disincentive effect.
Since 1988 benefits have been related to net   income after tax, and previous benefits paid were now taken into account.
Although the reform was thought to have eliminated the possibility of tax rates in excess of 100%, it did not in fact prevent the situation depicted in Table 16.7 with rates of more than 100% over quite long ranges at low levels of income.
The number of families where the head of household faced an implicit marginal tax rate greater than 70% in fact doubled after 1988 to over half a million.
The ‘unemployment trap’ occurs when people find they are no better off when the breadwinner is in employment than when out of employment.
Table 16.8 shows that the household is marginally better off out of work than it would have been in work.
The replacement rate is shown as 104%; this rate is the proportion of your net income that will be ‘replaced’ by the benefit system if you lose your job (or, for someone already out of work, the ratio of current income to expected net wage).
Both poverty and unemployment traps may provide a disincentive to work as those caught within them find it difficult, or even impossible, to improve their position through their own efforts.
They are, in effect, paying exceptionally high net marginal rates of tax (over 100% in our poverty trap example).
Tax avoidance is legal; tax evasion is illegal — involving concealment in one form or another, and therefore fraud.
The black economy.
The Inland Revenue in 1982 estimated that tax evasion was equal to between 6 and 8% of National Income in the UK- often called the ‘black economy’.
There is, however, considerable disagreement as to the size of the black economy.
Estimates vary from the 3 to 5% estimated by the Institute of Fiscal Studies to the 14.5% estimated by researchers working for the Institute of Economic Affairs.
One way in which the black economy can be estimated is through the difference between National Income when measured by the income method, and when measured by the expenditure method.
Apart from errors and omissions these are defined in the National Accounts in such a way that they come to the same value.
If, however, people receive income and do not declare it in tax returns, it will not appear on the income side, though expenditure will increase as the unrecorded income is spent on goods and services.
In recent years the ‘income’ valuation — based on tax returns — has fallen short of the ‘expenditure’valuation by progressively larger amounts.
Clearly the black economy is growing and its size is significant.
Johnson (1982) suggests that there may be as many as 1.6 million workers deriving unrecorded full-time income.
The black economy causes a shortfall in government revenue, and understates estimates of economic growth.
One indication of the black economy's effect on decreased tax revenue was shown in a recent Inland Revenue report.
It noted that increased activity by Inland Revenue officers (investigating those who had not paid tax) had yielded an extra 71.3m of revenue in 1990/91, which was equivalent to 2p on the basic rate of income tax (Johnson and Jack 1991).
It is important, therefore, to know why the black economy has grown.
One argument is that the growing burden of taxation has tempted more and more people to disregard the law by not declaring taxable income.
In Fig. 16.4 above we observed a switch from direct to indirect taxation since the late 1970s.
We noted that this switch entailed a move towards a more regressive system of taxation, i.e. one which takes a smaller proportion of higher incomes.
This must follow since we move away from direct taxes which we saw to be progressive, towards indirect taxes, which at best are proportional (VAT), and more usually are regressive (the community charge — now the new Council Tax, uniform business rate, excise duties, import duties, etc.).
It might be useful to consider in more general terms the advantages and disadvantages of direct and indirect systems of taxation.
For  convenience we shall compare the systems under four main headings, with indirect taxes considered first in each case.
Indirect taxes can be varied more quickly and easily, taking more immediate effect, than can direct taxes.
Since the Finance Act of 1961, the Chancellor of the Exchequer has had the power (via ‘the regulator’) to vary the rates of indirect taxation at any time between Budgets.
Excise and import duties can be varied by up to 10%, and VAT by up to 25% (i.e. between 13.13% and 21.87% for a 17.5% rate of VAT).
In contrast, direct taxes can only be changed at Budget time.
In the case of income tax, any change involves time consuming revisions to PAYE codings.
For these reasons, indirect taxes are usually regarded as a more flexible instrument of macroeconomic policy.
We have already seen how, in both theory and practice, direct taxes on income affect incentives to work.
We found that neither in theory nor in practice need the net effect be one of disincentive.
Nevertheless, it is often argued that if the same sum were derived from indirect taxation, then any net disincentive effect that did occur would be that much smaller.
In particular, it is often said that indirect taxes are less visible (than direct), being to some extent hidden in the quoted price of the good.
However, others suggest that consumers are well aware of the impact of indirect taxes on the price level.
Let us look in more detail at the direct vs indirect argument, first in relation to incentives to work and second in relation to incentives to save and take risks.
Work effort.
In terms of effects on the supply of work effort, a case against the current system of direct taxes and in favour of a switch towards indirect taxes might be made in the specific cases of poverty and unemployment traps.
However, no general case can be made for such a switch.
In fact, both income and substitution effects of a rise in indirect taxes are in the same direction as those for a rise in direct taxes.
By raising the prices of goods, higher indirect taxes also reduce real income, and at the same time reduce the cost of leisure in terms of goods forgone.
In other words, the income and substitution effects we considered above apply to higher indirect taxes as well as to higher direct taxes.
Whether the magnitude of the income and substitution effects will be the same for indirect as for direct taxes is quite another matter.
It will partly depend upon which items are taxed.
If indirect taxes are levied on goods with highly inelastic demand curves, then the indirect taxes will be largely passed on to consumers as higher prices.
Both income and substitution effects will then be substantial in magnitude.
Of course the converse also applies — if the indirect taxes are levied on goods with elastic demand curves, both income and substitution effects will be small.
We can make no general claim for ‘superiority’ of either type of tax with regard to work incentives.
Saving and risk-taking With regard to incentives for saving, indirect taxes  have the advantage of avoiding the ‘double-taxation effect’ imposed by direct income taxes.
Saving takes place out of net income, i.e. income that has already been taxed.
To tax the return on savings, via a tax on investment income (e.g. dividends), is to impose a type of double taxation on that income, an obvious disincentive to saving.
This is, however, a weak argument in support of indirect taxes as it is quite possible to devise a system of direct taxation that avoids double taxation (as currently with tax exemptions for returns on Post Office Savings and National Savings).
The argument that indirect taxes are to be preferred because they avoid the discrimination against risky investments of a direct tax system can also be rebutted.
Risky investments do usually have higher yields, and do therefore pay more direct tax than less risky investments.
However, such discrimination could be reduced, perhaps by raising the value of allowances (e.g. on exploration costs, etc.) that can be set against tax.
In terms of incentives, then, there is no general case to be made for or against one or other types of tax system.
If we are to be more specific, we must compare one particular type of indirect tax system with one particular type of direct tax system.
It is sometimes argued that indirect taxes are, in welfare terms, preferable to direct taxes, as they leave the taxpayer free to make a choice.
The individual can, for instance, avoid the tax by choosing not to consume the taxed commodity.
Although this ‘voluntary’ aspect of indirect taxes may apply to a particular individual and a particular tax, it cannot apply to all individuals and all taxes.
In other words, indirect taxes cannot be ‘voluntary’ for the community as a whole.
If a chancellor is to raise a given sum through a system of indirect taxes, individual choices not to consume taxed items must, if widespread, be countered either by raising rates of tax or by extending the range of goods and services taxed.
Another argument used to support indirect taxes on welfare grounds is that they can be used to combat ‘externalities’.
In Chapter 8 we noted that an externality occurs where private and social costs diverge.
Where private costs of production are below social costs, an indirect tax could be imposed, or increased, so that price is raised to reflect the true social costs of production.
Taxes on alcohol and tobacco could be justified on these grounds.
By discriminating between different goods and services, indirect taxes can help reallocate resources in a way that raises economic welfare for society as a whole.
On the other hand, indirect taxes have also been criticized on welfare grounds for being regressive, the element of indirect tax embodied in commodity prices taking a higher proportion of the income from lower-paid groups.
Nor is it easy to correct for this.
It would be impossible administratively to place a higher tax on a given item for those with higher incomes although one could impose indirect taxes mainly on the goods and services consumed by higher-income groups, and perhaps at higher rates.
In terms of economic welfare, as in terms of economic incentives, the picture is again unclear.
A case can be made with some conviction both for and against each type of tax.
Indirect taxes are often easy and cheap to administer.
They are paid by manufacturers and traders, which are obviously fewer in number than the total of individuals paying income tax.
This makes indirect taxes, such as excise and import duties, much cheaper to collect than direct taxes, though the difference is less marked for VAT, which requires the authorities to deal with a large number of mainly small traders.
Even if indirect taxes do impose smaller administrative costs than direct taxes for a given revenue yield, not too much should be made of this.
It is, for instance, always possible to reform the system of PAYE and reduce administrative costs.
The Inland Revenue is, in fact, considering a change from PAYE to an American system of income tax, with the obligation on taxpayers themselves to estimate and forward tax, subject to random checks.
Also, the computerization of Inland Revenue operations may, in the long run significantly reduce the administrative costs associated with the collection of direct taxes.
In summary, there is no clear case for one type of tax system compared to another.
The macroeconomic management and administrative cost grounds may appear to favour indirect taxes, though the comparison is only with the current system of direct taxation.
That system can, of course, be changed to accommodate criticisms along these lines.
On perhaps the more important grounds of economic incentives and economic welfare the case is very mixed, with arguments for and against each type of tax finely balanced.
To be more specific we must compare the particular and detailed systems proposed for each type of tax.
The subject of tax reform is a topic in its own right and can only be touched upon here.
Tax reform had been low on the political agenda before 1965, with the basic structure of taxes remaining unchanged for decades.
Since then there have been more new taxes introduced than in any other equivalent peacetime period.
Changes have included the introduction and repeal of selective employment tax; VAT replacing purchase tax; corporation tax replacing profits tax; the amalgamation of surtax and income tax; new taxes such as gambling and betting duties, and capital gains tax; and the replacement of estate duty first by capital transfer tax and subsequently by an inheritance tax.
In the late 1980s the Conservative government increased the pace of its tax reform.
It introduced the Community Charge in England and Wales during 1990 (in Scotland during 1989), together with the Uniform Business Rate (UBR) in the same year.
The unpopularity of the Community Charge or ‘poll tax’ led to its replacement in April 1993 by the Council Tax.
The Community Charge was introduced to replace what was seen as the ‘unfairness’ of the old local authority rates system.
The rates were a property tax, paid by tenants and owner occupiers.
The total amount paid per  household in tax was based on two figures.
First, on the rateable value of the property, which was a value based on an assessment of what the property could earn if it were let out on the open market.
Second, on a ‘poundage’ expressed as ‘so many pence in the pound’.
This was calculated by the local authority in accordance with the revenue it needed to raise to pay for local services.
For example, if the local authority valued a house at 30,000 and the local poundage was 2p in the pound, then the total rates for that house would be 30,000 x 0.02 or 600 per year.
There were persistent complaints that the rates system was complicated and inequitable, for instance because it was difficult to properly assess the rentable value of any property.
It was also based on the household unit, irrespective of how many people were actually living in the household.
Also the rates had a regressive effect on some members of the public: e.g. on elderly people who sometimes occupied large, highly rated properties but who could no longer afford to pay the rates demanded since their incomes were insufficient.
Finally, the total rates collected by this method were often inadequate to meet the increasing cost of local government spending on education, etc.
As a result, this system was abolished for domestic premises and replaced by the Community Charge in 1990.
For business premises the rating principle was retained in a modified form known as the Uniform Business Rate (UBR).
The UBR is based on new Inland Revenue valuations of commercial Rate properties undertaken in 1988.
Up-to-date valuations of such properties had not been undertaken for many years previously, partly because of business people's complaints that any revaluations of commercial properties could inevitably lead to an increase in their total tax bill.
To calculate the total amount of UBR payable, this new property valuation figure would then be multiplied by the UBR ‘poundage’ set by central government.
For example, the UBR poundage set for England in March 1992 was 40.2p in the pound, so that business premises would pay tax equivalent to the valuation of the property in pounds multiplied by 0.402.
One of the inevitable problems with this new tax was that business properties in the more dynamic or prosperous areas would find their valuations rising overnight to a much higher level than before, while other businesses in less prosperous areas would experience a fall in their valuations.
A calculation of the estimated changes in rates payable as a result of the new UBR system is shown in Fig. 16.8.
This shows clearly the potential inequalities of the system, with some areas experiencing huge increases in rates as a result of large revaluations, while others are much less affected.
It was calculated by the Department of the Environment that in England, some 58% of properties would experience an increase in rates, 37% a decrease in rates and a further 5% little or no change.
Since nearly 60% of the business premises would experience increases in payment under the UBR scheme, the government softened the financial impact by ‘phasing in’ the scheme over five years, with a maximum increase in UBR payments per year of 20% plus inflation.
However, because of the serious recession of the early 1990s, especially in the South East, the government decided in its Budget of 1992 to keep the increase for 1992/3  down to the current inflation rate of only 4.1 %, instead of the 24.1 % which would have been the maximum ‘phasing in’ amount payable.
On the other hand, businesses in the Midlands and North which qualified for UBR reductions were now to receive them more quickly.
Another modification introduced in 1992 was that any business which moved into new premises would inherit the transitional relief (i.e. the phasing in allowance) of the previous occupant.
In the original scheme a new occupier did not get any relief of this kind.
As can be seen, the problems faced by UK industry during the protracted recession of the early 1990s caused the government to introduce a series of ad-hoc measures to help industry minimize the effects of the UBR, at least in the short run.
The UBR also represented a change in that the ‘poundage rate’ under this scheme was now set by central government and not by the local authority.
Although the local authorities actually collect the UBR, the receipts are paid into a central fund outside local authority control.
The fund is then redistributed to local authorities at a fixed rate per adult, with extra finance made available to those local authorities with special problems.
This is clearly a further curbing of local authority financial control.
Unlike the UBR, the Community Charge sought to depart from the old rating system method of calculating local taxes.
The Community Charge was to be based not on the household, but on the individual.
In other words, the Community Charge (or poll tax) was a personal tax assessed on each adult and expressed in the form of a lump-sum payment per year.
Although the average Community Charge was 362 in 1990, the amount of the tax paid by individuals varied a great deal from area to area.
The reasons for this were linked to the financial relationship between central and local government.
The central government calculates a Standard Spending Assessment (SSA) for each authority, based on government estimates of the amount of money the authority needs to spend in order to provide a ‘standard’ level of service.
This calculation is based on various factors, such as the number of school children, miles of roads to be maintained, police and fire service requirements, etc. in each local authority.
The amount of grant which the central government gives to each local authority is then equal to the SSA minus an estimate of how much the authority will raise from other sources, i.e. the Community Charge and the UBR.
The central government also permitted local authorities to provide extra services in addition to the ones covered by the basic charge.
However these would have to be obtained from an extra levy imposed on the adults of that local authority area.
In other words, these higher spending areas would have higher Community Charges than lower spending areas.
The Community Charge was unpopular because it meant an increase in tax for many families, especially those with a number of adults living in one household.
It was also accused of being a regressive tax, in that the fixed charge per head tended to affect low income earners more than high income earners despite the existence of rebates for poor families.
Also, the cost of administering the tax was high, at some 4% of its yield, whereas other taxes cost less than half that amount to collect.
Many of these costs were associated with the need to register individuals and with the problems of chasing non-payers.
The tax also created tensions between central government and some local authorities who felt that their ‘needs’ were greater than was implied by their SSA.
As a result, some local authorities (often in hard pressed urban areas) put an extra levy on their Community Charge.
This increase in the Community Charge in major urban areas resulted in a general dissatisfaction with this form of local taxation.
The intense unpopularity of the Community Charge led to its replacement by the Council Tax on the first of April, 1993.
The Council tax is a hybrid tax, which is both part property or household tax and part personal tax.
The Council tax is based on the capital value of each property, on the assumption that it contains two adult members.
If the property contains only one adult, then he or she will pay only 75% of the bill of a two adult household.
No additional tax is paid on a property where more than two adults reside.
Also, personal discounts are given to certain classes of adults, e.g. handicapped people, those in full time education.
and so on.
Properties are valued on a sample basis (e.g. one house may be taken as typical of that street or area) and assigned to specific property bands, as shown in Table 16.9.
The average national property value is calculated and assigned to the appropriate band, i.e. band D in this case.
From this base, the tax bills for properties in both higher and lower bands are calculated.
For example, the average property value in England in 1991 was deemed to be 80,000, i.e. it is located in band D — between 68,000 and 88,000 (column one).
This means that this band ranges from between 85% and 110% of the average property value (second column).
Therefore the tax paid by property owners in band D is regarded as the ‘average’, i.e. 100 (third column).
Properties which are valued at under 40,000 will pay 67% of the average bill, and those valued at between 88,000 and 120,000 will pay 122% of the average bill, and so on.
If all authorities kept to their Standard Spending Assessment (SSA), then the actual average household bill would be shown in column four.
There are some points worth noticing about this scheme.
First, the Council tax, as in the case of rates, is a regressive tax in that properties of below average value pay proportionately more tax, while properties of above average value pay proportionately less in tax.
This can be seen from Fig. 16.9, in that the Council tax line is flatter than the dotted 45% line, which would represent a proportionate tax.
However, it may be said to be fairer than the Community Charge in that the tax does, at least, rise with the value of the house and it is reasonable to assume that those living in more expensive houses have higher incomes than those living in less expensive dwellings.
Second, the administration of the scheme will be much easier because, unlike the Community Charge, collection is based on the household and not on the individual.
Third, as with the Community Charge, the central government will still estimate the amount each local authority ‘needs’ to spend, i.e. the Standard Spending Assessment (SSA).
If a local council exceeds this amount, then the local Council tax will be increased by a factor greater than the excess spending (i.e. the high spending councils are penalized).
It has been calculated that some 37% of families would be better off, and 37% worse off, as a result of the change from Community Charge to the Council tax.
Those in the top 30% of income earners will probably lose as a  result of these changes in the method of taxation, and those in the bottom 70% of income earners will gain.
The biggest gain is likely to be experienced by middle income earners (Hills and Sutherland 1991).
The whole problem of gainers and losers has been complicated in the early 1990s by the fall in property prices which may cause many to feel that they are paying too much tax, as a result of being placed in an unduly high ‘band’.
In addition to the significant changes which have taken place in local taxation, there have also been attempts by government to modify the tax structure in order to make it more equitable, while at the same time encouraging savings and increasing the base of UK share ownership.
For example, the Approved Profit Sharing scheme (APS), the SAYE scheme and the Discretionary Share Option Scheme, all provide tax incentives for employees to buy shares in their companies.
Also the Personal Equity Plans (PEPs) introduced initially in 1986 have encouraged small savers to invest in UK companies through unit and investment trusts.
By making the income and capital gains from investing in such trusts free of tax, up to a maximum amount of 6,000 a year (1992), it is hoped that such savings will be encouraged, thereby helping to channel investment into UK industry.
It is difficult to measure the success of such share and savings schemes in stimulating UK industry since any increase in share ownership by employees does not necessarily improve company performance per se(Griffiths 1990).
On the personal taxation front, 1990 saw the introduction of a greater measure of equity, in that independent taxation for married couples was introduced.
This gave married women independent status as taxpayers, i.e. they could control their own tax affairs.
Since 1805 husbands had been legally responsible for the married couple's tax affairs and any married couple's allowance had been received by the husband.
In the budget of 1992 it was announced that from 1993/4 onwards any extra married allowance can be claimed in its entirety by either husband or wife, or it can be shared equally between them, thus making the tax system fairer to married women.
As far as the social security system was concerned, the government introduced important measures in 1988 to modify the whole system (see Tables 16.7 and 16.8).
These covered pensions, income support, housing benefits, a family credit system and the social funds.
The State Earnings Related Scheme (SERPS) which provided a pension based on National Insurance contributions was cut back.
Designated occupational pension schemes could now ‘contract out’ of SERPS.
This meant that state pensions would be reduced, but the private scheme must then guarantee to at least make up the difference.
Contracted out workers pay a rate of National Insurance contribution reduced by 2%, as do their employers.
At the same time the old supplementary benefit and heating allowances were abolished and a new system of income support was introduced.
Income support is available for people of 18 yrs or over whose incomes are below a certain level and who are not working 16hrs or more a week.
To get the Income Support a person must be available for full time work and show that he or she is taking reasonable steps to find a job.
In 1992, the personal allowance for a couple, both aged 18 yrs or over, was 66.60 with allowances  for dependent children varying from 14.55 to f33.80 according to age.
Those who are in full time work are not entitled to income support but all households are eligible for additional payments related to children and housing costs.
In 1992 child benefit was f9.65 for the eldest eligible child and f7.80 for each additional child.
Also a housing benefit is available to help those on low incomes cover rent and mortgage payments, while discounts are also available to help those on low incomes pay the Council tax.
A new family credit system was introduced in 1988 to replace the old family income supplement.
It is a regular, tax-free cash payment for working people with children, self-employed people and lone parents.
It is designed to help people on low earnings.
For example, in 1992, a family with two children of 12 and 14 yrs and whose income was less than f66.60 a week, could claim a maximum of f75.50 a week in family credit provided that they had less than f3,000 in personal savings.
Finally, a social fund was established in 1988 to help people with expenses which are difficult to pay out of regular income, such as maternity benefit, funeral benefit, crisis loans, and so on.
The intentions behind the important reforms of 1988 were to tighten up the social security system in order to reduce the disincentives to work recognized as inherent in the poverty and unemployment ‘traps’(see Tables 16.7 and 16.
X.).
It was also hoped that the new schemes would improve the take-up of benefits and would target them more efficiently on those in real need.
However, the complicated relationship between the tax structure and the benefits system still means that many people face marginal tax rates near to, or in excess of , 100%.
For instance, the Department of Social Security estimates that 660,000 people on means tested benefit lost 70% or more of each additional 1 of income (Willman 1992).
Also, it is not always the case that those who are entitled to benefits actually receive them, i.e. the ‘take-up’ rate may be low.
For pensions and child benefit, the take-up rate approaches 100%, but for means tested benefits such as family credit, the take-up rate may be as low as 50%.
It is therefore obvious that constructing a system of effective help for people in the low income groups is a serious and continuing problem.
For example, the Low Pay Unit commented that although the introduction of the new lower 20% tax band in 1992 provided an extra 1.92 per week to some 250,000 families, these families would lose 76p of this through increases in excise taxes and reductions in social security benefits (Goldsmith 1992).
The UK tax system is broadly proportional.
Direct taxes are, as a group, progressive in the UK, taking a larger proportion of the income of richer households.
Indirect taxes are, as a group, regressive, though this is not the case for all indirect taxes.
VAT is broadly proportional with the exception of the top fifth of income earners.
The movement towards indirect taxation has therefore made the UK tax system less progressive than it would otherwise have been.
Although the proportion of National Income taken in tax has risen, the UK is not overtaxed compared to other countries.
Neither does higher tax necessarily mean lower economic growth.
Certainly the empirical case for higher taxes being a disincentive to effort and output is rather flimsy, whether from questionnaire or econometric study.
There can be no general presumption in favour of either indirect or direct taxation, when we assess each system in terms of macro-management, economic incentives, economic welfare and administrative costs.
The dilemma of how to construct an equitable and efficient form of local taxation remains, while the complicated relationships between tax changes and social security benefits still create difficulties for those families caught in the poverty or unemployment ‘traps’.
1.
Which it does in the UK, e.g. 20% on the first f2,000 of taxable income 25% on taxable income up to f23,700 and 40% on higher income (1992/3)
2.
The average rate is total tax paid, divided by total income.
3.
That is, that line which minimizes the sum of squared deviations from the line.
4.
Though the Laffer curve strictly refers only to overall tax level, and not that for any particular tax.
The UK Financial System
One of the marks of a highly developed economy is the existence of a sophisticated financial system.
Any financial system exists to mediate between those who wish to lend money and those who wish to borrow it.
Mediation is necessary because lenders and borrowers have different needs.
Lenders want low-risk outlets for their money, which also offer attractive returns.
They want to be able to lend without having to search for a suitable borrower, and to get their money back quickly if their own need for liquidity changes.
Borrowers, on the other hand, often need to borrow money for longer periods of time, as in the case of industrial investment or house purchase.
They need to be able to obtain funds quickly and easily and in return they are willing to issue IOUs such as bills or bonds which are, in effect, claims against themselves.
These pieces of paper can be sold by those who hold them (i.e. lenders) on financial markets such as the Stock Exchange or the discount market if money is needed before the loan is due to be repaid.
The buyers of these claims are often the financial institutions, who buy them in order to hold them as assets.
The whole process of matching the needs of lenders and borrowers is known as ‘financial intermediation’, and the institutions which play a part in this process are known as ‘financial intermediaries’(see Fig. 17.1).
Their main function is to channel funds from those willing to lend to those willing to borrow, given that lenders and borrowers often have very different needs.
Paper claims can be generated either by (a) the financial intermediary issuing a claim to the lender — for instance, a certificate of deposit, or (b) the borrower issuing a claim to the financial intermediary — for instance , a bond or a share.
As we shall see, these claims may then be traded on the ‘secondary’ market, the market for already existing securities.
Financial institutions match the needs of lenders and borrowers in many different ways:
1.
They alleviate market imperfections caused by a lack of information in the market for loans and therefore reduce information and search costs (e.g. merchant banks).
2.
They provide economies of scale in lending transactions, taking the deposits of small lenders and transferring them to large-scale borrowers.
This reduces transaction costs (e.g. building societies).
3.
They spread the risks of lending by pooling funds and allocating them over a wide range of depositors (e.g. unit trusts).
4.
They bridge the gap between the desire of lenders to be able to get their money back quickly, and the desire of borrowers to borrow for a long period.
The scale of their operations and their expertise enable them to provide lenders with easily marketable paper claims, denominated in small units and with relatively low yield, whilst at the same time lending to borrowers on a long-term higher-yield basis (e.g. Certificates of Deposit bought by companies with excess funds from the banks).
5.
They take advantage of people's dislike of uncertainty by providing insurance services.
People will be willing to insure (effectively saving money which they may never get back) against contingencies which, if they occurred, would entail a drastic reduction in their standard of living.
Insurance companies use people's savings to acquire a range or portfolio of assets which they then manage in such a way as to make profit, whilst at the same time providing cover against contingencies.
6.
They can minimize uncertainty about the future by converting savings (possibly from current income) into a stream of income payable at some time in the future.
Although this is to some extent true of all financial intermediation, it is particularly relevant to the operations of pension funds.
The common characteristics of all financial intermediaries are therefore as follows.
First, they take money from those who save, whether it be in exchange for a deposit or in exchange for an asset.
Second, they lend the money provided by those savers to borrowers, who may issue a paper asset in return.
Third, in exchange for such lending they acquire a portfolio of paper assets (claims on borrowers) which will pay an income to the intermediary, and which it may ‘manage’ by buying and selling the assets on financial markets in order to yield a profit for itself.
We therefore have three kinds of operator in the UK financial system:
1.
Lenders and borrowers — persons, companies, government.
2.
Financial institutions — which act as intermediaries between lenders and borrowers, and manage their own asset portfolios.
3.
Markets-where money is lent and borrowed, and paper assets are  bought and sold.
These include the discount or bill market (the traditional London money market), the newer or parallel money markets, the gilt-edged market, and the Stock Exchange.
We shall deal in turn with financial institutions and financial markets.
However, we begin by discussing the financial assets in which they deal.
Financial assets are issued by borrowers and traded by financial institutions who hold them.
These assets are of two basic kinds — bills and bonds, and equities (shares).
A bond is an interest-bearing asset (or security) issued by central and local governments, companies, banks and other institutions.
The borrower undertakes to redeem the bond at ‘par value’(100) on a certain date, and to pay the bondholder an annual fixed sum (coupon rate) in interest each year.
Bonds may be bought either as new issue or second-hand on the secondary market.
The investor buying from the secondary market may have bought the bond at a price below par value, and the annual fixed interest payment will represent a yield on his investment which will be more attractive the lower the price he originally paid.
For instance, if 5% Treasury stock can be bought on the market at f50, the buyer receives f5 a year from the government.
This will give him a yield of 10% on his investment of f50.
In addition he will make a further gain of f50 when the bond is redeemed by the government at 100.
Bills are three month assets issued by the Treasury and some companies.
The original holder (i.e. whoever has lent the money) will buy the bill at a discount and earn a return by holding it to maturity when its redemption value is paid.
Alternatively he can take some profit and sell the bill in the bill (or discount) market before the three month term is up.
The yield to the purchaser then depends on the difference between the price he paid for the bill and its redemption value.
Equities (or shares) are non-redeemable assets issued by companies and investors are actually buying part-ownership (a share) of a company.
Ordinary or preference shares may be issued.
Investors in ordinary shares may receive dividends if companies are able to pay them, but their major advantage as an asset lies in the possibility of capital appreciation.
In the case of preference shares the company pays a fixed annual sum to the shareholder, and there is also the possibility of capital appreciation when the share is sold.
If financial assets were perfect substitutes for one another, the yields on each would be identical.
Any higher yield on one type of asset would cause financial institutions to adjust their ‘portfolios’ in favour of that asset.
The higher demand would raise the market price of the asset and thereby reduce the yield.
Any variation in yields therefore represents a lack of perfect substitutability between such assets.
That there is such variation is clear from Table 17.1.
Assets are imperfect substitutes because they possess different characteristics with respect to liquidity, marketability and profitability.
A liquid asset is one which can be transformed into cash quickly and without loss of value.
The more distant the maturity date, the less liquid is the asset likely to be.
Marketability varies between assets; some assets are easily   realizable, but some — such as perhaps the shares of small companies — may not find ready buyers.
Profitability, too, varies between the certain but perhaps unexciting rate of return paid by fixed interest government securities, to the more uncertain possibility of large gains to be made on equities.
Portfolio choice will depend on how individual investors evaluate the alternatives open to them, as well as on their expectations of future interest rate movements.
Yields in general will tend to be higher for longer term investments, because lenders require to be compensated for giving up their money for long periods of time.
However, if investors expect short-term interest rates to fall in the future they will wish to buy long-dated bonds today, thereby locking themselves into today's long rates.
This will have the effect of driving up the market price of long bonds, making their yield lower than normal, and perhaps even lower than short-term yields.
Table 17.1 shows how this was the case at the end of July 1992.
Looking at the yield curve graphically, Fig. 17.2(a) shows the ‘normal’ yield curve we would expect to find, with yields rising the longer the bond (gilt) has to go to maturity.
However, the yield curve is not always like this.
For example, Fig. 17.2(b) shows how the yield curve was in July 1992, with the yield falling as the maturity date rises.
This is also the situation represented by the data in Table 17.1.
By October 1992 (see Fig. 17.2(c)) the yield curve had resumed its normal shape.
This was because, following the UK's withdrawal from the ERM in September 1992, hopes rose that there would be a cut in short-term interest rates.
This made short-term gilts an attractive buy (before any interest rate cut), because of their fixed interest payments, so the price of these rose, driving down their yield.
From what has been said it will be clear that gilt yields and gilt prices are driven to a large extent by present and anticipated future interest rates.
Usually there is an inverse relationship between bond prices and interest rate movements in the economy.
Normally rising interest rates will depress the price of gilts by making their fixed interest payments less attractive to investors.
Conversely, falling interest rates will make pre-existing gilts a more attractive outlet for investors' funds and their prices will be driven up.
The market often anticipates interest changes likely to come as a result of changes in economic indicators such as the inflation rate or the exchange rate.
Thus, often gilt prices start to change direction before interest rate    movements take place, as investors successfully anticipate the government's intentions.
This situation is shown in Fig. 17.3, where investors anticipated interest rate increases (and hence sold gilts and drove down gilt prices) prior to June 1988, when bank base rates began to rise from 7.5%, until they peaked at 15% in October 1989.
Base rates then remained at this level for a year, before starting to fall in October 1990, when Britain joined the ERM.
The October 1990 rate cut was anticipated for some time in advance by the gilt market which bought gilts and drove up gilt prices (see Fig. 17.3), as was the continued fall in base rates over the next two years.
Rates reached 9% in September 1992 following sterling's withdrawal from the ERM and have fallen further since then.
The demand for particular assets depends not only on their characteristics but also on the institutional make-up of the financial system.
The particular nature of the business of a financial institution will affect the type and proportion of assets it holds in its portfolio.
Because of the need for both liquidity and profitability, banks tend to hold bills and bonds of varying maturities and yields.
Pension funds may, on the other hand, choose to hold the less liquid but usually more profitable assets in their portfolios, for example, company shares.
All institutions will need to hold some minimum level of liquid assets to meet short-term claims, and will try to choose a portfolio which will yield the maximum profit subject to that liquidity constraint.
Institutions within the UK financial sector are classified as (a) those which are within the monetary sector as defined by the Banking Acts of 1979 and 1987, and (b) other financial institutions, such as pension funds, investment and unit trusts, and insurance companies.
The monetary sector Until November 1981 the ‘banking sector’ comprised all banks in the UK which were required to observe the minimum reserve asset ratio imposed by the Competition and Credit Control arrangements of 1971, together with the discount houses and the Banking Department of the Bank of England.
Inclusion in the ‘banking sector’ was based on an informal appraisal of a bank's size and reputation, and was usually associated with the granting of authorized bank status for exchange control purposes.
The Banking Act of 1979 defined two new entities: ‘recognized banks’ and ‘licensed deposit-takers’(LDTs).
To become a recognized bank an institution had to satisfy the Bank of England as to its reputation, the range of services it offers, and its financial status.
Licensed deposit-takers had to meet the same requirements, but did not need to offer as wide a range of services.
In November 19X1 the Bank of England defined a new monetary sector which amalgamated the old banking sector with a number of other related institutions.
The monetary sector now comprised:(a) all recognized banks and LDTs;(b) the National Girobank;(c) the Trustee Savings Bank;(d) the Banking Department of the Bank of England; and (e) those institutions in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man which opted to adhere to the new arrangements.
The Banking Act of 1987, which was primarily concerned with supervisory arrangements, left the definition of the monetary sector essentially unchanged.
All institutions are now known as ‘authorized institutions’, and the use of the word ‘bank’ was restricted to those institutions which had a paid-up capital of at least f5m, but in all other respects the 1981 classification remained.
A major addition to the ‘bank’ category was the Abbey National, which became a public limited company in July 1989, and was authorized under the Banking Act of 1987 from that date.
This change necessitated  major changes to the compilation of financial and monetary statistics (see Ch. 18)
Since 1990 the Bank of England has dropped the term ‘monetary sector’ preferring to refer to the institutions in it as ‘UK banks’.
About 600 institutions are now included in the ‘UK Banking Sector’.
Before looking at the way in which the sector has changed in recent years we examine the role of the Bank of England.
The Bank of England.
The Bank of England is divided into the Issue Department, which is part of the public sector accounting system, and the Banking Department.
Its functions can be divided into those which are required by its role as banker to the government and those which it performs as banker to the banks.
As banker to the government it must:
(a)
implement monetary policy by manipulating interest rates, using direct controls, or restricting bank credit as necessary;
(b)
regulate the issue of legal tender;
(c)
manage both the issue and redemption of government stock;
(d)
keep the government's accounts;
(e)
manage the Exchange Equalization Account, and when necessary use official reserves to intervene in the foreign exchange market.
As banker to the banks it must:
(a)
supervise the cheque clearing system;
(b)
act as ‘lender of last resort’ to the banking system by supporting the discount market;
(c)
exercise prudential supervision over the banking system as a whole.
The Bank also acts as banker to overseas central banks, as well as to international organizations and to a small number of other institutions, companies and private individuals.
In operational day-to-day terms the Bank of England has a major influence on three major markets, the sterling money market, the foreign exchange market, and the gilt-edged market.
1.
The Bank is a major player in the sterling money market, buying and selling Treasury bills on a daily basis.
The object is twofold; in the first place the Bank buys and sells bills in order to ease cash shortages, or to withdraw cash surpluses, which arise in the discount market as a result of daily transactions between the government and the public.
Such transactions, by affecting commercial bank clearing balances, alter the liquidity of these banks and hence their willingness to lend to, or withdraw funds from, the discount houses.
Secondly, the Bank trades in bills with the government's interest rate policy specifically in mind.
The buying and selling of bills by the Bank affects yields.
In this way the Bank influences interest rates throughout the market.
The Bank, in its daily dealings, attempts to reconcile these two separate objectives.
2.
The Bank has a major role in the foreign exchange market as it is responsible for carrying out government policy with regard to the  exchange rate.
A strong pound has been seen as essential if inflation is to be kept low.
The combination in recent years of a floating pound and a weak balance of payments on current account had made it necessary to attract short term funds on capital account by maintaining high interest rates.
The Bank also uses the Exchange Equalization Account to intervene in the foreign exchange market by buying up surplus sterling to keep up the external value of the pound.
3.
The Bank is also influential in the gilt-edged market as it administers the issue of new bonds when the government wishes to borrow money.
Various methods are used, depending on market circumstances — the ‘tap’ method, where stock is issued gradually in order not to flood the market and depress the price; the ‘tender’method, where institutions are invited to tender for a given issue; and the ‘auction’method, where stock is sold to the highest bidders among the twenty or so gilt-edged market makers (GEMMs).
The Bank also manages the redemption of existing stock in such a way as to smooth the demands on the government's financial resources.
For instance it buys up stock which is nearing its redemption date, so as not to have to make large repayments over a short period of time.
The Bank faces a continual problem in that its actions in each of these markets have repercussions for the functioning of the others.
For instance, intervention to protect the value of sterling is often ineffective because of the size of speculative flows of short-term capital, hence interest rates must be manipulated in order to influence these flows.
This often proves difficult, however, because of the way in which daily transactions between government and public affect bankers' balances, causing banks to buy or sell bills to replenish their cash balances and thus to affect their yield.
Gilt market policy is also subject to the requirements of interest rate policy; this in turn places restrictions on National Debt management.
One of the most significant changes within the Bank of England during the last few years has been the improvement in arrangements for supervising the banking system.
Overall supervision of any banking system is essential to protect the interests of depositors, and although there was some degree of depositor protection in the 1960s it was not until the secondary banking crisis of the 1970s that formal supervisory structures were developed and embodied in the Banking Acts of 1979 and 1987.
The Board of Banking Supervision concerns itself with three issues:
1.
Capital adequacy.
To what extent have banks sufficient reserves of capital to cover the possibility of default by creditors?
This issue has become particularly important in recent years as the volume of Third World debt has grown to unmanageable proportions (see Ch. 29).
There are now international proposals that banks in major countries should maintain capital reserves equal to 8% of their assets, weighted according to risk.
2.
Liquidity.
There is currently no formal requirement as to adequate liquidity holdings by banks.
However, what is expected is that the Bank of England will require all banks under the Banking Act of 1987 to keep  a ratio of ‘primary liquid assets’ to some definition of deposit liabilities.
Such ratios may differ as between different types of banks, and deposits will be ranked according to their maturity.
The shorter is the maturity structure, the higher will be the ratio of liquid assets required.
3.
Foreign currency exposure.
This issue relates particularly to banks which take deposits and lend in different currencies.
Supervisors are concerned that banks should balance their assets and liabilities in each currency in such a way that their ‘exposure’(to risk of loss on the foreign exchange market) should not exceed 10% of their capital base.
Banks in the UK.
These include:
(a)
‘retail banks’— banks which either participate in a UK clearing system or have extensive branch networks, viz. London, Scottish and Northern Ireland clearing banks, and the Girobank;
(b)
merchant banks, including the accepting houses;
(c)
other British banks, a general category covering banks with UK majority ownership;
(d)
American banks;
(e)
Japanese banks;
(f)
other overseas banks and consortium banks (UK registered institutions owned by banks or financial institutions).
(g)
the building societies; since the deregulation permitted by the Building Societies Act of 1986 and subsequent Orders in Council.
There are two important distinctions to be made in the type of business done in the banking sector.
One is the distinction between lending and deposit taking in sterling as opposed to foreign currency, the other is the distinction between retail and wholesale business.
This latter distinction refers to the size of the transaction undertaken; lending and borrowing transactions in excess of 100,000 are termed wholesale transactions.
In the main, retail banks deal in smaller amounts, other banks deal primarily with wholesale corporate business.
However, this distinction is becoming increasingly blurred because of the participation of all banks in the interbank market.
Retail and wholesale banks alike raise large sums of money on this market, and lend their surpluses there.
This enables them to manage their liabilities more effectively, and to match the maturity of their assets and liabilities more profitably.
Table 17.2 shows changes in the volume of business transacted by these institutions.
We can identify a number of important changes which have occurred:
1.
It is clear that for the banking sector as a whole, foreign currency business predominates.
However, whereas in 1976 foreign currency liabilities were roughly twice as large as sterling liabilities, in 1992 they were only 1.2 times greater.
This in part reflects the recent very rapid rise in interest-bearing sterling deposits, due to high real interest rates.
It also, however, reflects the effects of the growth in consumer credit in general and bank lending in particular in the second half of the 1980s.
2.
The figures also show the fact that the growth of foreign currency business has been primarily located in the wholesale banking sector.
Within that, the most remarkable expansion is that of the Japanese banks.
In terms of numbers of banks the USA is the most heavily represented country, but in terms of market share the Japanese now account for nearly one-third of the market.
3.
Total international bank lending from London exceeded $1,300 billion in 1991, or about 18% of total international bank lending.
This makes London the leading cross-border lending centre, although it faces intense competition from Japan.
If local lending in foreign currency is included, Japan is slightly ahead in total international lending.
Japan has experienced enormous growth of its overseas lending activities since 1980, when it only had about 5% of the world lending market.
Although London just remained the largest cross-border lending centre in 1991, only 15.6% of this lending came from British banks (compared to 20.6% in 1985).
Japanese banks operating in London accounted for 28.5% of total lending from London in 1991, American banks 15%, and other banks 40.7%.
(BEQB, May 1992).
4.
What the overall figures do not show is the way in which the activity of banking business has changed over the last decade.
The growth of the inter-bank market (see below) has meant that banks no longer have to rely on attracting deposits to cover their lending.
Nevertheless, there is also much greater competition for deposits, not only with other financial institutions, but also with other and alternative forms of wealth holding, such as equities.
5.
In order to make profits, banks must maintain an adequate spread between borrowing and lending rates.
Profit-making is affected by the volatility of interest rates, because borrowing rates, being market determined, move more sharply than lending rates.
Banks find that this introduces instability; it is therefore necessary to match maturities of assets and liabilities with great precision.
They must also ensure that the riskiness of lending is kept to a minimum, since profits must be used to write off bad debts.
6.
The internationalization of banking business has been made necessary by  the growth of international business, the ending of exchange control, and international uncertainty in days of volatile exchange rates and interest rates.
It has been made possible by improvements in communication and organizational efficiency.
and by international deregulation.
The response of the banking sector to these factors has been to innovate.
Financial innovation can be seen in the growth of new financial instruments such as options and futures, in the diversification of banking business into new services such as personal equity plans for customers, in the use of new technologies such as automated clearing and electronic fund transfer at point of sale, and in the development of new organizational forms and procedures within the industry.
Changes in lending patterns.
We have examined the changing institutional structure of the financial sector.
We now look at the changing relationships between monetary sector institutions and their clients.
In particular, we are interested in the way lending patterns have changed over time, and whether in fact these changes have been optimal.
We look first at the changing overall pattern of lending.
Table 17.3 illustrates a number of major changes:
1.
The share of total sterling bank lending to the public sector (central and local government and public corporations) has declined sharply.
The current figure represents a dramatic retreat from the situation of the early 1970s when large government deficits were financed by the sale of public sector debt (bills and bonds) to the banking sector.
Such borrowing as the government now does tends to be financed by selling debt to the non-bank private sector, or encouraging the public to lend via National Savings.
Investors are attracted by the more varied and attractive securities currently available for purchase, such as index-linked gilts, as well as by historically high yields.
However, the situation may change if inflation rises; under those circumstances fixed yields become unattractive.
2.
The share of total sterling lending to the private sector-households and businesses — has risen sharply.
This is due to the huge increase in demand for credit in the last few years, primarily from the personal sector, as well as to the increased efforts of banks and other institutions to ‘market’ new ways of borrowing money.
3.
The ending of exchange control in 1979 was a great stimulus to lending to the overseas sector.
After 1979 banks marketed their overseas lending facilities more aggressively, although there is considerable evidence to  suggest that inadequate attention was paid to assessing the quality of borrowers.
By the end of the 1980s it was clear that many UK banks were overexposed to overseas lending risks, especially in less developed countries (LDCs).
Consequently banks have sought to reduce their overseas lending exposure in recent years.
It is clear, then, that although bank lending has increased, lending to the public sector has declined both in relative and absolute terms.
We now need to look in more detail at the primary area of bank lending, the private sector, particularly in the light of two criticisms which have been made of the role played by banking institutions.
The first criticism is that banks in the UK have failed to provide adequately for the needs of industry.
This criticism is based (a) on comparisons with other countries such as West Germany and Japan (Vittas 1986), where banks play a much larger role in industrial financing;(b) on an assumption that bad industrial performance can be attributed to a lack of finance; and (c) on a certain dissatisfaction with consistently high levels of bank profitability.
The second criticism relates to the role of the institutions in encouraging an explosion of consumer credit during the late 1980s.
The ease of obtaining credit may have led to over-borrowing and consequent personal and financial difficulties.
It is often argued that the institutions put the objective of profitability before the interests of the clients when making loans.
We need to examine these criticisms in the light of recent changes in corporate and personal sector finance.
Corporate sector finance.
Companies need finance for four main reasons:
1.
Working capital for stocks and work in progress.
2.
Cash to finance trade credit.
3.
Funds to replace plant and equipment.
4.
Capital for new investment.
Companies can meet these needs by internal financing-maintaining a liquidity cushion and/or retaining profits rather than distributing them to shareholders.
Alternatively, they can use external financing — they can borrow from banks, issue loan stock (debt), or issue shares (equity).
The choice of financing method will clearly be constrained by availability of different forms of finance, but there are other factors which have a greater influence on companies' decisions.
For instance, the choice between internal and external financing depends, amongst other things, on the sensitivity of share prices to dividend payout ratios.
If shareholders object to profits being retained rather than paid out as dividends they may sell their shares, thereby increasing the likelihood of a takeover by a predator.
The choice between debt and equity financing is determined by a further set of considerations.
The more the company finances by means of debt, the greater the proportion of future profits which are committed to interest payments.
In times of high interest rates, this burden will rise significantly.
Debt-financed companies may then find it difficult to sell shares to shareholders who will be skeptical of the likelihood of adequate dividends.
Against this has to be set the fact that in times of high  inflation the real value of company debt diminishes over time.
On the other hand the possibility of equity financing, even if it is a preferred company option, is often determined by matters external to the company, such as the state of the global equity market.
There appear to be structural differences between the major countries in the pattern of industrial financing.
Retentions or ploughed-back profits are the major source of finance everywhere.
In no country does equity finance contribute substantially.
However, there are major differences in the use of bank finance; France, Japan and Germany fund a higher proportion of their financing needs by bank loans than do the US and the UK.
But even within the UK the popularity of bank financing over time has been affected by a variety of factors.
There have been a number of trends in the sources of company finance since 1970:
1.
Borrowing in general, whether by loan stock or from banks, was much more significant before the inflation of the mid-1970s caused nominal interest rates to soar.
Since then firms have been unwilling to expand their long-term debt, but have preferred to borrow from banks, often on a much shorter-term basis.
In addition, uncertainty as to future interest rate movements has encouraged bank borrowing rather than debt financing.
2.
Borrowing from overseas has been affected by the same set of factors.
3.
Companies may offset the interest on all borrowing against profits tax.
Moreover in much of the 1980s profits rose and nominal interest rates fell (at least until 1980s), which could be expected to favour borrowing rather than equity financing.
However, companies generally show a preference for equity finance if it is possible.
This may be because interest must be met whereas dividends or equity can be passed or reduced.
Also heavily borrowed companies often dislike what they see as intrusive involvement by the banks in their day to day affairs.
(BEQB, 1988.)
4.
The possibility of equity financing depends on the state of the equity market.
The rise in equity prices during the 1980s, made it relatively easy to float new issues, and this gave an impetus to equity financing.
Share issues were subdued in the early 1980s but rose strongly after that as the market improved.
New issues declined again after the stockmarket crash of October 1987, but surged again with rising share prices in 1991 (see Fig. 17.4)
5.
Banks make a major contribution to industrial financing which is not shown in their lending figures, in that they facilitate the leasing of equipment.
Leasing is a system whereby a financial institution purchases a piece of equipment and leases it back to the company, which then has the use of equipment it has not had to purchase.
Leasing is the leading source of external finance for plant and equipment (as opposed to fixed capital).
It would appear, then, that the use of banking sector financing by companies depends in general on the demand for such financing rather than on supply   constraints as such.
Nevertheless, there has always been an undercurrent of concern that the correlation between the economic performance of Japan and Germany and their bank-based financing systems might be a causal one — in which case the UK's poorer economic performance might have something to do with her market-based industrial financing system.
The Wilson Committee examined this issue.
Committee to Review the Functioning of Financial Institutions (The Wilson Committee Report 1980).
The Wilson Committee was set up to investigate the whole question of the provision of funds for industry and trade.
The central question to be addressed by the committee was: whether any failings in the level and quality of investment have been due in any important degree to an inadequate supply of finance, reflecting a failure in the functioning of the financial system.
too high a price for finance, or an inability on the part of companies to find enough funds from their own resources, and if so, what can be done about it?
In answer to this question, the committee concluded that the financial sector was, in fact, providing adequately for the needs of corporate sector financing.
The lack of industrial investment was attributed to a potentially low rate of return rather than to any lack of institutional financing.
However, the committee was concerned about the effects on business of the high rates of interest which occur in an inflationary economy.
It was also concerned about the problems of financing small businesses — in particular, the difficulties encountered by very small firms in obtaining venture capital, where the risk element is different in kind from large-scale high-risk industrial financing.
Since the Wilson Committee reported there may have been some improvement in the availability of bank finance for small businesses.
A 1992 survey commissioned by the Institute of Directors of member companies who  employ less than 100 people, has shown that the cost of bank finance is generally felt by small business to be a greater problem than availability.
Of those questioned, 60% of those who expressed a definite view felt that cost was the greatest problem.
Responses differed by sector, availability of finance being seen as the greatest problem in manufacturing, but a much lesser problem than cost in the distribution sector.
(Fig. 17.5.)
Other evidence also suggests that the views of the Wilson Committee were correct.
Although there were gaps in the system, such as the provision for small firms and for high-risk finance, the fundamental problem with the financing of industry in the UK was correctly attributed not to the lack of availability of external financing, but rather to the inadequacy of industrial performance.
It is this which leads to low levels of profitability and to a lack of incentive to undertake new investment.
In other words, the Wilson Committee helped shift the focus of concern from the supply of industrial finance to the demand for such finance.
Two other developments in the late eighties have proved the Wilson Committee right.
The first of these is the increase in mergers and acquisitions as the preferred form of industrial growth (Table 17.4).
The banks have played a central role in this industrial restructuring.
There are several aspects to this.
1.
The traditional way of financing acquisitions was by means of equity, often on a share-for-share exchange basis.
However, there was a major shift away from equity financing of acquisitions after the Stock Market crash of 1987.
2.
Since 1987, acquisitions have been mainly funded by cash (bank borrowings).
Whereas in 1986, 25.6% of acquisitions were funded in this way, the figure for 1988 was 69.7%, and in 1989 around 80% of merger funding was in cash.
The profitability of this type of lending is substantial in days of high interest rates.
In 1990, there was a significant reduction in merger activity as the economy moved firmly into recession (Table 17.4).
3.
Other forms of merger funding also involve the banks.
Money is often  raised by the issue of fixed interest stock secured against the assets of the company (‘junk bonds’).
But more recently banks have been providing other forms of merger funding-'mezzanine debt', which does not rate as highly in terms of claims against the company's assets, but provides additional financial resources.
Because this debt is highly ‘leveraged’(see Ch. 2) and thus more risky, it yields a substantial return to the banks.
4.
Banks play a central role as consultants, advisers and agents in acquisition situations.
There is sharp competition between UK and American banks, in particular, in the provision of these specialized services.
The second development in which the banks have been implicated is the growth of the ‘venture capital’ industry.
Financial institutions provide finance and specialist services to companies which are as yet unproven but have potential.
Funds are used for start-ups, for expansion and second stage growth, and often for management buyouts of an existing company.
Banks such as 3i, which is the largest venture capital investor in the UK and is owned by six clearing banks and by the Bank of England, raise ‘independent’ funds on the market and from their own retained profits.
Other ‘captive’ funds come from pension funds, insurance companies and banks which allocate specific funds for this type of investment.
The growth of the venture capital industry fulfils the need identified by the Wilson Committee, although financing gaps still remain.
(BEQB 1990).
Personal sector financing.
Both the assets and the liabilities of the personal sector have been rising rapidly over the past ten years.
Rising incomes have led both to an increase in wealth and an increase in borrowing.
However, concern has been caused by the fact that between 1976 and 1989 the ratio of debt to personal disposable income rose from 50% to over 100% (BEQB May 1989), and since 1980 the growth in credit has substantially exceeded the growth in income.
It is clear that this is partly due to the fact that incomes have been rising in real terms, so that people feel able to take on an increased burden of debt.
But it is also the case that the financial sector has encouraged people to borrow more money.
Deregulation, competition and the creation of new financial products have all served to make credit more attractive and easier to obtain.
Mortgage  loans in particular were granted for higher multiples of the borrower's income in the late 1980s, although falling prices in the housing market have made lenders more cautious in 1991 and 1992.
Table 17.5 shows the growth of consumer credit since 1987 (note that lending on mortgages by building societies and banks is excluded).
The downturn in the housing market in 1989 and mounting unemployment have slowed the growth of consumer credit compared to the mid-1980s.
There are two reasons why we cannot take these figures as indicative of the true size of borrowing.
One is that the credit card figures include balances which are incurred and immediately repaid at the end of the month.
It is estimated that the growth of credit is overestimated by about 2% because of this.
The other factor to consider is that the figures do not tell us about the amount of borrowing which comes about from increases in mortgages used for purposes other than house purchase.
Borrowers released equity built up in their houses as a result of rising house prices in the 1980s by remortgaging.
This boosted personal consumption.
The Bank of England has voiced concern at increasing debt defaults by personal borrowers, and especially those with substantial mortgages.
Lenders have sometimes failed to make an adequate assessment of the credit worthiness of clients, especially as competition to lend has intensified.
Rising interest rates from mid-1988 to late 1990 caused distress for many borrowers, especially those with low incomes or little cushion by way of assets.
Defaults on both unsecured consumer credit and mortgage-related business have increased markedly since 1988, and property repossessions by mortgage lenders have further depressed the housing market.
According to the Bank of England, by the second quarter of 1992 around 876,000 households faced a situation where house price falls had reduced the value of their home to below the value of their outstanding mortgage.
According to the Council of Mortgage Lenders, 305,000 borrowers were more than six months in arrears with mortgage repayments.
(See Bank of England Briefing, August 1992.)
Building societies.
The traditional business of the building societies has been the taking of small savings deposits and the financing of house purchase.
In 1984, 50% of all personal sector liquid assets were held in building society accounts, as opposed to 34% in banks and 16% in National Savings accounts.
Lending was almost solely for mortgage purposes.
The climate of deregulation made it necessary to remove restrictions on the ability of  building societies to compete in financial markets.
The Building Societies Act of 1986, and subsequent Orders in Council of 1988, have permitted societies to offer a whole range of new banking, investment and housing services in addition to their traditional savings and home loan business.
They are allowed to lend amounts up to 10,000 on an unsecured basis, and to lend money on second mortgages.
They can buy life assurance companies, run unit trusts and take over or start stockbroking firms.
They can offer services such as tax advice, financial planning services and executorship.
They no longer rely on the taking of deposits to finance their lending, because they can now borrow on the wholesale money markets.
The focus of interest here is the extent to which the building societies are likely to make inroads into traditional banking business.
In practice, it is only the largest of building societies which can offer a real competitive challenge.
So far building society inroads into consumer credit have been small.
Table 17.6 shows how the banks dominate the personal lending market.
There are two reasons for bank domination of the personal lending market.
One is the fact that the Building Societies Act of 1986 requires that at least 90% of the society's commercial assets be devoted to mortgage lending.
This leaves only 10% to finance newer activities.
The other reason is that these activities must be backed by capital reserves, as in the case of banks.
This effectively means that only the largest building societies, those with assets of 100m or more, can effectively compete.
However, there are a number of other issues to consider in this context
1.
Banks are profit-making corporations; they measure their success in terms of profit, with client satisfaction as the constraint.
Building societies are mutual organizations run for the benefit of their depositors; their success is measured in terms of growth.
However, building societies are gradually moving towards the status of public companies.
One, the Abbey National, has already switched to limited liability status as a full bank.
If this trend continues, building societies are poised to provide a greater competitive challenge to the retail banking sector.
2.
Building society business is low risk because all the lending is secured and mortgage holders pay on time.
This is necessarily a source of weakness for the banks in the competitive struggle against the building societies.
However, as building societies enter the area of unsecured lending, they may find that the banks have the advantage of greater expertise.
3.
The mutual structure of building societies means that capital resources to finance expansion can only be built up out of retained surpluses.
This factor may encourage building societies to seek corporate status since they will then be able to raise capital on the open market.
4.
Until the late 1970s, building societies provided 95% of home loans.
In 1986 banks had 20% of the market, and by the beginning of 1990 they had 50% of the market.
Banks have managed to attain this share by offering attractive packages.
However, building societies have taken advantage of the new regulations which allow them to raise 40% of funds on the wholesale markets, and are intent on maintaining their market share by encroaching on areas of lending business which traditionally belonged to banks.
5.
Building societies have been consistently successful in improving their share of personal sector deposits.
This has been partly due to the new and attractive packages offered to depositors, and partly due to the increase in competition in the sector since the interest rate cartel was ended a few years ago.
6.
Both types of institution acquired other institutions such as estate agents in the late 1980s in an attempt to capture the market for home loans by offering additional services.
However, this has been a costly process and the fall in house prices since 1989 has made it impossible to earn adequate returns from these investments in the short-term.
Other financial institutions.
We now consider the sector which comprises institutions other than those in the monetary sector.
These (OFIs) are defined as institutions which ‘obtain, convert and distribute available funds as their main activity’.
The major institutions are life assurance and pension funds, unit trusts and investment trusts.
The institutions of this sector fulfil a number of specialist functions.
Some cater for the public's need for insurance or pension provision.
Still others, as in the case of unit, investment or property trusts, specialize in matching borrowers' needs for long-term finance with lenders' needs for paper assets denominated in small units which are readily saleable.
As in the case of the banks, the assets of these institutions represent paper claims against money which has been lent by them to the public sector, to industry and to persons.
Decisions as to the proportion in which they hold these assets, in other words the nature of their portfolio management, determine how the sector as a whole fulfils the function of allocating the community's savings to those who wish to borrow.
It should be noted that, unlike the institutions of the banking sector, OFIs lend primarily by the acquisition of assets, rather than directly by loans and advances.
We shall examine the major portfolio holders in this sector.
Life assurance and pension funds.
These are the major recipients of long-term personal sector savings.
About half of personal savings are channelled into these institutions via regular and single premium life assurance and pension payments.
This saving is used to acquire and manage a portfolio of assets which yields a sufficient return to pay pensions and insurance claims, as well as providing a working rate of return for the financial institution.
Pension funds increased thirtyfold in size over the twenty-five years to 1985; insurance companies grew fourteenfold over the same period.
Continuing growth has meant that as investors, insurance companies and pension funds represent a major influence in the assets markets.
By the end of the 1980s they held more than half the total issued British government stock, and about 54% of UK equities.
(A further 9% of UK equities was held by investment and unit trusts.)
Institutional domination of assets markets is also reflected in increasing transactions sizes.
The average gilt ‘bargain' size has increased from 152,230 in 1980 to over 1 million in 1989.
Equity ‘bargain' averages have also increased from 7,280 to 36,148 over the same period.
Despite the privatizations of the 1980s, there is a real fear that private investors in stocks and shares are being driven out of the market.
This is partly because changes in institutional stockholding can make markets highly volatile and therefore risky for smaller investors.
Also it has been the larger institutions that have benefited from low dealing commissions since the ‘big bang’ in October 1987.
Competition is intense in the deregulated financial markets which have been created since 1986.
Up to 1988 life assurance companies were gaining ground on pension funds, with individual life assurance premiums doubling their share of the personal savings market to 1988.
Pension contributions of employers and employees fell from around 42% to about 30% of total personal savings over the same period.
However, life assurance business was strongly related to the boom in the housing market which came to an end in 1988.
In addition, life assurance companies lost significant tax concessions to investors in ‘qualifying policies’ in 1984.
These factors, plus the existence since 1988 of substantial tax breaks for those who invest in personal pension schemes (PPCs).
have helped to restore the position of the pension funds once again.
During 1990 all pension funds total net assets grew by over 35%, whereas those of the life assurance companies grew by only 9.1 %.
Although these two savings intermediaries are strong competitors in the personal savings market, their portfolio choices differ, because the structures of their liabilities differ.
Life insurance funds invest more in fixed interest securities because a large part of their liabilities is in nominal terms.
Pension funds, on the other hand, are interested in the real rates of return, their liabilities are in real terms-pensions are paid in the future and are often index-linked.
However, with a shrinking PSBR in the 1980s, the supply of government bonds was consequently reduced, forcing insurance companies to look to other types of fixed interest stock such as corporate bonds and property.
Less than 20% of life insurance funds is now held in gilts.
Pension funds, too, have reduced their holdings of gilts, but in their case the reduction from 23% of total assets in 1979 to less than 10% in 1990 is partly explained by the attractiveness of equities in the rising market of the 80s.
Gilt holding may be expected to increase again with the rising public deficits of the early 1990s and the reductions in corporate profits and equity dividend payments in a time of recession.
Table 17.7 shows the way in which asset holdings vary by type of institution.
Perhaps the most important issue here concerns the extent to which OFIs are   involved in equity finance.
The fact that OFIs are responsible for over 50% of equity finance means that share prices will be predominantly affected by the portfolio preferences of these institutions.
This in turn will be determined by overall environmental' factors such as the inflation rate, the exchange rate and the state of business expectations, as well as by the particular needs of the institutions themselves.
Since institutions tend to be affected in the same way by the same set of factors, share prices will be more volatile than would otherwise be the case.
This will have significant repercussions on the companies concerned: since share prices will not reflect their true valuation in terms of yield, both the decision and the ability of companies to raise funds on the Stock Exchange will be affected.
The other area of concern relates to the rise in overseas investment.
In so far as institutions find it more profitable to invest abroad, UK companies may find it more difficult to float new share issues.
We now turn our attention to the third kind of operator in the UK financial system — the financial markets.
We deal first with money markets.
The term ‘money market’ refers to the process whereby financial institutions come together to borrow and lend wholesale funds for periods varying from one day to one year.
Wholesale funds are amounts in excess of 100,000.
Money markets have no physical existence; the participants in the markets are linked by telephone and computer.
Money market activity has developed very rapidly in London in the last thirty years, partly due to the growth of the financial sector in general, but also because of the increasing demand for sophisticated financial services by clients both in the UK and abroad.
The oldest of the money markets is the discount market, but there are also the newer sterling and foreign currency markets.
We deal with these first.
(a)
The sterling certificate of deposit market.
CDs, as they are known, are paper assets issued by banks, building societies and finance houses to depositors who are willing to leave their money on deposit for a specified period of time.
They are issued for periods ranging from 3 months to 5 years at a rate of interest which can either be fixed or floating.
The holder of the CD can sell it on the market if he should want his money back before then.
This system enables banks to lend longer term because they can be certain of having deposits, as lenders can realize their asset at any time.
In addition, CDs are attractive to portfolio holders because the yield is competitive.
They are denominated in sterling, but also in dollars and SDRs.
(b)
The sterling inter-bank market.
Banks borrow and lend wholesale funds amongst themselves, dealing through money brokers, for periods ranging from overnight to five years.
This is the largest of the wholesale markets, and its existence has revolutionized banking business.
Banks can borrow to finance lending, to use unlent deposits, to balance out fluctuations in their books, and to speculate on future movements in interest rates.
The London Inter-Bank Offer Rate (LIBOR) therefore represents the marginal or opportunity cost of funds to the banks and is the major influence on banks' base rates.
Lending and borrowing on this market is unsecured.
(c)
The local authority market.
This market grew up in the 1950s when the local authorities began to raise money for capital projects by issuing bills and bonds, and by raising loans.
The market has now declined in importance, due to the inability of authorities to borrow and the unpopularity of the assets with investors uncertain about the future of local authority finance.
(d)
The finance house market.
Again, this market has declined in importance because the major finance houses have now achieved the status of banks and can therefore borrow funds on the inter-bank market or by the issue of CDs.
(e)
The inter-company market.
The fortunes of this market have varied with the ease or difficulty of borrowing from banks.
In the 1960s, when bank credit was tight, companies found they could use the services of a broker to lend to one another.
When restrictions on bank credit were relaxed, companies found it more advantageous to lend and borrow through banks, particularly as when they dealt directly transactions were unsecured.
(f)
The building society market.
The new status of the building societies (see below) has made it necessary and advantageous for them to raise extra funds in the wholesale money markets.
UK building societies are raising growing amounts of wholesale funds in domestic and international markets.
They raised a total of 6.9 billion in 1991 and 4.5 billion in the first half of 1992.
As Figure 17.6 shows, wholesale funding has accounted for a growing share of the building societies' total funding.
Societies have diversified their wholesale liabilities by issuing a new sterling instrument — permanent interest-bearing shares (PIBS).
These are rather like undated gilts in that they are perpetual instruments, but interest can be waived or reduced if it would cause the issuer to breach capital adequacy requirements.
If interest payments are waived, the society is not obliged to pay arrears of interest in future years.
The first issue of PIBS was made in June 1991.
By the end of June 1992, five societies had issued PIBS and four others had issued bonds convertible in the future into PIBS.
So far PIBS issues have only raised small sums, ranging from 20–60 million, mainly on behalf of the larger societies.
However smaller societies are now also showing interest in this new instrument.
Building societies have also been increasing their foreign currency funding through euro-medium-term notes (EMTNs) and by issuing other types of euro-commercial paper.
(g)
The sterling commercial paper market.
This is the newest of the money markets.
Since May 1986 companies have been permitted to issue short-term (7–364 days) unsecured promissory notes, which can then be traded at a discount.
This provides a way of raising short-term funds for general business purposes, often more cheaply than through the banking sector.
In the 1989 Budget, the right to issue sterling commercial paper was extended to unlisted governments, overseas companies and certain overseas authorities; also to banks, building societies and insurance companies.
(h)
The Euro currency market.
Eurocurrency is currency held on deposit with a bank outside the country from which that currency originates.
These deposits are then borrowed and lent in the usual way.
The Eurocurrency market is a wholesale market; it had its origins in holdings of US dollars outside the US in the sixties at a time when the US authorities were placing restrictions on capital exports.
It has since grown to include dealing in all the major currencies, and become particularly important when oil price rises created huge world surpluses and deficits.
London became the dominant Eurocurrency centre because the dollar was the dominant currency, and because it was strategically located half way between New York and Tokyo so that dealing could continue round the clock.
The major participants are banks, who use the market (a) for short-term interbank lending and borrowing,(b) to spread maturity transformation,(c) to match the currency composition of assets and liabilities and (d) for global liquidity transformation between branches.
However, the market is also extensively used by companies, and by governmental and international organizations.
Lending which is longer-term is usually done on a variable-rate basis, where the interest is calculated periodically in line with changing market rates.
There are two important factors which make Eurocurrency business attractive.
The first is that the market is unregulated, so that banks which are subject to reserve requirements or interest rate restrictions in the home country, for instance, can do business more freely abroad.
The other factor is that the margin between lending and borrowing rates is narrower on this market than on the home market, primarily because banks can operate at lower cost when all business is wholesale and when they are not subject to reserve requirements.
The discount market The discount market has always played an important role within the financial system.
In the last century its major function was the discounting of bills of exchange which financed the increasing volume of international trade.
Between the wars it provided a market for the growing volume of Treasury bills issued by the government to meet its short-term financing needs.
As the volume of Treasury bills declined in the 1970s the discount houses facilitated the rapid growth in the commercial bill market.
The prime business of the eight members of the London Discount Market Association is to buy bills at a discount and hold them until redemption date, thereby taking a profit.
Cash flow for this purpose is provided by overnight and short-term ‘money at call’ lent by the banking sector.
Bills must be ‘accepted’(underwritten) by a discount house or a reputable bank in order to be eligible to be traded on the market.
Bills accepted by banks designated as ‘eligible’ banks by the Bank of England become first-class bills which the Bank of England is willing to deal in on the market.
The Bank of England as well as dealing with the discount houses, now also deals with the other firms or ‘dealing counterparts’ on this market.
The functions of the discount houses may be summarized as follows:
(a)
They underwrite the weekly tender issue of Treasury bills by bidding competitively for those not sold.
(b)
They take surplus funds from the banking sector which can be recalled if banks are short of cash, thus effectively acting as a buffer between the banks and the Bank of England.
Banks' daily holdings of cash fluctuate as a result of transactions between the government and the public; bank cash held by the discount houses is used to smooth out these fluctuations.
(c)
They provide short-term finance for companies by discounting commercial bills.
(d)
They maintain a secondary market in CDs and other short term financial instruments.
Although these functions have remained essentially unchanged since the early 1970s, there have been a number of changes in the way they have been carried out, which are best examined by looking at the balance sheet of the discount market (Table 17.8):
1.
It will be seen that the bulk of the funding for the discount market comes from banking sector institutions.
Under the 1981 arrangements eligible   banks undertook to hold not less than 2.5% of their eligible liabilities as call money with the discount houses.
The purpose of this requirement was to ensure that the bill market was adequately funded.
However, since October 1986 this requirement has been abolished, the Bank of England no longer deeming it appropriate in the newly deregulated capital market.
2.
Traditionally the Bank of England supported the discount houses, and thus indirectly the banking sector as a whole, by lending to them at a rate of its own choosing, known since 1971 as minimum lending rate.
This enabled the Bank to raise the rate when it wished to tighten liquidity in the banking sector and force the banks to recall loans from the discount houses.
The current arrangement is that the Bank will support the discount market by dealing rather than lending.
The Bank buys and sells daily in the market in a manner which is designed both to achieve its interest rate objectives (see Ch. 18) and to support the market.
However, it reserves the right to lend direct should dealing distort market conditions.
This accounts for the existence of funds borrowed from the Bank of England on the liabilities side of the balance sheet.
3.
On the assets side cash deposits with the Bank of England are held to fulfil the requirement that all banking sector institutions hold 0.45% of  their eligible liabilities as non-operational deposits with the Bank of England.
‘Eligible’ liabilities are those deposits not originating from other banking sector institutions; these form an insignificant proportion of total discount market liabilities.
It will be seen that commercial bills (‘other bills’) form the bulk of bills held.
This is partly due to the fact that the government now prefers to fund its PSBR in other ways, and partly due to the increasing use of commercial bills by companies for short-term financing.
The capital market.
The capital market is concerned with the provision of long-term finance for both private and public sectors (primary market activity), as well as the trading of existing bonds and equities (secondary market activity).
The Stock Exchange is the traditional centre of the capital market.
Until 1986 Stock Exchange participants were either brokers, who acted on behalf of clients in buying and selling securities, or jobbers, who held stocks and shares and dealt with brokers as the market required, and acted rather like wholesalers of securities.
Restrictive rules maintained the separation of these functions and limited Stock Exchange membership and the inflow of capital into existing firms.
From the mid-1970s onwards a number of factors began to threaten the continued existence of this ‘single capacity’ system:
1.
The Office of Fair Trading brought a case against the Stock Exchange on the grounds of restrictive practice.
As a result of agreement between the government and the Stock Exchange in 1983 the case was dropped, on condition that the Stock Exchange investigate ways to liberalize its trading arrangements.
2.
An increasing amount of share trading, particularly in international shares, was bypassing the floor of the Stock Exchange.
Participants were dealing directly with one another and most transactions, particularly in Eurobonds, took place on over-the-counter markets maintained by the major banks in London.
3.
Institutional investors complained of high percentage fees levied on transactions.
4.
Stock Exchange members began to see themselves as being at a disadvantage in the face of international competition from larger and more sophisticated international firms, with more substantial capital bases.
5.
The fact that Stock Exchange rules limited the scope of member firms to increase their capital meant that resources for technological innovation were limited.
The pressure to deregulate came therefore not only from outside but from inside the Stock Exchange.
In March 1986 outside firms were permitted to take a 100% stake in Stock Exchange member firms.
The result was a large number of takeovers and mergers.
Commercial and investment banks, both domestic and foreign, rapidly absorbed most of London's traditional stockbrokers and jobbers.
The financial sector prepared itself for full deregulation and open competition with foreign institutions.
On 27 October 1986 the ‘big bang’ brought the following changes:
1.
The scale of minimum commissions charged by brokers was dismantled.
Commissions are now negotiable.
2.
There are no further restrictions on outside ownership of member firms.
3.
The distinction between jobbers and brokers — the ‘single capacity system’— was abolished.
There is now only one type of member, the broker/dealer.
A certain number of these undertake to ‘make a market’ in a range of shares.
All broker/dealers may deal directly with the public, but they must state in which capacity they are acting.
4.
Members of the Stock Exchange had always been individuals operating in partnerships.
Now the corporate member is the norm.
5.
Dealing is now done electronically through SEAQ (Stock Exchange Automated Quotations), which shows the share buying and selling price, records all deals in the most traded share within five minutes, and registers the volume of trading in those shares during the day.
This means that complete market surveillance is possible and better investor protection is thus also possible.
The deregulation of the capital market brought with it the need for increased investor protection.
The Financial Services Act of 1986 aimed to fulfil this need, as well as to abolish some of the inconsistencies which had crept into the existing regulatory system for the financial services industry.
The Act gives power to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to delegate powers of regulation to the Securities and Investment Board, which in turn is responsible for delegating responsibility to a number of self-regulatory bodies governing practice in the securities market, insurance broking, fund management, provision of investment advice, and activities in futures and options.
The consequences of deregulation were immediately felt.
Increased competition caused a narrowing of the margins between bid and offer price, and a reduction in commissions.
In spite of the fact that trade increased by 50% in the three months following the ‘big bang’ the rise in costs associated with both increased labour and capital costs caused reductions in rates of return on capital for many firms.
Moreover, since the stockmarket crash of October 1987, equity turnover has been adversely affected.
The results of these factors have been that several of the new ‘one-stop shop’ security houses have withdrawn from market making.
This has brought about a shake-out of labour in the financial services sector, where employment growth had exceeded 5% per annum between 1979 and 1990.
Not only have medium sized British merchant banks been driven out of equity market making, so too have some substantial overseas banks, whose capital bases were overstretched due to debt defaults in other parts of the world.
Undoubtedly the reduced employment in the service sector in the South-east since 1990 reflects the ‘shake-out’ of firms and individuals in a sector which had overexpanded.
A major worry has been the extent to which the newly structured capital market has drawn in scarce resources, notably graduates who are paid  salaries far beyond their opportunity cost.
This has had extensive effects, not least on house prices in the South-east.
It is questionable whether the value added by the increased efficiency of the capital market warranted this type of externality.
Concerns about the structure and functioning of the capital market were highlighted by the equity market crash, which began in New York on 16 October 1987.
Since the ‘big bang’ of 1986, the increased volume of trade had forced share prices up and, by reducing transactions costs for institutions, probably prolonged the equity boom.
The bull market had been raging for more than five years in the US.
In Britain shares had been rising, more or less, since 1975, and particularly strongly since 1984.
In New York the Dow Jones index of stockmarket prices fell 508 points to 1,738.41 on Friday 16 October 1987, a decline of 22.6% — almost double the 13% per cent drop seen on the worst day of the 1929 stockmarket crash.
New computer activated ‘sell’ programs undoubtedly worsened the situation.
In the UK the FT-SE 100 index fell 500 points on ‘Black Monday’ and Tuesday 20 October (the fall being delayed by severe gales which had kept many City traders at home on Friday).
The UK market hit its lowest point on 9 November, when the FT-SE closed at 1,565.2.
(The market's post crash high had been 2,737.8 on 11 May 1992.)
At the end of the Black Monday, the overall valuation of the market was 382.8 billion.
In the five years between then and mid-October 1992, it has grown to 543 billion, having been given a significant fillip by sterling's withdrawal from the ERM on 16 September 1992.
The immediate reasons for the market crash of 1987 were not hard to find.
It was clear that in the  preceding year share prices in global financial markets had risen in such a way as to force yields down several points below gilt yields (see Fig. 17.7).
There had thus emerged a ‘reverse yield gap’ which meant that either share prices would fall sometime or interest rates had to fall.
The latter was unlikely given the fact that the US was borrowing from the world on a massive scale by issuing bonds in order to finance the US deficit.
Share prices had therefore to bear the burden of adjustment.
The implementation of the Single Europe Act in 1993 provides for the EC wide abolition of exchange controls and gives authorized financial institutions the right to do business anywhere in Europe.
The aim is to create a European financial common market so that citizens and businesses in all member states will be free to invest their money, open accounts and take out loans and insurance policies where they choose.
Banks and other financial intermediaries will be free to offer their products and services without restriction, and securities will be quotable on all stock exchanges and issuable in all EC countries.
Financial sectors in other European countries have been deregulating and modernizing in order to be able to compete more efficiently in the new environment.
Both financial institutions and financial markets are in the main more regulated and less developed than those within the UK financial sector.
The implication of this is that there is more scope for innovation and change in Europe than there is in the UK.
In the short run this provides the UK with comparative advantages in the provision of various financial services.
But, in the longer run, it may present the UK financial sector with new competitive challenges which currently do not exist.
However, the increased freedom of competition will necessitate harmonization on a variety of fronts if enormous competitive disparities are not to result.
Some of these distortions have already been foreseen and measures have been taken at Community level to eliminate them.
For instance, Community-wide capital adequacy requirements are to be introduced for banks and securities firms so that all institutions compete on an equal footing.
However, other distortions will inevitably remain, and will only be eliminated by agreement between member countries as the need for further reform emerges.
Examples of areas of concern include:
1.
‘Conduct of business’ rules, where there will have to be some convergence between stringent and lax host authorities.
2.
Reserve requirements on banks will have to be standardized if some banks are not to suffer a competitive disadvantage.
3.
Savings taxes, stamp duty, VAT, corporation tax, and tax treatment of options and futures are different everywhere.
But it is not possible to reconcile the freedom of individual countries to tax with the freedom of capital movement within the Community.
All this has implications for the UK financial sector, and financial institutions have responded to the challenge in four separate ways.
1.
Banks are moving into Europe, either by share swaps (as for instance between the Royal Bank of Scotland and Banco Santander) or by the establishment of new branches, such as those by NatWest in Spain.
2.
Financial institutions are extending the scope of their activities Community-wide by merging with other types of financial institution for instance, banks have merged with insurance companies and established links with fund managers.
3.
In countries where banking is small-scale and fragmented there are initiatives to promote larger banking groups.
This is bound to have  competitive implications for the UK banking sector, which is already heavily rationalized and has therefore little scope for gaining further economies of scale.
4.
Product innovation in financial services and banking-for instance, interest-bearing current accounts, new types of pooled investment and new types of credit card — is bound to spread, thus intensifying competition.
As to the impact of all this, several questions present themselves.
1.
To what extent will London lose business?
It is inevitable that as continental markets become more streamlined business which is now done in Eurocurrencies in London may move back to national financial markets.
This is particularly likely in the case of Euro-DM business, which has to some extent been driven abroad by restrictions on the German banking sector.
2.
To what extent will business shift from banking to other types of lending?
Industry might well find it easier to raise money on continental securities markets which may have surplus funds available or offer more innovative ways of raising share capital.
3.
To what extent will a more competitive European sector give opportunity for further expansion by competitors outside the Community?
Japanese security houses and banks, in particular, have extended the scope of their operations by acquisitions in Europe.
4.
Does the future lie with diversified financial conglomerates or with highly specialized financial institutions?
In terms of financial products, to what extent is standardization possible, or desirable, at a Community-wide level?
The answers to these questions will depend on the extent to which the tendency towards globalization of financial business is outweighed by the national characteristics of differing markets.
Whatever the outcome, the UK financial sector has entered a period of increasing risk and uncertainty in which it remains to be seen whether the deregulation of the 1980s has provided it with competitive advantages.