

SALE OF GOODS
PRODUCT LIABILITY
A manufacturer of a defective product may find himself liable on any one of a number of grounds.
There are five principal grounds.
1.
The contract of sale
Like any other seller of goods, a manufacturer can be liable for a breach of a term of his contract of sale.
This liability benefits only the immediate purchaser from the manufacturer, because liability for breach of contract exists only between parties to the same contract.
In the case of direct marketing the immediate purchaser may be the actual consumer.
Where goods are marketed via wholesaler and retailer the person who buys goods from the retailer cannot complain that the manufacturer was in breach of his contract of sale with the wholesaler.
He can of course sue upon his own contract of sale, i.e. sue the retailer.
The implied terms in sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act are often seen, and correctly so, as important safeguards for the consumer.
Nevertheless one must remember that, although they enhance the purchaser's contractual rights against his seller, they do not confer upon him any rights against other persons.
Indeed, if X buys goods and passes them as a gift to Y, those implied terms are of no benefit at all to Y because Y was not a party to the contract of sale, Heil v. Hedges (1951)(K.B.).
There is one way, assignment, by which Y can be given the benefit of the purchaser's (X's) rights against the seller.
The most effective way of doing this is for X to comply with the provisions of section 136 of the Law of Property Act 1925, i.e. to give Y a written notice, signed by X, unconditionally assigning to Y all X's rights as buyer under the contract of sale.
X can do this at the time of giving the goods to Y or at any later stage.
Of course in transferring his rights to Y, X is losing them himself.
The consent of the seller is not needed for such an assignment.
However, X cannot without the seller's consent assign his burdens under the contract (i.e. the obligation to pay).
2.
Collateral contract or guarantee
Where goods are marketed indirectly and the manufacturer therefore does not sell directly to the consumer, it can nevertheless happen that the manufacturer makes a collateral contract with the consumer.
The classic case of this was Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. (1893 C.A.) where the defendants published an advertisement claiming that their product was a cure and preventative of any number of illnesses.
In particular, the Company promised in the advertisement to pay £100 to anyone who contracted influenza after using a carbolic smoke ball as instructed for a specified period.
Mrs. Carlill saw the advertisement, purchased a smoke ball, used it as instructed for the specified period and nevertheless caught ‘flu.
Although she had not bought the smoke ball from the Company, it was held that there was a contract between her and the Company, albeit not a contract of sale.
A contract is a bargain and the bargain was that the Company made her the promise in the advertisement and she in return bought one of their smoke balls from a retailer.
The Company made her an offer in the advertisement which she accepted by buying a smoke ball from a retailer.
It can be seen then that manufacturers’‘guarantees’(or ‘warranties’) often form the basis of a contract between manufacturer and customer similar to that in Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co.
It is true that often they do not specify a sum of money and sometimes contain many qualifications.
Nevertheless if a guarantee promise (e.g. ‘The goods are warranted to be in perfect condition on leaving the factory’) is broken, then the manufacturer is liable, subject to the qualifications in the guarantee.
An example of such a qualification might occur where the manufacturer promises to refund the purchase price ‘provided the goods are first returned carriage paid to manufacturer.’
Sometimes a guarantee does more than qualify the benefits which it gives.
It may take away or qualify other rights of the consumer which are quite independent of the guarantee.
In particular it may claim to restrict or remove the consumer's ability to bring an action for negligence (see below).
This may be achieved by some clause in the guarantee such as‘Apart from his obligations under the terms of this guarantee, the manufacturer shall not be liable for any loss howsoever arising.’
This type of guarantee was in the past commonly created by the manufacturer supplying with the goods a reply paid postcard which the purchaser was asked to fill in and post, thereby  accepting its terms.
Now, by virtue of section 5 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, a clause in a manufacturer's or distributor's guarantee cannot operate to exclude or restrict the manufacturer's or distributor's liability to the consumer.
This is so provided three conditions are all satisfied:
(i)
the goods are of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption.
(ii)
they prove defective whilst ‘in consumer use’(i.e. not used exclusively for the purposes of a business).
(iii)
the manufacturer or distributor in question is not also the person who sold the goods to the consumer.
This last point seems to suggest that where the consumer buys the goods direct from the manufacturer, the manufacturer is free to exclude his liability.
However, this is not necessarily so.
In that case, although section 5 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act will not apply, other sections of the same Act are most likely to apply and to prevent the seller from excluding his liability.
These other sections will be considered in Chapter 10.
3.
Negligence
Donoghue v. Stevenson (1932) was a landmark in legal development.
The House of Lords established the principle that a consumer who suffers damage because of a manufacturer's negligence can sue the latter for damages and can do so irrespective of whether the consumer bought the goods.
Mrs. Donoghue and a friend went into a café.
The friend bought for Mrs. Donoghue a bottle of ginger beer, manufactured by Stevenson.
Mrs. Donoghue drank some.
When the remainder was poured out, she noticed that the bottle contained two half-decomposed snails.
She suffered some shock as well as some gastro-enteritis.
From the consumer's point of view, there is a considerable drawback to an action in negligence; he has to prove that the manufacturer (or one or more of his employees) was negligent.
This involves showing that reasonable care was not taken in the manufacture.
This can be difficult because the consumer has no means of knowing what goes on (or went on) in the factory.
Sometimes it may seem obvious that there must have been negligence, as in the case of the purchaser of a bath bun who found a stone in the middle of it (Chaproniere v. Mason (1905 C.A.)).
In such a case the purchaser may plead res ipsa loquitur — the facts speak for themselves.
Then it is up to the manufacturer to prove that there was no negligence, i.e. that all  reasonable care was taken.
In Chaproniere v. Mason the manufacturer brought evidence to show that he had a safe system of operations such as to prevent alien matter entering the food.
The court held that this did not show an absence of negligence since someone must have been careless in not following the proper system.
The manufacturer was therefore liable.
A similar situation arose in Daniels v. White (1938) where some carbolic acid got into a bottle of lemonade.
The consumer pleaded res ipsa loquitur.
The manufacturer brought evidence that he had a safe system of operating and adequate supervision to ensure that the system was followed.
Here it was held that this showed that all reasonable care had been taken.
The manufacturer was therefore not liable.
However, the reasoning behind the decision in Daniels v. White seems questionable.
If there was in operation a good system to prevent alien matter entering the lemonade then someone who worked there must have been very negligent if alien matter got in despite the system.
An employer is answerable for the negligence of his employees.
Therefore in Daniels v. White it would seem that the employer (the defendant) ought to have been held liable.
The decision has been criticised and in Hill v. James Crowe (1978 Q.B.D.) MacKenna J. refused to follow it.
It should be pointed out that an action in negligence is not restricted to shock and personal injuries but may also include damage to property or even sometimes purely financial loss.
It should also be pointed out that Donoghue v. Stevenson established a principle of wider application than it may so far have appeared.
Anyone (whether he is a manufacturer or not) who ought to appreciate that his acts or omissions may well cause harm to another may be liable to that other for any damage caused by his negligence in carrying on those activities.
A recent example of this can be found in Junior Books v. Veitchi (1982 H.L.).
The owner of a piece of land contracted with a building firm for the building of a factory on the land.
Under this contract the owner had the right to nominate which sub-contractor was to be engaged by the building firm to lay the floor.
The owner nominated Veitchi.
Subsequently, the owner claimed damages from Veitchi, claiming that Veitchi had through their negligence laid the floor badly.
The owner's claim was for purely financial loss.
It was for the cost of having the floor  relaid and also for consequential losses (i.e. lost profits arising from lost production while the factory was closed to enable the floor to be  relaid ).
Although claims in negligence for purely financial loss do not generally succeed, it was held  that this claim by the owner against the nominated sub-contractor could succeed in negligence (i.e. even though there was no contract between the owner and sub-contractor).
Now, suppose a manufacturer of catapults sells some to a wholesaler, who sells some to a retailer who in turn sells one to a young boy.
Suppose also that, because it has a latent defect, the catapult is not of merchantable quality and that it breaks in use and injures the boy's eye as a result.
The boy will no doubt succeed in his claim for breach of contract against the retailer, as will the retailer succeed against the wholesaler and the wholesaler against the manufacturer, Godley v. Ferry (1960 Q.B.).
The retailer's claim against the wholesaler is a claim for indemnity.
This simply means that the retailer is entitled to claim from the wholesaler (as damages for breach of contract) the whole amount which the retailer is himself liable to pay his buyer.
That is the amount of the retailer's loss arising from the wholesaler's breach of contract.
On the same reasoning the wholesaler is entitled to indemnity from the manufacturer.
In this way, liability is passed back up the chain of distribution to the manufacturer.
What if there is a blockage in the process?
This could happen if, for example, the wholesaler has gone out of business or if in the contract between the wholesaler and the retailer there is a valid exemption clause which prevents the wholesaler being liable to the retailer.
In this case, the retailer is liable to his buyer, the boy, but now has no contract under which he can recover indemnity.
We have already seen that if the defect was due to the negligence of the manufacturer, the boy could himself have sued the manufacturer direct for negligence.
That, however, is not much use to the retailer if the boy has chosen instead to sue the retailer for breach of contract.
In Lambert v. Lewis (1981 H.L.) Lord Diplock suggested that in that case someone down the chain of distribution who suffers economic loss (i.e. because he has to pay out damages for breach of contract), might well be able to claim indemnity direct from the negligent manufacturer under the principle in Donoghue v. Stevenson.
4.
Product liability
From the consumer's point of view, the drawback to the implied terms in the Sale of Goods Act is that only the buyer can sue the seller.
If someone other than the buyer was injured by the goods, the Sale of Goods Act gives him no rights.
A claim in negligence, on the other hand, can be brought by any consumer.
The drawback to this claim is that the defendant  (usually the manufacturer) must lie shown to have been negligent.
Part I of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 implements a Directive of the European Community and gives the consumer an additional right to make a claim which is free of both these drawbacks.
Under this Act, anyone who is injured by a defective product can sue the manufacturer, irrespective of whether the manufacturer was negligent.
Damage caused to non-business property can be claimed if it exceeds £275 in value.
In giving this right, the Act does not remove or alter any other rights of the consumer, e.g. under the Sale of Goods Act or the law of negligence.
Basis of the claim — section 2
To succeed under Part I of the Consumer Protection Act, the plaintiff must establish four things, namely that:
(a)
a product contained a defect,
(b)
the plaintiff suffered damage,
(c)
the damage was caused by the defect,
(d)
the defendant was, producer, own-brander or importer into the European Community (or, sometimes, supplier) of the product.
Defect — section 3
A product is defective ‘if the safety of the product is not such as persons generally are entitled to expect.’
Safety includes safety in the context of risks of damage to property as well as in the context of risks of death or personal injury.
Thus new furniture would be defective if it contained live woodworm even though the presence of the woodworm posed no threat of personal injury.
Safety is a relative, not an absolute, concept.
A sharp kitchen knife cannot be made absolutely safe if it is to be any use as a kitchen knife.
If, however, it were marketed as a child's toy or the blade were such that when used to peel potatoes it disintegrated into splinters, then it would not be as safe as people generally were entitled to expect.
Thus section 3(2) provides that in determining whether a product is defective all the circumstances are to be taken into account, including:
‘(a) the manner in which, and purposes for which, the product has been marketed, its get-up, the use of any mark in relation to the product and any instructions for, or warnings with respect to, doing or refraining from doing anything with or in relation to the product;(b) what might reasonably be expected to be done with or in relation to the product; and (c) the time when the product was supplied by its producer to another; and nothing in this section shall require a defect to be inferred from the fact alone that the safety of a product which is supplied after that time is greater than the safety of the product in question.’
As in the knife example earlier, the marketing and/or labelling will affect the use to which the product is likely to be put.
Something advertised as a toy is likely to be used by children.
If something is advertised and sold as a hover-mower, is it reasonable to expect it to be used as a hedge-trimmer?
If not, then it is not defective just because it is dangerous when used in that way.
Public expectations as to safety are to be judged as at the time the producer supplied the product in question.
A producer is not required to meet expectations of safety which arise after he has supplied the product.
Suppose manufacturer A has for some years produced a razor which will not normally cut the user unless it is slid sideways across the skin.
Suppose that in May 1991 manufacturer B markets a razor which is equally efficient but which will not normally cut the user, even when slid sideways.
Imagine that a razor supplied by manufacturer A in February 1989 is bought from a retailer in June 1991 and when used in July 1991 cuts the user's face when slid sideways across it.
The fact that manufacturer B produced a safer razor after the razor in question had been supplied by manufacturer A is not enough to enable us to say that manufacturer A's razor was defective.
If, however, another user is cut by a razor which manufacturer A supplied after May 1991, this user can point to the safer design of manufacturer B's razor as evidence that the razor which cut him was not as safe as persons were (at the time manufacturer A supplied it) entitled to expect.
Product — section 1 (2)
The definition of product is very wide.
Thus there is liability 9–09 for defects in virtually anything which might conceivably be considered a product, including goods, electricity, gas and  vapours.
There are three exceptions, relating to land, primary agricultural produce and unprocessed game.
Liability is imposed for defective goods, not for defective land.
‘Goods’ include ‘things comprised in land by virtue of being attached to it,’section 45.
A building is land.
A builder will therefore not be liable under the Act for damage caused by a defect in the building because it was badly built, e.g. because the foundations were inadequate, though he might be liable under some other legal provision (e.g. negligence or the Defective Premises Act 1972).
A brick or tile used in the construction of a building is a thing comprised in land by virtue of being attached to it.
Therefore, if a tile, because it is defective, breaks and falls on to a passer-by, the manufacturer of the tile will be liable under the Act.
Agricultural produce and game are excluded from liability under the Act unless it has undergone an ‘industrial process’ giving it ‘essential characteristics.’
These expressions are not defined in the Act.
Presumably the freezing or canning of peas or the turning of meat into sausages would amount to such an industrial process.
In that case, the industrial processor (not the farmer) is regarded as the producer and will be liable to anyone injured by a defect in the peas or sausages.
That is so even if the defect (e.g. salmonella) was present in the produce before it reached the industrial processor.
It seems unlikely that mere packaging and grading of produce would qualify as an industrial process giving essential characteristics.
It also seems unlikely that processing before harvesting or slaughtering (e.g. crop spraying) would qualify.
The same can be said of the harvesting or slaughtering process itself.
Industrial processing seems to refer to initial processing after harvesting or slaughtering.
Damage — section 5
Under Part I of the 1987 Act damages can be claimed for death or personal injuries and also for loss of, or damage to, property (including land) which is:
(a)
of a description of property ordinarily intended for private use, occupation or consumption; and
(b)
intended by the person suffering the loss or damage mainly for his own private use, occupation or consumption.
Damage to business property cannot be claimed under the Act.
Furthermore the plaintiff cannot claim even for his private  (non-business) property loss or damage unless it exceeds £275.
This is to prevent trivial claims for property damage.
If, however, the amount of damage done to the plaintiff's private property exceeds £275, then the whole amount is recoverable including the first £275.
(Someone suffering property damage not exceeding £275 may, of course, be able to claim for it in negligence or under the implied terms in the Sale of Goods Act).
A claim under Part I of the Consumer Protection Act cannot be made for any damage to the defective product itself.
Thus if a defective toaster catches fire damaging the house and contents, one adds up the value of the damage done (but not including either the toaster itself or any property used mainly for business purposes, e.g. a word processor).
If the value exceeds £275, then it can be claimed under the Act.
If the defect had been in a component of the toaster, say the heating element, the result would still be the same unless the heating element had not been supplied as part of the toaster (e.g. had been bought as a replacement later).
If the defective element had not been supplied with the toaster, then the value of the damage done to the toaster (but not to the element) could be included in the claim.
(In this case, of course, the claim would not be against the toaster manufacturer but against the manufacturer of the heating element).
The rule is that one cannot claim for damage to the defective product itself or to any product which was supplied with the defective product comprised within it.
Where a defective product is used as a component by another manufacturer, there will be two defective products and two producers.
Under the Act the plaintiff can sue either.
Whichever he sues, he cannot include a claim for damage done to the component or to the larger item which was supplied with the component comprised in it.
The defendant — section 2
Under the 1987 Act a claim can be brought against the producer, the own-brander or the importer.
The producer is the manufacturer.
In the case of products (like salt, oil or coal) which are won or abstracted, the person who wins or abstracts them is the producer.
In the case of other products (e.g. agricultural produce) which are not manufactured, the producer is the person who carries out an industrial process (e.g. freezing) which gives them essential characteristics.
An own-brander is liable if he has own-branded the goods in such a way as to hold himself out as being the producer.
If Superstores own-brands the coffee it sells, it can avoid liability by labelling it with a statement such as‘Made for Superstores by Coffee Fellers Inc.’
The only importer liable under the Act is the person who imported the product into the European Community.
If a product was made in France and brought to England, there is no importer to sue, but only a French producer.
If the product was made in the United States and brought to France before being brought to England, then the person who imported it into France is liable.
If judgment is obtained in this country against someone in France (or most other Community states), that judgment can be enforced in the country in question by virtue of the Brussels Convention (on Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgments) 1968.
The same is also true vice versa, Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982.
Where there is a long chain of distribution, the plaintiff may find it difficult to identify who was the producer or importer into the European Community.
He may ask anyone who has supplied the product in question, e.g. retailer, wholesaler or distributor, to identify the producer, own-brander or importer into the European Community.
If the supplier fails to make the identification and also fails to identify the person who supplied the product to him, the supplier is liable as if he had himself been the producer.
Defences — section 4
Section 4 provides the following defences:
1.
The defect is due to compliance with any statutory requirement or rule of the European Community.
2.
The defendant did not supply the product, e.g. it was stolen from his premises.
3.
The defendant supplied the product otherwise than in the course of a business and the defendant did not produce it (or own-brand it or import it into the European Community) with a view to profit.
This lets off grandad who makes grandson John a toy and gives it to him for Christmas.
Similarly a tourist returning from Japan with a gift for a friend in Britain will not be liable either as supplier or as importer.
4.
The defect did not exist in the product at the time it was supplied by the defendant (i.e. the producer, own-brander or importer).
Thus the defendant would not be  liable if chocolates he had made and supplied were poisoned by saboteurs at the retailer's premises.
5.
A component manufacturer is not liable where the defect is attributable to the design of the larger product in which the product is included or where the defect is attributable to instructions given by the manufacturer of the larger product.
In such circumstances, the defence will not, of course, be available to the producer of the larger product.
6.
The ‘development risks’ defence is available where the defendant shows ‘that the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the relevant time was not such that a producer of products of the same description as the product in question might be expected to have discovered the defect if it had existed in his products while they were under his control.’
In short, a producer relying on this defence needs to show that the defect was not discoverable at the time he supplied the product.
Suppose that in 1995 a pair of gloves supplied by the manufacturer in 1989 is proved to have caused arthritis to the wearer because the gloves were made with polyester.
To succeed under the Consumer Protection Act, the plaintiff would have to establish that in 1989 people generally were entitled to expect the gloves not to carry the risk of causing arthritis (see paragraph 9–08 above).
If the plaintiff can establish that, then the manufacturer will have a defence if he can show that in 1989, given the then state of scientific and technical knowledge, the risk of the polyester causing arthritis was not discoverable.
Establishing the defence might be very important to the manufacturer if over the years he has supplied a lot of such gloves and a lot of wearers have suffered arthritis because of them.
Whichever of these six defences in section 4 is raised, the burden of establishing it rests upon the defendant.
The same is true of the defence of contributory negligence, section 6(1).
With this defence the defendant is saying that the plaintiff has failed to take reasonable care and thereby been partly responsible for his own injuries, loss or damage.
This could apply where the plaintiff has made an unreasonable use of the product.
In fact an unreasonable use of the product might allow the defendant three different arguments in his own  defence.
So suppose an adult sniffs glue making himself very ill and subsequently sues the glue manufacturer.
The latter could argue:
(i)
that there was no defect in the glue, i.e. it was as safe as persons generally were entitled to expect.
This argument would be especially strong if there were no commercially viable way of producing glue without the risk of toxic fumes and if the container had carried a clear warning of the risks.
(ii)
that the plaintiff's illness was caused not by the alleged defects in the product but entirely by his own decision to sniff the glue.
(iii)
that the plaintiff by his own failure to take reasonable care for his own safety contributed to his own illness.
In this example it is difficult to know which of these arguments would find favour with a court.
If either of the first two did so, the defendant would not be liable.
If only the third found favour, the damages awarded would be a reduced proportion of what would be awarded for such an illness in the absence of contributory negligence.
Exclusion of liability and Limitation
No exclusion or limitation of liability clause can exclude or limit the liability imposed by Part I of the Consumer Protection Act (section 7).
The rules on limitation are an entirely different matter.
These are rules laid down by law which allow a claim to be brought only if legal proceedings are commenced before the expiry of a deadline.
There are two such rules which apply to claims for product liability under the Consumer Protection Act:
1.
Proceedings must be commenced within three years of when the injury or damage  occurred or, if the injury, etc., was not discovered until later, within three years of when the plaintiff became aware of the injury or damage.
2.
No proceedings may be commenced more than 10 years after the producer supplied the product.
If the own-brander or importer is being sued, then the 10 years run from when he supplied the product.
The 10 years begin to run the moment that the particular product in question was supplied by its producer (own-brander  or importer).
If those 10 years have expired, it is immaterial that the defendant continued — even is still continuing — to manufacture and supply identical products.
5.
Part H of the Consumer Protection Act 1987
Part II replaces provisions previously in the Consumer Protection Acts 1961–71 and, more recently, the Consumer Safety Act 1978.
It does four things.
First, it empowers the Secretary of State to make safety regulations governing the making and supplying of goods, i. e. regulations designed to secure that goods are safe, that appropriate information is supplied with them and inappropriate information is not supplied.
Thus, for example, regulations may govern the composition or design of goods, may require goods to conform to a certain standard (e.g. a British Institute Standard) and may require a warning or instructions to be given with the goods.
Some regulations were made under earlier Acts and continue to be effective under the 1987 Act.
They relate to such things as children's nightdresses, carrycot stands, electric blankets, prams and pushchairs, cosmetics, colour coding of electrical appliances and upholstered furniture.
The regulations will sometimes affect only a manufacturer (e.g. where they govern design or composition).
Other regulations may affect any supplier, whether manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer (e. g. regulations requiring information to be supplied with goods).
It is a criminal offence to infringe the regulations.
The second thing Part II does is to enable quick action to be taken against the marketing of unsafe goods.
Section 13 gives the Secretary of State powers to issue two types of instruction:
(i)
a ‘prohibition notice’ can be issued to prevent the trader upon whom it is served from supplying any specified type of goods which the Secretary of State considers unsafe:
(ii)
a ‘notice to warn’ can require the trader upon whom it is served to take specified steps to warn consumers about unsafe goods which that trader supplies or has already supplied.
A ‘notice to warn’ might well be served for example upon a car manufacturer if it appears that a certain model had a dangerous design fault.
The notice will specify what steps the manufacturer must take.
It may require him to publish a warning in the newspaper or it could, for example, require him to write individually to all purchasers of that model.
Failure by  a trader to comply with a prohibition notice or notice to warn is a criminal offence.
A prohibition notice can in practice be made only when the fact that there are dangerous goods on the market has come to the attention of the Secretary of State.
It has sometimes been the case, however, that unsafe imported goods have been in the shops and bought in considerable quantities before the Secretary of State has learnt of their presence in the country.
Hence each enforcement authority (i.e. local trading standards department) now has power to serve a ‘suspension notice’ upon a trader where it has reasonable grounds to think legal safety requirements have been infringed, section 14.
The notice will prohibit the trader from supplying specified goods for up to six months.
If it turns out that there had been no infringement of the law in relation to the goods in question, the trader may be entitled to compensation from the enforcement authority, section 14(7).
In order to catch suspect goods at the ports, customs officers have power to seize and detain goods for up to two working days in order to enable local trading standards officers to examine them to determine whether they infringe legal safety requirements, section 31.
The third aspect of Part II is that section 10 now makes it an offence for a trader to supply consumer goods which fail to comply with a general safety requirement.
Consumer goods are those ‘which are ordinarily intended for private use or consumption’ but the following are excluded: growing crops, things comprised in land by being attached to it, water, food, feeding stuff or fertiliser, gas supplied by persons authorised under the Gas Act 1986, aircraft (other than hang-gliders) motor vehicles, controlled drugs, licensed medicinal products and tobacco.
The general safety requirement is that the goods be reasonably safe and the definition of ‘unsafe’ is very similar to that of ‘defect’in Part I of the Act (see paragraph 9–08 above).
A court in deciding whether goods were unsafe will have regard to all the circumstances, including the purpose for which the goods were marketed, their ‘get-up,’ any instructions or warnings given, and also any published standards of safety.
Thus a B.S.I. (British Standards Institute) standard, even if not incorporated into any safety regulations, could well be relevant.
Furthermore a trader will be able to use, as a complete defence, evidence that in the relevant respect, he complied with the requirements of safety regulations or any approved standard of safety.
The Secretary of State has power to approve such standards, e. g.
B.S.I. standards.
Where there is such an  approved standard it is, strictly speaking not mandatory for the manufacturer to comply with it.
In practice however he has to comply with it, because, if he does not, that fact is evidence against him and, if he does, he has a complete defence.
The offence is committed not just by a trader who supplies consumer goods that are not reasonably safe but also by a trader who agrees or offers to supply them or exposes or possesses them for supply.
There is a limited defence for a retailer (but not for a wholesaler or distributor) who neither knew, nor had reasonable grounds for believing, that the goods were not reasonably safe.
There are two further defences whose effect is that the offence does not apply either to goods intended for export from the United Kingdom or to goods not supplied as being new, e.g. second-hand goods and demonstration models.
The defence of due diligence is available to anyone charged with the offence in section 10 or with an offence under safety regulations.
The defence is that the defendant took all reasonable steps and exercised all due diligence to avoid committing the offence, section 39.
An importer or wholesaler will not be able to rely on this defence if he has taken no steps to require his supplier to supply goods which correspond with the relevant legal requirements.
This may mean not only placing specific contractual obligations upon his supplier but also making tests on more than infrequent random samples of the goods supplied, Riley v. Webb (1987 D.C.) and Rotherham M.B.C. v. Raysun (1988 D.C.).
The fourth aspect of Part H of the Consumer Protection Act relates to civil liability.
The Act entitles a consumer to bring an action for damages against any trader in respect of damage or loss suffered by the consumer because of an infringement by the trader of safety regulations.
Thus a child whose nightdress catches fire because when supplied it did not comply with the safety regulations will be able to claim compensation for her burns from the manufacturer.
This is so even if she did not buy it direct from the manufacturer (or, indeed, even if she did not buy it.)
She does not have to prove any negligence on the part of the manufacturer and does not even have to rely upon the product liability provisions of Part I of the Act.
Civil liability under the Act cannot be excluded or restricted by any exemption clause.
Criminal and civil liability under Part II of the Consumer Protection Act attaches only to persons who are acting ‘in the course of carrying on a business.’
The defendant in Southwark London Borough v. Charlesworth (1983 D.C.) was a shoe  repairer who also carried on a secondary business as seller of second-hand goods.
At his shop he sold an electric fire which infringed safety regulations (under the Consumer Protection Act 1961).
The fire had come from his home and the money from the sale of the fire and not go through the books of the business.
Nevertheless there was no differentiation in the shop between the fire and other goods he was selling in his secondary line of business.
That being so, the court held that the sale was a sale in the course of a business.
The result might have been different if there had been a notice attached to the goods making it clear that these goods had nothing to do with the defendant's business as a dealer in second-hand goods but had come from his home and that the sale of the goods was to be a private transaction.
For further examples of what is ‘in the course of a business’ see paragraphs 10. -18, 16–04, 16–07 and 20–04.
EXEMPTION CLAUSES
AN exemption clause is a term of the contract intended to exclude or restrict the liability of one of the parties, usually the seller.
Sometimes a seller is so financially powerful that he can blatantly insist on such a clause being included in the contract; he can adopt a ‘take it or leave it’ attitude.
More common is the seller who, having inserted an exclusion clause into his conditions of sale, relies on his buyer not bothering to read (or not understanding) the small print; for example, the exclusion clause may be contained in the small print of a guarantee which he gives to the buyer.
An exemption clause may, contrary to appearances, have little or no effect.
The reason is that such clauses are not looked upon with favour either by the courts or by Parliament.
They are subject to several common law rules evolved by the courts as well as to certain recent pieces of legislation.
In this respect a particularly important piece of legislation is the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
This Act will be considered later in the Chapter.
At the moment it is worth recording that section 55 (1) of the Sale of Goods Act reads:
‘Where a right, duty or liability would arise under a contract of sale of goods by implication of law, it may (subject to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977) be negatived or varied by express agreement, or by the course of dealing between the parties, or by such usage as binds both parties to the contract.’
Before turning to the 1977 Act we shall first examine the common law rules relating to incorporation, misrepresentation, privity of contract and scope of the clause.
INCORPORATION
A clause is of no effect unless it is incorporated (included) as a term in the contract.
It must be incorporated when the contract is made.
Any attempt to incorporate it after the contract is made will be unsuccessful.
Thus a document which is first  brought to the purchaser's notice after the contract is made will not incorporate into the contract terms printed on the document.
It is for this reason that a seller will usually be unable to rely on an exclusion clause printed on a receipt.
Receipts are not usually handed over until after the purchaser has paid (i. e. after the contract has been made).
This rule that a clause cannot subsequently be incorporated, was applied in Olley v. Marlborough Court (1949 C.A.).
There the plaintiff had booked in at the reception desk of a hotel and only subsequently, on entering her room, did she discover behind the door a notice which claimed to exclude the hotel's liability for guests’ property.
The Court of Appeal held that the notice was not incorporated in the contract, since it was not displayed at a spot visible to plaintiff before she made the contract.
The defendant would have been better advised to display his notice in a prominent position near the reception desk.
We can now consider individually the different methods of incorporation.
Oral agreement between buyer and seller
This method is not commonly used for two main reasons.
First, it involves bringing the exclusion directly to the attention of the buyer.
Secondly, there may be difficulty in proving that the buyer orally agreed to the exclusion.
Signed contractual document
The buyer will find it difficult to argue that the clause was not agreed upon if it is contained in a document signed by him.
It will not help him to plead that he had not read the clause or was unaware of its existence.
In L'Estrange v. Graucob (1934 C.A.) a café proprietress bought a vending machine on the terms of a Sales Agreement which she signed without having read.
Although she had been unaware that the small print contained a wide exclusion clause, the Court of Appeal held that the clause protected the seller from liability in respect of defects in the machine.
A clause will not be incorporated by a document which is not a contractual document.
A document will be ‘contractual’ if a reasonable person in the position of the prospective buyer would expect it to contain terms affecting his rights and liabilities.
A buyer who has taken the formal step of signing a document will therefore find it difficult to show that it was not a contractual document.
Unsigned contractual document
There are two significant differences between signed and unsigned documents.
First, an exclusion clause in an unsigned document is not incorporated unless at the time of making the contract, either the buyer was aware of its existence or else reasonable steps had been taken to bring it to his attention.
The harsher the clause, the greater the effort needed to bring it to the attention of the buyer (see Interfoto Picture Library v. Stiletto Visual Programmes, paragraph 7–03 above).
Secondly, the buyer may find it easier to establish that it was not a contractual document.
In Chapelton v. Barry U.D.C. (1940) C.A.) Mr. Chapelton wanted to hire a deck chair on the beach.
He saw a pile of them and a notice nearby, ‘Hire of chairs 2d. per session of three hours.’
The notice continued by ‘respectfully requesting’ the hirer to obtain a ticket from the attendant.
This he did.
He later brought an action claiming damages for injuries he received when his chair collapsed.
As a defence, the Council pleaded an exemption clause printed on the back of the ticket.
As Mr. Chapelton had obtained his ticket from the attendant at the time of making the contract (i. e. when he collected his chair from the pile), the ticket had changed hands in sufficient time.
The Court of Appeal rejected the Council's defence on the ground, not that the ticket changed hands too late, but that it was not a contractual document; for no reasonable person would expect to find contractual terms in a document which was no more than a receipt for him to prove that he had paid and which in many instances (i.e. in the absence of the attendant) would not change hands until long after the contract was made.
Displayed notices
As with an unsigned contractual document, this method of incorporation will work only if at the time of making the contract the buyer actually knew of the existence of the terms or else reasonable steps had been taken to bring them to his attention.
Thus the notice must be reasonably large and prominently displayed at a spot visible to the buyer when the contract is made.
Exactly what amounts to ‘reasonable steps’ is a question of fact in each case.
The wider and more drastic the clause, the more care must be taken to bring it to the buyer's attention.
Even if reasonable steps have been taken to bring the exemption clause to the notice of the buyer, it will not be  incorporated if it does not clearly cover the particular transaction in question.
In D & M Trailers (Halifax) Ltd. v. Stirling (1978 C.A.) an extensive exemption clause was included in the conditions of sale posted up around an auction room.
One of these conditions stated, ‘Sale’ used in these conditions shall include sale by private treaty as well as sale by auction.’
Mr. Stirling attended the auction and bought some vehicles.
On returning a day or two later to pay for them, he saw in the yard a Scania tractor which had been included but not sold at the auction which he had attended.
He spoke privately with the auctioneers and agreed to buy the Scania (i.e. he agreed by private treaty and not in an auction).
The Scania soon proved to be seriously defective and not of merchantable quality.
The buyer's claim for breach of condition succeeded.
The court held that the exemption clause, though it had been incorporated in the auction sales, had not been incorporated in the later sale by private treaty.
This was a separate transaction from the auction and the auctioneers had not made it clear that the exemption clause was being incorporated into it.
Previous course of dealing
If, in the past, parties have regularly made contracts with each other upon the same terms (including exempting terms), then that course of dealing can incorporate those same terms into a later contract between them.
This later contract must be merely the latest in the established course of dealing.
Thus three requirements must be satisfied before a course of dealing can incorporate an exemption clause into a later contract:
(i)
The transactions between the parties must have been sufficiently numerous to constitute a ‘course of dealing,’
(ii)
The established course of dealing must have been consistent.
(iii)
The established course of dealing must not have been deviated from on the occasion in question.
In Hollier v. Rambler Motors (1972 C.A.) the first of these requirements was not satisfied.
The Court of Appeal held that three or four transactions in the course of five years were not sufficient to establish a course of dealing.
In Kendall v. Lillico (1969 H.L.) all the requirements were fulfilled.
Just as he had done on over 100 occasions during the previous three years, the seller sold some animal food to the buyer.
As had always previously happened, they made an oral agreement followed by the seller giving to the buyers a ‘sold  note’ which had on the back an exclusion clause.
Plainly the clause was not on this occasion incorporated by virtue of the sold note, which had been handed over only after the bargain was struck.
However, there had been a long and consistent course of dealing which was adhered to on this occasion.
It was by virtue of this that the clause was incorporated.
The House of Lords held this to be so, even though the buyers were unaware of the precise terms on the sold notes.
Lord Pearce said, ‘The only reasonable inference from the regular course of dealing over so long a period is that the buyers were evincing an acceptance of, and a readiness to be bound by, the printed conditions of whose existence they were well aware although they had not troubled to read them.’
Trade usage
Whereas a course of dealing can incorporate a term that has in effect become customary between the two parties in question, trade usage can incorporate a term that has become a custom amongst all the buyers and sellers dealing in the environment in question.
In the latter case there is no need for the particular seller and buyer to have dealt previously with each other, or, indeed, previously in the particular environment.
It is sufficient that the custom was established in the market in which on this occasion the buyer bought from the seller.
By dealing in this market, they are taken, unless they expressly agreed otherwise, to have been dealing in accordance with all the customs of the market.
Thus in Cointat v. Myham (1913 C.A.) where the plaintiff bought bad meat in the Central London Meat Market, it was held that any warranty as to the fitness or quality of the meat was excluded, because there was an established custom of the market to that effect.
Overriding oral warranty
An exclusion clause which would otherwise be incorporated by one of the methods referred to above, may nevertheless be  overridden by later statements made by the seller to the buyer.
The plaintiff in Harling v. Eddy (1951 C.A.) bought a heifer at a cattle auction.
One of the printed conditions of sale in the auction catalogue was that no warranty was given in respect of any animal sold.
However, when there had been some difficulty in getting the bidding started, the seller announced that there was nothing wrong with the heifer and he would absolutely guarantee her.
After this the heifer was knocked down to the  plaintiff.
The Court of Appeal held that the oral statement overrode the exclusion clause which therefore did not form part of the contract.
MISREPRESENTATION
The seller cannot rely on any exclusion clause, no matter what liability it claims to exclude, to the extent that he or his agent has misrepresented the effect of the clause.
In Curtis v. Chemical Dyeing Co. (1951 C.A.) the plaintiff took a wedding dress to the defendants for cleaning.
The shop assistant asked her to sign a receipt, telling her that this was because the cleaners took no responsibility for damage to beads and sequins on the dress.
In fact this was literally true but the clause on the receipt went further.
It claimed to exempt the defendants from liability for ‘any damage howsoever caused.’
The plaintiff signed the receipt without reading it.
The assistant had not deliberately or knowingly misled the plaintiff.
Nevertheless she had, by revealing part of the  clause's effect, concealed its full effect.
This amounted to a misrepresentation.
The Court of Appeal held the defendants liable in negligence for damage caused to the dress.
The misrepresentation, albeit an innocent one, ‘was a sufficient misrepresentation to disentitle the cleaner from relying on the exemption, except in regard to beads and sequins.’
PRIVITY OF CONTRACT
The privity of contract principle is that someone who is not privy to (i.e. not a party to) a contract can neither rely upon the contract nor be bound by it.
Generally, a contract can affect the rights and liabilities only as between the parties to it.
Thus an exclusion clause in a contract is a defence available only to a contracted party and only against the other contracted party, Scruttons v. Midland Silicones (1962 H.L.).
Consider a common situation; a manufacturer sells a number of his products to a wholesaler; the wholesaler sells some of them to a retailer and the retailer sells one of them to a consumer.
Here there are three separate contracts of sale.
If the product proves to be defective, then this could give rise to three separate claims for damages for breach of contract — one by the consumer against the retailer, one by the retailer against the wholesaler and one by the wholesaler against the manufacturer.
There is a chain of contracts and a breach of one may well cause a chain reaction, i.e. a breach of each of the others see paragraph 9–05 above.
The law does not allow the consumer to ignore the intermediate links in the chain.
He cannot sue the manufacturer for breach of the latter's contract of sale.
However, in certain circumstances, the law of tort gives a consumer a right to sue a manufacturer with whom he has no contract (see Chapter 9).
In our example, if the manufacturer was careless in the manufacture of his product and this had injured the consumer, the latter will have a claim (in the law of tort) in negligence against the manufacturer even though he did not buy the goods from him.
Whilst an exclusion clause in the manufacturer's contract of sale could provide the manufacturer with a good defence to a claim by the wholesaler, it would provide him with no defence to a claim in negligence by the consumer.
Similarly, an exclusion clause in the contract between the retailer and the consumer could not be relied upon by the manufacturer.
An exclusion clause in a contract of sale can provide a defence only to the seller and only against a claim by the person to whom he sold.
Sometimes a manufacturer sells directly to a member of the public, e.g. by mall order or by door to door salesman.
In such a case an exclusion clause could, if appropriately worded (and subject to the provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act), provide the manufacturer with a good defence against a claim by the purchaser in negligence.
However, someone other than the purchaser could be injured on account of the article's negligent manufacture and an exclusion clause would provide no defence in an action brought by him against the manufacturer.
Furthermore, a manufacturer can now be liable to his immediate purchaser or to anyone else who is caused injury (or private property damage) by a defective product.
This liability, under Part I of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, cannot be limited or excluded at all— see paragraphs 9–6 to 9–14 above.
SCOPE OF THE CLAUSE
An exclusion clause is construed contra proferentem, i. e. narrowly against the interest of the person relying upon it.
An exclusion clause is inserted for the sole benefit of one of the parties, in a contract of sale, the seller.
The court in interpreting the clause, leans against the seller.
If the clause is ambiguous, the court will adopt the meaning less favourable to the seller and any ground of liability not clearly excluded will remain.
In Andrews v. Singer (1934 C.A.) the plaintiff made a written contract to buy a ‘new Singer car.’
The car delivered to him had in fact done a considerable mileage.
It was held that a  clause excluding all ‘implied conditions and warranties’ did not exclude the seller's liability for breach of the express condition that he would supply a ‘new’car.
A further illustration is to be found in Wallis & Wells v. Pratt and Haynes (1911 H.L.) where the House of Lords held that the clause ‘Sellers give no warranty, express or implied’ did not exclude conditions.
A clause which does not expressly mention conditions will not normally exclude liability for breach of condition.
Old approach to interpretation
Until the 1970s there was no statutory control upon exemption clauses.
So, if an exemption clause was part of the contract and if on its wording it excused one party from a given liability, then the court had to give effect to the clause, i.e. that party (usually the seller) had a valid defence.
That is what happened in L'Estrange v. Graucob (paragraph 10–04 above).
The courts, however, did not very much like this sort of result and, when interpreting an exemption clause, used to adopt a hostile approach.
There were two particular aspects to this.
First the court would sometimes place a strained or tortured meaning on the words of the exemption clause in order to deprive it of effect.
Secondly, the courts developed the doctrine of fundamental breach of contract.
According to this doctrine, a party who had committed a fundamental breach of contract, could not (at least, sometimes could not) rely for his defence upon an exemption clause.
This doctrine was never, however, approved by the highest court in the land, the House of Lords.
New approach to interpretation
As will be explained later in this chapter, Parliament in the 1970s passed legislation which renders certain exemption clauses absolutely ineffective and renders many others ineffective unless they pass a test of fairness and reasonableness.
This means that, even though an exemption clause on its wording apparently provides a defence, it may nevertheless be ineffective.
This has enabled the court to adopt a less hostile approach to the interpretation of the wording of exemption clauses.
This new approach was heralded by the decision in Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor Transport Ltd. (1980) in which the House of Lords swept away the doctrine that a fundamental breach of contract could prevent an exemption clause from providing a defence.
Their lordships overruled earlier decisions saying otherwise.
Since the Photo Production case there have been two more decisions of the House of Lords, Ailsa Craig  Fishing Co.
Ltd. v. Malvern Fishing Co.
Ltd. (1983) and George Mitchell Ltd. v. Finney Lock Seeds Ltd. (1983).
From this trilogy of cases the modem approach to the interpretation of exemption clauses has emerged.
Exemption clauses are still to be construed contra proferentem, i.e. if a clause is ambiguous the court will adopt the meaning which is less favourable to the party (usually the seller) wishing to rely upon the clause.
The court will not, however, read an ambiguity into clear words by giving them a strained or tortured meaning.
Clear and plain words will be given their clear meaning.
One aspect of the contra proferentem rule is that, if there is more than one possible head of liability one of which is liability for negligence, then an exemption clause will not be interpreted as excluding liability for negligence unless it does so in clear terms.
For example a manufacturer who sells his goods to a wholesaler may in the contract exclude his liability in respect of defects in the goods.
This clause might well be interpreted as excluding the manufacturer's liability to the wholesaler under the implied terms as to merchantable quality and fitness for purpose.
In the absence of clear words, however, it will not be interpreted as excluding the manufacturer's liability to the wholesaler for negligence (i.e. under the principle in Donoghue v. Stevenson, see paragraph 9–04 above).
On the other hand the Ailsa Craig case established that the contra proferentem rule is not applied quite as rigorously in interpreting clauses which merely limit the defendant's (usually the seller's) liability, as it is to clauses which claim to exclude his liability.
In George Mitchell Ltd. v. Finney Lock Seeds Ltd. some farmers contracted to buy from some seed merchants 30lbs of Finney's ‘Late Dutch Special’ cabbage seed.
Unknown to the buyers, the sellers negligently delivered the wrong seed.
The buyers planted the seed but only leaves came up and the crop proved worthless, causing the buyers a loss of £61,000.
In defence to a claim for that loss, the sellers sought to rely upon a contractual clause limiting the sellers' liability to the cost of replacement of the seeds, i. e. the clause excluded the sellers' liability for any consequential loss arising from ‘use or failure in performance of or any defect in any seeds or plants supplied or for any other loss or damage whatsoever,’ except for the cost of replacement of the seed.
In interpreting the clause, their lordships observed that this was a limitation of liability clause and not a complete exclusion clause.
They unanimously held that on its wording it limited the sellers' liability to the cost of replacing the seed.
That was so even though the breach of  contract had been a negligent one.
That, however, did not mean that the clause necessarily gave the sellers a valid defence because the clause still had to satisfy the recent legislation on exemption clauses (see further, paragraph 10–21 below).
UNFAIR CONTRACT TERMS ACT 1977
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 is a major landmark in the development of the law of contract.
It deals with exemption clauses and it replaces and greatly extends certain provisions which were previously in the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973.
The 1973 Act was confined to exemption clauses which claimed to exclude or restrict the statutory implied terms relating to title, description, quality and sample (implied by sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act).
The 1977 Act places severe curbs upon the effectiveness of exemption clauses of many sorts.
One preliminary matter is that the 1977 Act does not deal with liability under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (explained at paragraphs 9–06 to 9–14 and 9–19 above).
The Consumer Protection Act itself provides, in sections 7 and 41(4), that such liability cannot be excluded or limited.
Two further preliminary matters must be explained.
First, the 1977 Act applies to exemption clauses and these include not only clauses which claim to exclude liability for breach of contract but also (by section 13 of the 1977 Act) those which claim:
(i)
to prevent liability from arising in the first place (e.g. ‘Seller gives no warranty as to fitness for purpose or merchantable quality’);
(ii)
to restrict liability (e.g. to a maximum amount);
(iii)
to restrict the buyer's remedies (e.g. to prevent him from rejecting the goods and to confine him to damages for breach of condition);
(iv)
to restrict the time within which a remedy may be claimed (e.g. ‘No claims to be made more than six weeks after purchase’).
The general rule is that a claim for damages for breach of contract can be brought at any time up to six years after the breach occurred.
If the claim is for personal injuries the period is reduced to three years.
A clause claiming to shorten these periods is an exemption clause;
(iv)
to make the enforcement of any remedy subject to a restrictive condition (e.g. ‘Seller accepts no liability unless the goods are first returned to him carriage paid’).
The other preliminary matter is that the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 does not tell you whether the seller is liable.
To put it another way, it does not alter the basis of liability.
It simply curbs the effectiveness of exemption clauses.
Suppose a contract of sale contains an exemption clause; suppose also that exemption clause is rendered ineffective by the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
There still remains the question ‘What, if any, is the liability of the seller?’
That question can be answered only by examining the express and implied terms of the contract, including those implied by the Sale of Goods Act.
Now let us turn to exemption clauses and the effect upon them of the provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Section 55(1) of the Sale of Goods Act was quoted at paragraph 10–01 above.
It allows an exemption clause to take effect subject to the common law rules already outlined and subject also to the provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
We shall examine first the effect of the 1977 Act upon exemption clauses which claim to exempt from liability under the statutory implied terms as to title, description, quality and sample and then its effect upon other exemption clauses.
Exemption from sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act — section 6
Section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act applies to any clause claiming to exempt the seller from any of the terms implied by sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act, i.e. the terms as to title description, merchantable quality, fitness for purpose and sample.
The effect of section 6 depends upon whether the buyer was ‘dealing as a consumer.’
Consumer deals
In any case where the buyer ‘deals as consumer’ it is impossible for the seller to exempt himself from any of his liability under sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
Section 12 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act tells us when a buyer ‘deals as consumer’;
‘(1) A party to a contract ‘deals as consumer’ in relation to another party if —;(a) he neither makes the contract in the course of a business nor holds himself out as doing so; and (b) the other party does make the contract in the course of a business; and  (c)…the goods passing under or in pursuance of the contract are of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption.
(2) But on a sale by auction or by competitive tender the buyer is not in any circumstances to be regarded as dealing as consumer.
(3) Subject to this, it is for those claiming that a party does not deal as consumer to show that he does not.’
Thus the following are not consumer deals:
(i)
The sale of goods for the purpose of resale by the purchaser to a wholesaler, retailer or distributor.
(ii)
The sale of goods for use by the purchaser in an industrial process, e.g. manufacturing.
(iii)
The sale of goods for use by the purchaser in the running of his business, e.g. a typewriter for use in a firm's office.
(iv)
The sale of goods by a private individual.
(v)
The sale of goods by auction or competitive tender.
Clearly the sale of cigarettes to a publican for the purpose of resale across the counter is not a consumer sale.
It may Lie that the sale of cigarettes for the same purpose to a working men's club is a consumer sale.
Cigarettes are a type of goods ordinarily bought for private use or consumption and it has been held (for the purpose of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968) that a private members' club is not a business, John v. Matthews (1910 D.C.), see paragraph 16 — 04 below.
The question as to whether the contract was a consumer deal arose in Rasbora Ltd. v. J.C.L.
Marine Ltd. (1977 Q.B.D.).
A contract was made between a Mr. Atkinson and J.C.L.
Marine Ltd., a Norfolk boat builder, for J.C.L.
Marine to build a boat for Mr. Atkinson.
This contract included a clause claiming to exclude the sellers' (J.C.L.
Marine's) liability for breach of the statutory implied terms as to merchantable quality and fitness for purpose.
Subsequently Rasbora Ltd., a company incorporated in Jersey, was substituted as buyer in place of Mr. Atkinson.
This was done by novation, i.e. by agreement between Mr. Atkinson, J.C.L.
Marine Ltd. and Rasbora Ltd.
A novation is an extinguishing of rights under the earlier contract and the creation of a new contract.
Rasbora Ltd. was wholly owned by Mr. Atkinson and, being a Jersey company, did not have to pay V.A.T. (valued added tax) on the boat.
Shortly after it was purchased, the boat caught fire and sank off  Dungeness.
The buyers, Rasbora Ltd., sued the sellers for breach of the implied term as to merchantable quality.
The sellers tried to rely upon the exemption clause.
The judge held that the contract originally made between Mr. Atkinson and J.C.L.
Marine was a consumer deal and that the new one made between Rasbora Ltd. and J.C.L.Marine was also a consumer deal, i.e. that the novation did not alter the consumer nature of the contract.
How was it that a limited company made a contract otherwise than in the course of its business?
His lordship pointed out that Rasbora Ltd. had been formed by Mr. Atkinson for the purpose of buying the boat and with the intention that the boat was to be used only by Mr. Atkinson and his friends; there was no intention to hire it out.
It being a consumer deal, the condition as to merchantable quality could not be excluded and the sellers were therefore liable.
It is now firmly established that a company (or indeed a partnership or sole trader) definitely can make purchases other than in the course of its business.
Where the purchase is merely incidental to the business, the purchase is not made ‘in the course of’ the business unless it is integral to the business and it will not be an integral part of the business unless the business makes purchases of that type with a degree of regularity.
This principle, first laid down in Davies v. Sumner, a trade descriptions case (see paragraph 16–07, below), applies also under the Unfair Contract Terms Act, R. & B. Customs Brokers Co.
Ltd. v. United Dominions Trust Ltd. (1988 C.A.).
In the latter case a company (whose business was shipping brokerage) bought a car for the use of its directors.
This was only the second or third time in its five years existence that the company had bought a car.
This not being a sufficient degree of regularity, the company had not bought the car ‘in the course of a business.’
The company had dealt as a consumer in buying the car.
Therefore the clause purporting to exclude the seller's liability for breach of the implied terms in section 14 of the Sale of Goods Act was ineffective.
Non-consumer deals
Where the buyer is not ‘dealing as consumer’ the effect of section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act is as follows.
It is impossible for the seller to exempt himself from liability under section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act.
It is, however, possible for the seller to be exempted from liability under sections 13 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act, but only in so far as the seller can  show that the exemption clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness, i.e. that it was a ‘fair and reasonable one to be included having regard to circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made’(section 11).
Schedule 2 provides ‘guidelines’ for the application of the reasonableness test:
‘The matters to which regard is to be had in particular…are any of the following which appear to be relevant —;(a) the strength of the bargaining positions of the parties relative to each other , taking into account (among other things) alternative means by which the customer's requirements could have been met;(b) whether the customer received an inducement to agree to the term, or in accepting it had an opportunity of entering into a similar contract with other persons, but without having to accept a similar term;(c) whether the customer knew or ought reasonably to have known of the existence of the term (having regard, among other things, to any custom of the trade and any previous course of dealing between the parties);(d) where the term excludes or restricts any relevant liability if some condition is not complied with, whether it was reasonable at the time of the contract to expect that compliance with that condition would be practic-able;(e) whether the goods were manufactured, processed or adapted to the special order of the customer.’
It would appear from paragraph (a) that a seller who has a monopoly over the supply of the kind of goods in question is unlikely to convince the court of the reasonableness of a wide exemption clause, especially if it was a large demand for the product which enabled him to insist on the clause being in the contract.
In the light of paragraph (b) the seller having a monopoly will be more likely to succeed if the buyer had been offered the chance of buying the goods, perhaps at a slightly higher price, on terms not including the exemption clause.
Obviously, if the alternative offer had involved a considerably or prohibitively higher price, that would tell against the seller.
Paragraph (c) would appear not to affect decisions in cases such as Kendall v. Lillico (see paragraph 10–07) and Cointat v. Myham (see paragraph 10–08) cases where the purchaser  chooses to buy goods for his business from a seller whose terms he has in a consistent course of dealing been apparently quite happy to accept or where the purchaser buys goods in a market in which a trade custom shows that merchants have found exclusion terms to be acceptable.
In the light of paragraph (d), a clause excluding, for example, all liability ‘other than that in respect of defects and defaults notified to the seller within three days of purchase’ would clearly not be reasonable, Green v. Cade (1978 Q.B., paragraph 10–2J below).
Paragraph (e) would be particularly relevant where the purchaser required the goods to be made or adapted from some use for which the seller did not normally supply goods.
It would seem reasonable for the seller to stipulate that he will not guarantee the goods' suitability for that purpose.
Paragraphs (a) to (e) are only guidelines and all the circumstances of the case should be taken into account.
So, for example, the scope and harshness (or otherwise) of the clause will also be relevant.
The leading case on the requirement of reasonableness arose, not under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, but under the earlier provisions of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 which were replaced by the 1977 Act.
The requirement of reasonableness under the earlier Act was different in two respects, First the onus of proof was upon the buyer to show that the exemption clause did not pass the test, whereas under the 1977 Act the onus is on the seller to show that the clause passes the test.
Secondly, under the 1973 Act the test was whether it was fair and reasonable to allow reliance upon the exemption clause, whereas under the 1977 Act the test is whether the clause was a fair and reasonable one to have been included in the contract.
Nevertheless the former test and the current test are very similar and indeed the ‘guidelines’ laid down by the two Acts are the same.
Thus the case law under the 1973 Act is likely to be a good guide as to how the courts will approach the current test.
The leading case is George Mitchell v. Finney Lock Seeds (for the facts see paragraph 10–13 above).
There the exemption clause, according to its wording limited the liability of some seed merchants (for supplying defective seed) to the cost of replacing the seed; it excluded liability for consequential loss of the buyers' crop.
These limitation terms were incorporated in all contracts between seedsmen and farmers and had been for many years.
They had not been negotiated by any representative body of farmers, such as the National Farmers' Union.
They had been introduced by  seed merchants putting them into their catalogues and invoices — and never objected to by farmers.
It was held that the exemption clause did not in the circumstances pass the test of reasonableness and that therefore their sellers could not rely upon it to limit their liability.
The relevant circumstances were that:(i) the limitation terms had nut been negotiated by any representative body;(ii) the buyers could not have discovered the error (i. e. that the wrong seed had been delivered) until after the crop was sown, whereas the sellers were in a position to have known;(iii) the buyers could not reasonably have been expected to cover such a risk (i.e. of crop failure) by insurance whereas it was possible for seedsmen to cover their liability by insurance at a modest premium which would not have put up the cost of seeds by very much;(iv) the error could not have  occurred without some negligence on the part of the sellers.
George Mitchell v. Finney Lock Seeds was different from Green v. Cade (1978 Q.B.), which had involved the sale of seed potatoes on the standard terms of the National Association of Seed Potato Merchants.
In that case one clause which on its wording excluded liability if the buyers had not given notice of any defects within three days of purchase was held to fail the reasonableness test.
Another clause, restricting the sellers' liability for a consequential loss and limiting that liability to the amount of the contract price was held to pass the reasonableness test.
The latter clause, however, had had the approval of negotiating bodies representing both potato merchants and farmers; no blame for the infection of the seed potatoes was attributable to either side; and, further, the buyers, if they had so wished, could have bought at a small extra cost, seed potatoes certified by inspectors of the Ministry of Agriculture.
Exemption from other terms of the contract — section 3
We have just considered the extent to which the Unfair Contract Terms Act allows the seller to exclude his liability under section 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
However, the contract will doubtless contain other terms, some of them expressly agreed between the parties (e.g. the date of delivery) and some of them implied (often by other sections of the Sale of Goods Act — e.g. as to the place of delivery, section 29(2)).
The Unfair Contract Terms Act does not totally prohibit the seller from exempting himself from liability for breach of these other terms.
Section 3 of that Act, however, does, in certain circumstances, render such an exemption clause subject to the  requirement of reasonableness.
This section applies if two conditions are both satisfied:
(i)
The seller's liability is ‘business liability,’ and
(ii)
In buying the goods, the buyer ‘deals as consumer’ or on the seller's written standard terms of business.’
The first of these requirements will clearly be satisfied where the seller sells the goods in the course of his business.
The meaning of ‘deals as consumer’ has already been considered (at paragraph 10–17).
The Act does not define ‘written standard terms of business.’
This expression clearly covers the situation where a seller insists that all (or a considerable proportion of) his buyers buy on the terms of his written contract, there being no variation in the terms from one buyer to another.
This would still seem to be so if most, though not all, the terms are standard — if, say, there are minor variations from one buyer to another (e.g. as to the commodity or the quantity bought or the price to be paid).
Even where the only ‘standard’ terms of the seller are those in the exemption clause itself, still a buyer whose contract includes that exemption clause could well be regarded as buying on the seller's ‘written standard terms of business.’
This will depend upon how the courts interpret the section.
Where the two conditions mentioned above are satisfied, section 3 applies and its effect is that the seller can not (section 3(2)):
‘(a) when himself in breach of contract, exclude or restrict any liability of his in respect of the breach; or (b) claim to be entitled —;(i) to render a contractual performance substantially different from that which was reasonably expected of him or (ii) in respect of the whole or any part of his contractual obligation, to render no performance at all, except in so far as the contract term [i.e. exemption clause]satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.’
There is a great deal of room for the courts to interpret these words.
Confining ourselves to the obvious, it is clear that for paragraph (a) to apply the seller must be in breach of contract.
Clearly therefore, a maximum damages clause would be caught by it.
Three important points must be made.
First, section 3, where it applies, does not render a clause ineffective if the clause is shown to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness.
This  requirement has already been explained in relation to section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act (paragraphs 10–19 to 10–21 above).
It is exactly the same here except that the Act does not say that the ‘guidelines’ in Schedule 2 should be referred to.
Nevertheless it seems likely that similar factors will in fact be taken into account by the courts.
Secondly, an exemption clause may be partially effective if it is shown to be to some extent reasonable.
A clause might for example claim (i) to exclude liability for certain fundamental breaches of contract and (ii) to limit any damages to a maximum of £5,000.
A court might well be persuaded that the clause is reasonable as to(ii) but not as to (i).
The third point is that where an exemption clause is not invalidated (or not completely so) by section 3 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act, the buyer may still be able to defeat the exemption clause by relying on section 6, section 8 or section 2 of that Act.
Section 6 has already been considered and applies where the buyer's claim is based upon a breach by the seller of the terms implied by sections 12 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
Section 8 applies where the claim is based upon misrepresentation and will be returned to later.
Section 2 applies where the claim is based upon negligence.
Exemption from liability for negligence — section 2
In Chapter 9 we saw that a manufacturer can be liable to a consumer for any loss or damage caused by the negligence of the manufacturer or any of his employees.
This is so irrespective of whether the consumer bought the goods from the manufacturer.
A distributor or seller who was not the manufacturer (e.g. a retailer) could also be liable under the same principle if he was negligent, e.g. if he negligently failed to pass on to the customer a warning label (‘Not to be taken internally’) which he had received with a bottle of medicine.
We have also seen that manufacturer or distributor who does not supply the goods directly to the consumer can not (e.g. in a guarantee document) exclude any liability for negligence that he may have towards the consumer — see section 5 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act (paragraph 9–03 above).
What about the trader who does sell directly to the consumer?
This could be a manufacturer or, say, a retailer.
Can he exclude his liability for negligence?
Section 2 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act applies here.
Its effect is twofold.
First, it is impossible to exclude liability for death or personal injuries caused by negligence.
Secondly, it is possible to exclude or restrict liability for other loss or damage (e.g. to  property) caused by negligence, but only to the extent that the exemption clause is shown to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness.
The requirement of reasonableness is exactly the same here as it is in relation to section 3 (paragraph 10–23 above).
There are three final points about section 2. first, like sections 3 and 5, it applies only to ‘business liability.’
Secondly, where an exemption clause is not invalidated by section 2, the buyer may be able to sue the seller for breach of contract and to defeat the exemption clause by virtue of sections 6 or 3 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Thirdly, he may be able to establish a claim for product liability under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 — such liability can not be excluded (paragraph 9–06 above).
Alternatively he may lie able to sue for misrepresentation.
Exemption of liability for misrepresentation — section 8
Section 8 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act has amended section 3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967 (see paragraph 6–05 above).
The latter section, as amended, renders any exemption clause ineffective except to the extent that the clause is shown to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness.
This requirement is exactly the same here as it is in relation to section 3 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act (paragraph 10–23 above).
Business liability
Some sections (2, 3 and 5) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act apply to exemption clauses only where those clauses claim to exempt from ‘business liability.’
‘Business’ includes a profession and the activities of any government department or local or public authority,’section 14.
Thus a private householder selling his old lawn mower or even his second-hand car is free to insist on an exemption clause excluding his liability for, say, negligence.
Such a clause will be effective, subject only to the common law rules outlined earlier in this chapter.
Two sections of the Unfair Contract Terms Act apply both to business and to non-business liability, section 6 and 8.
Thus, by section 8, the private seller cannot exempt himself from liability for misrepresentation unless he can show that the exemption clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
By section 6, the position is the same if he tries to exempt himself from section 13–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
This is because it is not a consumer deal if the seller does not sell in the course of a business.
All of this does not, however, mean that if the goods  prove defective the private seller can easily be made liable for breach of the terms of sections 13–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
He is unlikely to have sold by sample; that rules out section J5.
By definition the private seller did not sell in the course of a business; that rules out the conditions in section 14 (i.e. as to merchantable quality and fitness for purpose).
Finally, provided the goods correspond with the description, there will be no liability under section 13.
Mixed exemption clauses
Suppose one exemption clause falls within more than one section of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Suppose, for example, it claims to exclude all the following liabilities of the seller: for misrepresentation, for negligence and also for breach of the terms implied by sections 12 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
Which section of the Unfair Contract Terms Act is relevant?
The answer depends upon what claim the buyer makes.
Section 8 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act is relevant to a claim for misrepresentation; section 2 to a claim for negligence; section 6 to a claim under sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act; section 3 to a claim for any other breach of contract.
Following a consumer deal in which the consumer bought a hot bottle direct from the manufacturer, the consumer may claim for damage to his bed after the bottle burst.
It is possible here that his claims (if any) against the manufacturer for misrepresentation or negligence will fail because of an exemption clause which satisfies the requirement of reasonableness (imposed by sections 8 and 2 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act).
A claim for product liability under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 will also fail unless the damage to the bed exceeds £275 in value (see paragraph 9–10 above).
A claim under section 14 of the Sale Goods Act will, however, succeed because section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act totally prevents the exclusion from a consumer deal of the terms implied by sections 12-J5 of the Sale of Goods Act.
Contracts other than for the sale of goods
The Unfair Contract Terms Act applies to hire-purchase contracts in exactly the same way as it does to contracts of sale of goods.
This will be explained in Chapter 23.
There are certain other contracts which are not contracts of sale of goods but which are analogous contracts because the ownership of goods passes under them, e.g. contracts of exchange and barter and contracts for labour and materials supplied (see Chapter 8  above).
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 applies to these analogous contracts in the same way as it applies to contract of sale of goods.
The statutory terms (as to title, description, quality and sample) implied by sections 2–5 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 are dealt with in the same way as the corresponding terms implied in contracts of sale of goods.
There is the same distinction between ‘consumer deals’ and others — the distinction having exactly the same effect.
Turning to hire contracts, it will be remembered that there are statutory implied terms as title, description, quality and sample implied by sections 6–10 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 (see paragraph 8–08 above).
The Unfair Contract Terms Act applies, with one small difference, to hire contracts as it does to contracts of sale of goods, hire purchase, barter and exchange, etc.
Thus, its effect is the same in relation to a clause claiming to exempt the supplier from liability under the terms relating to description, quality or sample.
It is impossible to exclude such liability in a consumer deal and in any non-consumer deal the clause is subject to the requirement of reasonableness.
The one difference is that in a hire contract the terms as to title and quiet possession can be excluded or restricted by an exemption clause provided that exemption clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
Finally, let us turn to the third set of terms implied by the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
These are the terms implied in a contract where the supplier has agreed to carry out a service (paragraph 8–09 above).
These are terms that: the supplier acting in the course of a business will carry out the service with reasonable care and skill (section 13) and within a reasonable time (section 14); and that the customer will pay a reasonable charge (section 15).
An exclusion clause, which purports to exclude or limit liability under these terms, is subject to the rules already outlined in this chapter, including the rules laid down in the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
In particular section 3 of that Act will apply (paragraph 10–22 above).
Thus a clause purporting to exclude or limit the supplier's liability will be subject to the requirement of reasonableness, provided the supplier's customer was either dealing as a consumer or else had contracted on the supplier's written standard terms of business.
A further explanation, however, is required in relation to the term as to reasonable care and skill implied by section 13 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
This is because a claim for a breach of that term is treated by the Unfair Contract Terms Act, section 1, as  a claim for negligence.
Thus, liability for death or personal injury arising from such a breach of contract can not be excluded or restricted at all; liability for other loss or injury arising from such a breach can be excluded only in so far as the exclusion clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness, Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, section 2 (see paragraph 10–24 above).
Criminal use of ineffective exemption clauses
At one time it was not uncommon for a retailer to display an exemption clause in his premises or include it in a written contract even though that clause was rendered totally ineffective by Act of Parliament.
The clause, though having no legal validity, would very likely mislead the consumer as to his rights.
The Unfair Contract Terms Act does not in any way prevent that practice.
However, the Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976 has been made under the Fair Trading Act 1973 (The procedure for making these orders is explained at paragraph 16–40 below).
The 1976 Order (as amended by a further order in 1978) applies to any exemption clause claiming in a consumer deal to exclude liability under sections 13-J5 of the Sale of Goods Act.
There are four aspects to the Order.
First, it makes it a criminal offence for anyone in the course of a business to display at a place where consumer deals are likely to be made (e.g. at a shop or garage) a notice of an exemption clause which is void by virtue of section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Secondly, it is similarly an offence for someone in the course of a business to publish such a notice in any advertisement (or catalogue or circular) or to supply goods bearing any such notice.
Thirdly, it is an offence for someone in the course of a business to furnish the consumer with a written contract (or other written document) containing such a notice.
Fourthly, it is an offence for someone in the course of a business to supply goods bearing any statement about the seller's liability in respect of description, quality or fitness for purpose unless the statement also makes it clear that the statement does not affect the statutory rights of the consumer.
The Order applies only to clauses rendered void by section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Section 6, however, does not render a clause void unless the clause, properly interpreted, purports to exclude or limit liability under sections 13–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
Thus whereas an ambiguous clause, such as‘bought as seen,’ might be understood by a buyer to exclude  such liability, it might equally well, as a matter of correct legal interpretation, be held not to have that effect.
If so, the clause is not caught by the 1976 Order, Cavendish Woodhouse Ltd. v. Manley (1984 D.C.).
Though of no legal effect, it can be used, apparently with impunity, to mislead a buyer about his rights.
The Order applies only to exemption clauses relating to ‘consumer deals’ and only to exemption clauses affected by section 6 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Thus a manufacturer commits no offence by including on the goods he supplies to his wholesaler a notice which reads ‘The manufacturer accepts no liability in respect of death or personal injuries arising from negligence.’
Nor will the wholesaler commit any offence in supplying the goods thus labelled to the retailer, nor the retailer in similarly supplying them to the consumer.
No offence is committed even though this notice will have no effect (see section 5 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act, paragraph 9–03 above).
It should be noted that if any of these ineffective exclusion clauses are included in an advertisement, the trader responsible will expose himself to the risk of proceedings against him under the Control of Misleading Advertisements Regulations 1988 (see paragraph 16 — 37, below).
DELIVERY AND PAYMENT
THE parties can make what agreement they wish about the time, place and manner of delivery and payment.
What follows is an explanation of the rights and duties between the seller and buyer when they have not agreed anything different in their contract.
Concurrent conditions
Section 28 provides:
‘Unless otherwise agreed, delivery of the goods and payment of the price are concurrent conditions….’
Thus, although section 49 states that the seller can sue for the price in certain circumstances (see Chapter 12), he will nevertheless not be able to do so unless he is also ready and willing to deliver the goods.
Equally the buyer will not be able to sue for non-delivery unless he was ready and willing to pay or else it had been agreed that he could have credit.
The rule that delivery and payment are concurrent conditions ties in with the unpaid seller's lien (see Chapter 12) which entitles him in the absence of contrary agreement to retain the goods until payment.
DELIVERY
Delivery is the voluntary transfer of possession from one person to another, section 61.
Delivery may be achieved in one of several ways.
The seller may physically hand over the goods.
He may hand over the means of control of the goods, e.g. the key to the premises where they are housed.
He may, where the goods are at the time of the sale in the possession of a third party (e.g. at a warehouse), instruct the third party to hold the goods to the order of the buyer.
In that case, delivery occurs when the third party attorns, i.e. acknowledges to the buyer that he holds the goods on his behalf, section 29(4).
Delivery can be made in an appropriate case by the transfer of a document, or documents, of title, as in c.i.f. contracts (see paragraph 3-.25).
Sometimes there could be a confusion between the last two methods of delivery.
For example, X could own a cargo in course of transit which is therefore in the hands of a third party, the carrier.
If X sells it by dealing with the documents of title, then delivery occurs when he transfers the bill of lading to the buyer, irrespective of whether the carrier attorns, section 29(4).
Place of delivery
Section 29 provides:
‘(1) Whether it is for the buyer to take possession of the goods or for the seller to send them to the buyer is a question depending in each case on the contract, express or implied, between the parties.
(2) Apart from any such contract, express or implied, the place of delivery is the seller's place of business, if he has one, and if not, his residence: except that, if the contract is for the sale of specific goods, which to the knowledge of the parties when the contract is made are in some other place, then that place is the place of delivery.’
Thus, unless otherwise agreed it is not for the seller to convey the goods to the buyer but for the latter to collect them.
If the seller does agree to convey them, he must do so within a reasonable length of time, section 29(3).
If on arrival he hands them over to someone whom he reasonably assumes to be authorised to receive them, then he has carried out his duty of delivery, Galbraith and Grant v. Block (1922 K.B.).
Time of delivery
We have already seen (paragraph 7–05) that the time of delivery is normally ‘of the essence,’ i.e. if a delivery date is stipulated and the seller cannot make delivery by that date, that is a breach of condition and the buyer is entitled to repudiate the contract and sue for non-delivery.
When no time is stipulated and it is for the buyer to collect, the seller must be ready to hand over the goods (against payment) to the buyer on demand (provided made at a reasonable hour, section 29(5)) at any time after the making of the contract.
If he fails to do so, he is in breach of condition; the buyer can treat the contract as repudiated and sue for non-delivery.
Expenses
Unless otherwise agreed, the seller must bear the expenses, if  any, connected with putting the goods into a deliverable state, section 29(6).
Delivery of wrong quantity
Section 30 provides:
‘(1) Where the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods less than he contracted to sell, the buyer may reject them, but if the buyer accepts the goods so delivered he must pay for them at the contract rate.
(2) Where the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods larger than he contracted to sell, the buyer may accept the goods included in the contract and reject the rest, or he may reject the whole.
(3) Where the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods larger than he contracted to sell and the buyer accepts the whole of the goods so delivered he must pay for them at the contract rate.
(4) Where the seller delivers to the buyer the goods he contracted to sell mixed with goods of a different description not included in the contract, the buyer may accept the goods which are in accordance with the contract and reject the rest or he may reject the whole.
(5) This section is subject to any usage of trade, special agreement, or course of dealing between the parties.’
The law ignores trifling breaches of contract.
In Shipton, Anderson v. Weil Bros. (1912 K.B.) the sellers were entitled to deliver 4,950 tons.
They in fact delivered 4,950 tons 55 lb.
It was held that this did not entitle the buyers to reject the whole consignment.
A breach of the obligations to deliver the contract quantity will be a breach of the condition implied by section 13 (see paragraph 7–13).
This leads to two interesting observations.
First, section 30 constitutes an exception to the general rule in section 11(4) that the buyer cannot accept part and reject part of the goods (see paragraph 13–03).
Secondly, section 30(5) must presumably be read subject to the provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 which has drastically reduced the ability of the parties to exclude or restrict the seller's liability (see paragraphs 10–14 onwards).
Section 30(1) entitles the buyer to reject all the goods if less than the contract quantity is delivered.
Section 30(1) does not, however, apply where a contract is severable, i.e. where the parties have agreed that delivery can be made in instalments  and, on a true construction of the contract, the parties did not intend that a breach of one consignment was to justify rejection of them all, Regent v. Francesco (1981 Q.B.).
In that case a shortfall in one instalment will normally only justify a rejection of that one instalment.
It would not entitle the buyer to reject all other instalments unless the seller's breach was so serious as to amount to a repudiation of the contract (see paragraph 11–08 below).
Delivery by instalments
There are three possible situations.
(i) The parties did not agree that delivery could be by instalments.
In this case the buyer is not bound to accept delivery by instalments.
In Behrend v. Produce Brokers (1920 K.B.) part of the goods were delivered which the buyers accepted.
It was held, applying section 30, that the buyers were entitled to refuse to accept later delivery of the rest of the goods and that they should pay pro rata for those they had accepted.
(ii) The parties agreed that delivery could be by instalments but the contract is not severable.
A breach of condition (e.g. as to quality) in relation to the first instalment will entitle the buyer to repudiate the whole contract.
If however he has accepted one or more instalments, he will not be able to reject later instalments if there is a breach of condition in relation to them, section 11(4) (unless he can bring himself within section 30 (above)).
(iii) The parties agreed that delivery could be made by instalments (either on specified dates or ‘as required’) and the contract is severable (divisible).
The contract is severable if, on its true construction, the parties did not intend that a breach as to one consignment would justify rejection of all the consign-ments.
If the parties had agreed that each consignment was to be separately paid for, the court will normally construe the contract as severable.
That, however, is not an essential requirement of a severable contract.
In the case of a severable contract, acceptance of one or more instalments does not preclude rejection of later instalments for breach of condition, section 11(4).
In Jackson v. Rotax Motor and Cycle Co. (1910 C.A.) the buyer accepted as satisfactory the first delivery of motor horns but claimed to reject the later deliveries because they were not of merchantable quality.
It was held that he was entitled to do this.
A more difficult question in relation to severable contracts is whether a breach of condition in relation to one or more  instalments entitles the innocent party to regard the whole contract as repudiated or whether it is a severable breach confined to the instalments in question.
It is a question of fact in each case depending upon the circumstances, section 31(2).
Maple Flock Co. v. Universal Furniture Products (Wembley)(1933 C.A.) concerned a severable contract for the sale of 100 tons of flock by instalments.
The first 15 instalments were satisfactory, the sixteenth was defective, and there were four or more satisfactory deliveries.
The buyers claimed to regard the whole contract as repudiated.
It was held that they could not.
The court said that whether the breach was a repudiatory one depended on two factors,(i) the ratio the breach bore quantitatively to the whole contract (ii) the likelihood of the breach being repeated in later instalments.
On neither factor did the breach appear serious in this case.
Sometimes the contract includes a clause such as‘each instalment to be considered as a separate contract.’
This has little effect and the courts will still regard the contract as one contract (albeit a severable one) and therefore it is possible for a sufficiently serious breach to be a repudiation of the whole contract, Smyth (Ross) v. Bailey (1940 H.L.)
The problem of classifying the contract as either non-severable (i.e. (ii) above) or severable (i.e. (iii) above) arose in Rosenthal v. Esmail (1965 H.L.).
Under a c.i.f. contract which provided ‘each shipment to be regarded as a separate contract,’ the sellers had an option whether to send separate shipments or to send all the goods by one shipment.
They chose the latter course but they sent to the buyer separate shipping documents in respect of two different lots in the one ship.
The buyer claimed that the contract was severable, accepted one lot and rejected the other for breach of condition.
The House of Lords held that since the sellers had opted for the one shipment, albeit with separate documents, the contract was not severable.
Therefore the buyers having accepted part of the goods could not reject the rest, section 11.
Delivery to a carrier
Where the seller is authorised or required to send the goods to the buyer, delivery to a carrier for that purpose will normally constitute complete performance of the seller's duty of delivery, section 32(1).
The seller must, unless otherwise authorised, make the best reasonably possible contract with the carrier on behalf of the buyer, section 32(2).
In Thomas Young v. Hobson (1949 C.A.) the seller made a contract for the goods to be carried at ‘owner's risk.’
The carrier would have agreed to carry them for the same price at the carrier's risk.
The goods were damaged in transit and it was held that the seller was in breach of his duty under section 32(2) and the buyer was entitled to reject the goods.
(As to risk generally during transit, see paragraphs 3–35 and 7–18.)
Where customary, the seller must give sufficient information to the buyer to enable him to insure the goods whilst in transit by sea, section 32(3).
PAYMENT
Normally, in the absence of contrary agreement, the buyer need not make payment until delivery is made, section 28.
However, where the goods have been destroyed or stolen at a time when they were at the buyer's risk (see paragraph 3–36), then of course he is under a duty to pay, even though delivery is impossible.
Apart from that situation, if the buyer has paid and the goods are not delivered, he is entitled to recover the price because he has received no consideration for it, section 54.
Two matters are dealt with elsewhere, the amount of the price (see paragraphs 2–12 to 2–17) and when the seller can sue for the price (see paragraph 12–02).
SELLER'S REMEDIES
A seller has two sets of remedies available, personal remedies enforceable by taking action in the courts against the buyer and remedies exercisable against the goods.
PERSONAL REMEDIES
The seller has two possible actions; for the price or for damages for non-acceptance.
The price
Section 49 allows the seller to maintain an action for the price where both the following conditions are fulfilled:
(i)
The buyer has wrongfully refused or neglected to pay according to the terms of the contract.
(ii)
Either property has passed to the buyer or ‘the price is payable on a day certain irrespective of delivery.’
The buyer's refusal or failure to pay must have been wrongful.
It is not wrongful if he has rightfully rejected the goods for breach of condition.
Similarly, he is entitled (subject to contrary agreement) to refuse to pay except in exchange for taking delivery of the goods, section 28.
Therefore the seller will be unable to sue for the price unless, at the time of the neglect or refusal to pay, he was ready and willing to deliver.
Again, if the seller has granted the buyer credit, he cannot sue for the price before the end of the agreed credit period; until then the buyer's failure to pay is not wrongful.
In relation to the second requirement, if a particular date has been stipulated for payment then an action can he maintained after that date irrespective of whether property has passed to the buyer.
When no ‘day certain’ has been agreed, the seller will succeed only if property has passed to the buyer.
A ‘day certain’ may be a fixed date or could be fixed b reference to the seller's performance of his part of the contract.
Different days certain may be agreed for the payment of different instalments of the price.
In Workman Clark v. Lloyd Brazileno  (1908 C.A.) the seller was building a vessel for the buyer and the price was to be paid by instalments on dates to be determined by reference to the stage of construction.
It was held that at the relevant stages the seller could sue for the instalments then due.
In addition to an action for the price, the seller may have a claim under section 37 which provides:
‘(1) When the seller is ready and willing to deliver the goods, and requests the buyer to take delivery, and the buyer does not within a reasonable time after such request take delivery of the goods, he is liable to the seller for any loss occasioned by his neglect or refusal to take delivery, and also for a reasonable charge for the care and custody of the goods.
(2) Nothing in this section affects the rights of the seller where the neglect or refusal of the buyer to take delivery amounts to a repudiation of the contract.’
This might apply, if, for example, the goods had perished or contaminated others.
Damages for non-acceptance
If the seller cannot maintain an action under section 49, he may still have a claim for damages which he can bring under section 50 ‘where the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to accept and pay for the goods.’
The measure of damages is considered in Chapter 14.
Usually damages will be much less than the price and the seller also has the inconvenience of having to find another buyer.
REMEDIES AGAINST THE GOODS
There are three possible remedies against the goods — lien, stoppage in transit and resale.
They are available to an ‘unpaid seller.’
By section 38 a seller is an ‘unpaid seller,’
‘(a) when the whole of the price has not been paid or tendered;(b) when a bill of exchange or other negotiable instrument has been received as conditional payment, and the condition on which it was received has not been fulfilled by reason of the dishonour of the instrument or otherwise.’
A cheque is a bill of exchange.
Thus a seller who in the normal way has accepted a cheque which is later dishonoured, is an unpaid seller.
Lien
The unpaid seller has a right in the circumstances provided by section 41(1) to retain possession of the goods until he is paid or payment is tendered to him.
As a matter of strict terminology, this right is called a ‘lien’ if property has passed to the buyer and a ‘right of retention’if property is still with the seller, section 39(2).
This right complements the rule in section 28 that, in the absence of contrary agreement, payment and delivery are concurrent conditions.
By section 41(1) the right exists in each of the following circumstances:
‘(a) where the goods have been sold without any stipulation as to credit;(b) where the goods have been sold on credit, but the term of credit has expired;(c) where the buyer becomes insolvent.’
Obviously, agreement by the seller to allow credit is agreement contrary to the rule in section 28.
In such circumstances the seller is not entitled to refuse delivery unless the agreed period has already expired.
Usually by that time, delivery will already have been made, thus depriving the seller of his lien.
Section 41(1) (c) represents an exception to the rule that the seller has no lien during an agreed period of credit.
In spite of having agreed to grant credit, the seller does have a lien if, before the seller relinquishes possession, the buyer becomes insolvent.
A person is insolvent (whether or not he is bankrupt)‘if he has either ceased to pay his debts in the ordinary course of business or he cannot pay his debts as they become due,’ section 61(4).
The seller's lien relates only to the price.
He is not entitled to withhold the goods until other debts owed to him by the buyer are paid.
Thus there is no lien for damages due by the buyer under section 37 (see paragraph 12–02 above).
Where delivery is made in instalments, the extent of the unpaid seller's lien depends upon whether the contract is severable.
If it is not severable, the seller can retain any part of the goods to compel payment of any part or all of the price.
Section 42 provides:
‘Where an unpaid seller has made part delivery of the goods, he may exercise his lien or right of retention on  the remainder, unless such part delivery has been made under such circumstances as to show an agreement to waive the lien or right of retention.’
A severable contract is generally one where goods are to be delivered in instalments which are to lie separately paid for (see paragraph 11–08 above).
In this case the seller has no lien over one instalment of goods to compel payment for a different (earlier) instalment.
However, if the buyer's failure to pay amounts to a repudiatory breach of contract (see paragraph 11–08 above), the seller can refuse to make further deliveries, not by virtue of any lien, but because the buyer's repudiatory breach excuses the seller from further performance of his contractual obligations.
If the reason for the buyer's failure to pay is his insolvency then the breach is a repudiatory one, although in this case the seller must deliver those instalments which have actually been paid for.
The seller's lien is lost if any of the following situations arises:
(i)
The seller ceases to be unpaid, i.e. if the whole of the price is paid or tendered to him.
(ii)
One of the terminating events in section 43 occurs.
(iii)
An innocent third party acquires title free from the lien, under one of the exceptions to the nemo dat principle.
The last two of these require explanation.
Section 43 states:
‘(1) The unpaid seller of goods loses his lien or right of retention in respect of them (a) when he delivers the goods to a carrier or other bailee or custodier for the purpose of transmission to the buyer without reserving the right of disposal of the goods;(b) when the buyer or his agent lawfully obtains possession of the goods,(c) by waiver of the lien or right of retention.’
Although delivery to a carrier without the reservation of a right of disposal terminates the unpaid seller's lien, he may still be able to recover the goods by exercising his right of stoppage in transit.
Lawful acquisition of possession by the buyer will deprive the seller of his rights of lien and stoppage and those rights will not revive even if the buyer later returns the goods to the possession of the seller.
Allowing the buyer to have access to the goods, e.g. to paint or repair, will not amount to giving him possession provided the seller retains control over the goods.
If the buyer without authority from the seller seizes  possession of the goods that is unlawful and does not destroy the seller's lien.
Waiver of his lien by the seller may take the form of first an express agreement to forego the lien, or secondly an act clearly indicating an intention to forego it, or thirdly a wrongful act inconsistent with delivery to the buyer.
Examples of the last of these are, consumption of the goods by the seller or a resale of them by the seller when he has no right to re-sell.
In these cases the buyer can lawfully bring an action for damages against the seller but the damages will be awarded only after deducting the price still owed by the buyer.
An example of the second form of waiver is assent by the seller to a sub-sale by the buyer.
To amount to a waiver it must be such an assent as to show that the seller intends to renounce his rights against the goods.
In Mordauntt v. British Oil & Cake Mills Ltd. (1910 K.B.) the seller was told of the sub-sale by the buyer only after it had been made.
It was held that the seller's acknowledgment of the existence of the sub-sale was not assent such as to defeat his lien.
In spite of the sub-sale the seller was entitled to retain possession of the goods until they were paid for.
If the buyer disposes of the goods within one of the exceptions to the nemo dat principle (see Chapter 5), the innocent sub-purchaser obtains title free from the seller's lien.
In this case the seller must surrender the goods to the sub-purchaser and will be reduced to pursuing his personal remedies against the buyer.
Most of the exceptions to the nemo dat principle apply only if the goods are disposed of by someone in possession of them and if the buyer is lawfully in possession of the goods the seller's lien is lost anyway (section 43(1) (b)).
The exceptions may, however, be relevant where the buyer has unlawfully obtained possession.
Further, certain exceptions can apply where the buyer has possession only of documents of title.
The seller can lose his lien by virtue of one of these.
The provisions of section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 9 of the Factors Act have already been considered (see paragraph 5–32 above).
However, there is a further provision by virtue of which an innocent sub-purchaser may acquire title free from the seller's lien, section 47.
It reads:
‘(1) Subject to this Act, the unpaid seller's right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit is not affected by any sale, or other disposition of the goods which the buyer may have made, unless the seller has assented to it.
(2) Where a document of title to goods has been lawfully transferred to any person as buyer or owner of the goods, and that person transfers the document to a person who takes it in good faith and for valuable consideration, then —;(a) if the last-mentioned transfer was by way of sale the unpaid seller's right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit is defeated; and (b) if the last-mentioned transfer was made by way of pledge or other disposition for value, the unpaid seller's right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit can only be exercised subject to the rights of the transferee.’
The provision in subsection (2) was applied in Ant.
Jurgens Margarinefabrieken v. Louis Dreyfus & Co. (1914 K.B.).
Some mowra seed was sold.
The buyers paid by cheque and the sellers gave the buyers a delivery order which the buyers endorsed and transferred to a sub-purchaser.
The cheque was dishonoured and the sellers claimed to have a lien over the mowra seed which was still in their possession.
It was held that since all the requirements of subsection (2) were fulfilled, the seller's lien was defeated.
Subsection (2) is clearly an exception to the nemo dat principle, since the buyers were able to confer upon the sub-purchaser a title better than that which the buyers had themselves, namely, a title free from the sellers’ lien and which therefore gave to the sub-purchaser the right to immediate possession.
In the last mentioned case the delivery order transferred by the buyers to the sub-purchaser was the same document as that which has been transferred to the buyers by the sellers.
If, instead of transferring the same document, the buyers had transferred a different one, then section 47(2) would not have applied.
This was held by Salmon J. in Mount v. Jay & Jay Ltd. (1959 Q.B.) where the buyers wrote their own delivery order which they sent off to the sub-purchaser.
His Lordship thought, however, that section 25 applied to defeat the sellers' lien (see paragraph 5–37 above).
Nevertheless he did not base his decision upon section 25, but held that the sellers' lien was defeated because the sellers, who knew in advance of the sub-sale, had assented to it in a way that indicated their intention to forego the lien.
Stoppage in transit
Section 44 provides that the seller can resume possession of  the goods and retain them until payment or tender of the price to him, if two conditions are both fulfilled:
(i)
The buyer has become insolvent.
(ii)
The goods are ‘in course of transit.’
The meaning of ‘insolvent’ has already been considered when dealing with the seller's lien.
Section 45 is a long section dealing with the ‘course of transit.’
Broadly, goods are in course of transit from the time that they are delivered to an independent middleman for the purpose of transmission to the buyer, until the time that the buyer actually obtains or is entitled to obtain possession.
The carrier will of course be paid for his service by the buyer or seller.
Apart from that, however, he must be independent.
If, for example, the buyer sends his own lorry driven by one of his own employees to collect the goods, then the goods, once loaded onto the lorry, are not in the course of transit but are in the buyer's possession.
The course of transit ends:
(i)
When the buyer obtains delivery, or
(ii)
When the carrier acknowledges that he holds for and on behalf of the buyer, e.g. by accepting and acting upon the buyer's instructions not to convey the goods as far as their original destination or to convey them to a further destination, or
(iii)
When the carrier wrongfully refuses to deliver the goods to the buyer.
Part delivery to the buyer does not prevent the remainder being stopped in transit unless the part delivery is made under such circumstances as to show an agreement to give up possession of the whole of the goods.
Section 46 deals with how stoppage in transit may be effected, by the seller either taking actual possession of the goods or giving notice of his claim to the carrier.
The carrier is under a duty to comply with the seller's instructions as to redelivery, although the seller must bear the expenses involved.
The seller can give his instructions to the person in actual possession of the goods, but it may be difficult for him to discover who that is, if, for example , the goods are on the railways.
If, as is more likely, the seller gives his instruction to that person's employer or principal, he must allow reasonable time for the instructions to be communicated to the person in actual possession before delivery is made to the buyer.
With one exception, the right of stoppage in transit is lost in the same circumstances as is the seller's lien.
It can therefore be lost by waiver or the operation of section 47(2), etc.
The exception is of course that delivery to a carrier without the reservation of a right of disposal will terminate the seller's lien whereas it marks the commencement of the ‘course of transit.’
Resale
Section 48 governs the right of the unpaid seller to re-sell the goods.
Section 48(1) reads:
‘(1) Subject to this section, a contract of sale is not rescinded by the mere exercise by an unpaid seller of his right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit.’
Since the contract is not rescinded by the seller exercising his rights of lien or stoppage, the seller's obligations under the contract remain, including his obligation to deliver the goods against payment of the price.
Thus lie has no right to re-sell the goods other than that allowed him by later subsections of section 48.
In fact sections 48(3) and (4) allow him quite generous rights of resale:
‘(3) Where the goods are of a perishable nature, or where the unpaid seller gives notice to the buyer of his intention to resell, and the buyer does not within a reasonable time pay or tender the price, the unpaid seller may re-sell the goods and recover from the original buyer damages for any loss occasioned by his breach of contract.
(4) Where the seller expressly reserves the right of resale in case the buyer should make default, and on the buyer making default, re-sells the goods, the original contract of sale is rescinded, but without prejudice to any claim the seller may have for damages.’
When the seller exercises his right of resale — whether under subsection (3) or under subsection (4), the contract with the first buyer is thereby rescinded.
The effect of rescission is that property (title), if it had passed to the buyer, reverts to the seller.
Thus, on exercising his right of resale, the seller re-sells as owner.
Since he re-sells as owner it follows that he can keep any profit he makes by re-selling at a higher price than the original buyer had agreed to pay.
That is in addition to keeping any deposit he obtained from the original buyer (see paragraph 2–17 above).
In the more likely event that the seller makes a loss on the resale, he can claim that loss from the original buyer  as damages together with any other damage caused to him by the buyer's failure to pay.
Ward v. Bignall (1967 C.A.) concerned a contract for the sale of two cars for £850.
After paying a deposit of £25 the buyer refused to pay the rest.
The seller informed the buyer in writing that, if he did not pay the balance by a given date, the seller would try to re-sell the cars.
The buyer still did not pay.
The seller sold one car for £350 but failed to find a purchaser for the other.
He brought a claim against the original buyer for the balance of the purchase price (£475) and advertising expenses (£22 10s.).
It was held that the seller could not recover any of the price since the buyer was no longer the owner of either of the cars, the ownership having reverted to the seller on the resale.
The seller was entitled to damages.
The remaining car being worth £450, the seller's loss on the resale was £850 minus (£450 plus £350) equals £50.
From that figure was deducted the amount (£25) of the deposit paid by the original buyer.
The seller was also entitled to his reasonable advertising expenses for the resale, i.e. £22 10s.
Therefore the damages awarded to him totalled £47 10s.
It is of course possible for the unpaid seller to re-sell the goods in circumstances where he has no right to do so.
If he does, he will confer good title on the new purchaser provided the resale falls within one of the exceptions to the nemo dat principle.
One particular exception which may well apply is that contained in sections 8 of the Factors Act and 24 of the Sale of Goods Act.
This exception applies where the seller continues or is in possession of the goods or documents of title and subsequently delivers them to a new innocent purchaser.
It was considered in paragraph 5–27 above.
A further exception is to be found in section 48(2) of the Sale of Goods Act:
‘(2) Where an unpaid seller who has exercised his right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit re-sells the goods, the buyer acquires a good title to them as against the original buyer.’
This provision can apply in much the same circumstances as section 24, namely where someone who has sold goods to one person then later re-sells them to another.
However, for the subsequent purchaser to acquire good title under this provision there are different requirements to be fulfilled:
(i)
The seller must have been ‘unpaid’ by the first buyer.
(ii)
He must also have exercised his right of lien or retention or stoppage in transit.
(iii)
He must ‘sell’ the goods.
Thus someone taking only a pledge cannot acquire good title by virtue of this provision.
Unlike section 24, section 48(2) has no requirement that there be a delivery to the second purchaser and no requirement that the latter should be bona fide.
Finally it should be noted that if the seller does re-sell the goods and confer good title upon the new purchaser, the original buyer will be able to bring an action against the seller for non-delivery provided the seller did not have the right to re-sell.
BUYER'S REMEDIES
Specific performance
SECTION 52 allows the court to make an order of specific performance against the seller in the case of a contract to deliver specific or ascertained goods.
Thus the order cannot be made in the case of a contract for the sale of unascertained goods which have not been appropriated to the contract — Re Wait (see paragraph 3–04 above).
An order for specific performance is one which requires the seller actually to deliver the goods and does not give him the option of paying damages instead.
Even in the case of specific or ascertained goods the court will not make such an order unless damages for non-delivery would not lie an adequate remedy.
This is likely to be the case only where similar goods are unobtainable elsewhere, e.g. if the goods are unique or virtually so, as in Behnke v. Bede Shipping Co. (1927 K.B.).
A German shipowner had agreed to buy for immediate use a specific ship, the City, which had engines and boilers which were practically new and satisfied German regulations.
There was only one other such ship afloat.
An order for specific performance was granted since damages would not have been an adequate remedy.
Rejection of the goods
A breach of condition by the seller gives the buyer, as well as a claim to damages, the right to reject the goods (and therefore not to have to pay for them).
The buyer can exercise this right by refusing to take delivery or informing the seller that he rejects the goods.
He need not return them to the seller, who if he wants them must come and collect them, section 36.
If the seller fails to collect goods which the buyer has rightly rejected and as a result the buyer reasonably incurs storage expenses, the buyer is entitled to claim those expenses from the seller as damages for breach of contract, Kolfor Plant Ltd. v. Tilbury Plant Ltd. (1977 Q.B.).
The buyer has no lien over rejected goods and therefore must hand them over on request even though he has not received the return of his purchase money, Lyons v. May & Baker (1923 K.B.).
He can bring an action to recover his price on the ground of a total failure of consideration.
The right of rejection is not given for an ordinary breach of warranty.
Unless the seller commits a breach of condition or commits a breach of warranty which is so serious as to deprive the buyer of substantially the whole benefit of the contract, the buyer has no right to reject the goods or recover the price (see paragraph 7–04 above).
If he unjustifiably rejects them, the seller may sue him for damages for non-acceptance or, possibly, will have an action for the price (see paragraph 13–05 and Chapter 12).
Acceptance
Faced with a breach of condition, the buyer's choice is either to reject or to accept the goods.
Apart from two exceptions, acceptance of all or part of the goods destroys any right of rejection, section 11(4).
The exceptions have already been explained in Chapter 11 (see paragraphs 11–07 and 11–08).
Note also that the Law Commission has proposed that the all or nothing rule be amended (see paragraph 7–22 above).
Simply taking delivery does not amount to acceptance.
Acceptance may take one of three forms, section 35:
(i)
If the buyer informs the seller that he has accepted the goods.
(ii)
If the buyer, takes delivery and, after having a reasonable opportunity to examine the goods to see if they comply with the contract, he does some act inconsistent with the seller being the owner of them (e.g. by selling them).
(iii)
If the buyer retains the goods for more than a reasonable length of time without informing the seller that he rejects them.
Re-selling the goods, therefore, does not constitute acceptance unless the buyer has had a reasonable opportunity of examining them.
For example, where a manufacturer sells goods in sealed containers to a distributor who re-sells them, that distributor does not thereby lose his right of rejection.
If the distributor's buyer opens them up and finds them not to comply with a condition in his contract he may reject them.
If they also do not comply with a condition in the contract between the manufacturer and distributor, the latter may also reject them.
In Lee v. York Coach and Marine (1977 Q.B.), the buyer had been supplied in March with a second hand car which was not of merchantable quality because its brakes were defective.
Because the buyer did not claim to reject the car until September, it was held that she had accepted it and that therefore she was entitled only to damages.
The buyer is allowed a ‘reasonable length of time’ before he is taken to have accepted the goods.
This means a reasonable length of time to try out the goods generally, not a reasonable length of time in which to discover any defects there might be in the goods, Bernstein v. Pamsons Motors (Golders Green) Ltd. (1986 Q.B.).
In that case the buyer of a new Nissan car had had it for less than three weeks and had made two or three short journeys in it for the purpose of trying it out, before the engine seized up because of a latent manufacturing fault.
Rougier J. held that, before the seizure the buyer had already had the car a reasonable length of time for trying it out generally.
Therefore the buyer had accepted the car and was entitled only to damages.
The Law Commissions in their 1987 report discussed the fact that the present law on acceptance means that a buyer can lose his right of rejection before he knows, or can know, that he has a right of rejection.
They recommended that this aspect should not be changed.
Waiver
The buyer may lose his right to reject by waiver of that right, section 11(2).
This may be particularly relevant where the seller is, to the buyer's knowledge, in breach of condition before the goods are delivered.
If the buyer indicates that he will nevertheless accept delivery in spite of the breach of condition, that may well amount to waiver (see Rickards v. Oppenheim, paragraph 7–05 above).
Treatment of contract as repudiated
The buyer's right to treat the contract as repudiated arises in the same circumstances as his right to reject the goods, i. e. if the seller commits a breach of condition or a breach of warranty which deprives the buyer of substantially the whole benefit of the contract (see paragraph 7–04, above).
Often the buyer will exercise both remedies at once, i.e. will reject the goods and will also indicate that he is not going on with the contract, e.g. by demanding his money back.
He can, however, reject the  goods without treating the contract as repudiated.
If he does, then the seller is at liberty, if he can do so, to re-tender goods which comply with the contract.
If the seller does so, he will be entitled to the price.
It can of course also occur that the buyer treats the contract as repudiated by the seller and yet does not reject any goods.
This could occur if the breach by the seller is a failure to deliver the goods by the contractual delivery date, or if the seller commits an anticipatory repudiation, e.g. informs the buyer that he will not be delivering or will not be delivering by the contractual delivery date.
In the circumstances where the buyer accepts the seller's breach as a repudiation of the contract, the buyer will be entitled to damages assessed as for non-delivery of the goods (see Chapter 14).
To exercise his right to treat the contract as repudiated by the seller's repudiatory breach, the buyer must inform the seller that he regards the contract as at an end.
Suppose the seller commits an anticipatory repudiation which the buyer does not accept as a repudiation.
This latter point would lie clear, for example, if the buyer responded to the anticipatory breach by indicating that due delivery was still expected.
If then the seller duly makes delivery in accordance with the contract, the buyer must accept it.
This is because an anticipatory repudiation terminates a contract only if it is accepted by the innocent party, Fercometal S.a.r.l. v. Mediterra-nean Shipping Co. (1988 H.L.).
If after having failed to accept the seller's breach as a repudiation, the buyer himself subsequently repudiates the contract, e.g. by rejecting goods which conform to the contract, he will himself be liable to the seller for damages assessed as for non-acceptance (see Chapter 14).
These principles work exactly the same vice versa.
Thus where the buyer commits an anticipatory repudiation which the seller fails to accept as terminating the contract, the seller will be liable if he himself subsequently fails to perform the contract.
Action for damages
The buyer can claim damages for non-delivery or for breach of any other condition or warranty.
This right is an addition to any right to reject the goods or to recover the purchase price.
The measure of damages will be considered in Chapter 14.
Recovery of the purchase price
Where the consideration has totally failed, the buyer can recover any payments he has already paid.
This rule clearly applies in the case of a non-delivery.
It also applies where the  buyer exercises his right to reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated because of a breach of condition.
We have also seen a surprising application of it in the case of Rowland v. Divall (see paragraph 7–08 above).
Of course, in those situations where the buyer can and does accept part and reject part of the goods (i.e. where section 30 applies or where the contract is severable, see paragraphs 11–07 and 11–08 above), he is entitled to recover any part of the price that he has paid in respect of the rejected part of the goods.
ADDITIONAL OR ALTERNATIVE DEFENDANT
Of course, the seller will be liable for his own breach of contract.
However, as an exception to the general rule, section 75 of The Consumer Credit Act 1974 allows the buyer in certain circumstances to bring against someone else (the creditor) a claim for the seller's breach of contract or misrepresentation.
Section 75 has already been noted in connection with misrepresentation (see paragraph 6–06).
It applies in exactly the same way in the case of a breach of contract by the seller.
The claim that the buyer can bring against the creditor (e.g. the credit card company when the buyer has used his credit card to buy an item for more than £100) is the same as that which he can bring against the seller.
The section only enhances the buyer's rights and therefore does not in any way reduce his right to sue the seller.
The circumstances in which section 75 applies are set out in Chapter 23.
THE MEASURE OF DAMAGES
GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES
ACCORDING to the rules in Hadley v. Baxendale (1854) damages for breach of contract can be obtained for two kinds of loss:
(i)
Any loss naturally arising from the breach;
(ii)
Any loss which at the time of making the contract the defendant could have predicted as likely (or not unlikely) to result from the breach of it.
These principles were applied in Victoria Laundry v. Newman Industries (1949 C.A.) where the laundry had agreed to buy a new (larger) boiler.
In breach of contract the boiler was delivered five months late.
For that period the buyers were therefore without its larger capacity and therefore unable to cater for a larger volume of business.
They were awarded damages for this loss of ordinary business which arose naturally from the late delivery.
They received no damages for the loss of some exceptionally lucrative government dyeing contracts which they would haze secured if the boiler had been delivered on time.
This loss did not arise naturally — in the usual course of business.
Neither was it within the second type of loss above, because the sellers were unaware of the buyers' chance of obtaining those lucrative contracts.
PRIMA FACIE RULES
The general principles just outlined apply in sale of goods, for although there are sections of the Sale of Goods Act governing the assessment of damages, those sections do little more than embody the general principles.
Non-acceptance
Section 50 provides:
‘(1) Where the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to accept and pay for the goods, the seller may maintain an action against him for damages for non-acceptance.  (2) The measure of damages is the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from the buyer's breach of contract.
(3) Where there is an available market for the goods in question the measure of damages is prima facie to be ascertained by the difference between the contract price and market or current price at the time or times when the goods ought to have been accepted, or (if no time was fixed for acceptance) at the time of the refusal to accept.’
Subsection 3 lays down the prima facie measure of damages.
The idea is that if the seller can sell the goods elsewhere at the same or a higher price than the buyer had agreed to pay, the seller has lost nothing, in which case he will receive only nominal damages.
However, if the market price is less than the contract price, the difference between the two represents the seller's loss.
The market price for these purposes is the price which in normal business dealings those goods would have fetched on the date when the buyer should have accepted the goods.
If the market price subsequently rose or fell, that is irrelevant, even if the seller actually sold at that subsequent greater or lower price.
This is clear from some words of Salmon L.J.
in Pagnan v. Corbisa (1970 C.A.) which are quoted below.
The measure of damages in subsection 3, being prima facie, does not apply where it does not represent the seller's loss.
In Thompson v. Robinson (1955 Q.B.) the purchaser ordered from a motor trader a Vanguard car and later refused to accept it.
The price of Vanguard cars did not fluctuate and the contract price and market price at the date of the buyer's breach were the same.
However, the trailer's loss was not merely nominal because he had lost a sale.
It was held that the prima facie rule was displaced and the seller received as damages his loss of profit on one transaction.
This was his loss ‘directly and naturally resulting.’
That case was distinguished in Charter v. Sullivan (1957 C.A.) where the buyer refused to accept a Hillman Mini which he had ordered from a trader.
The difference was that in Charter v. Sullivan there was a shortage of Hillman Minx cars.
The number of sales the trader could make was limited to the number of cars he could get.
Demand exceeded supply.
Thus when one purchaser backed out, the trader did not lose a sale.
He received only nominal damages.
Thompson v. Robinson was distinguished also in Lazenby Garages v. Wright (1976 C.A.) where Mr. Wright refused to  accept a second-hand car which he had previously agreed to buy for £1,670 from a car dealer.
The dealer sold it a little later to another buyer for £1,770.
The dealer claimed from Mr. Wright the loss of profit on one sale.
However, it could not be said with any certainty that because Mr. Wright had backed out, the dealer had sold one car less.
This was because second-hand cars are all unique.
It was held that since the dealer had sold the car for more than the price Mr. Wright had agreed to pay, he had suffered no damages at all.
Even when it is not displaced, the prima facie rule does not exclude any further loss which was reasonably foreseeable as a result of the buyer's breach.
So, for example, the seller will also be able to recover any reasonable extra storage expenses he has had to incur, section 37.
Non-delivery
Section 51 provides:
‘(1) Where the seller wrongfully neglects or refuses to deliver the goods to the buyer, the buyer may maintain an action against the seller for damages for non-delivery. (2) The measure of damages is the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from the seller's breach of contract.
(3) Where there is an available market for the goods in question the measure of damages is prima facie to be ascertained by the difference between the contract price and market or current price of the goods at the time or times when they ought to have been delivered, or (if no time was fixed) at the time of the refusal to deliver.’
This section is converse of section 50.
If on the date the seller fails or refuses to deliver, the buyer can buy similar goods from elsewhere at the same or a cheaper price, then prima facie the buyer's damages are only nominal.
If the market price is higher, then the prima facie measure of damages is the extra, i.e. the difference between the contract price and the market price on the date of the seller's breach.
Again, it is the market price on the date of the breach which is important.
In Pagnan v. Corbisa (1970 C.A.) Salmon L.J.
explained the prima facie rule:
‘…the innocent party is not bound to go on the market and buy or sell at the date of the breach.
Nor is he bound to gamble on the market changing in his favour.
He may wait if he chooses; and if the market turns against him this  cannot increase the liability of the party in default; similarly, if the market turns in his favour, the liability of the party in default is not diminished.’
Thus, if the buyer does not immediately buy replacement goods but does so subsequently and at a different price from the market price at the date of the breach, that is normally irrelevant.
His subsequent purchase is an ‘independent and disconnected’ transaction.
The prima facie rule would be displaced by a subsequent transaction which was not ‘independent and disconnected,’ as illustrated by the facts in Pagnan v. Corbisa.
The sellers delivered goods which did not comply with the conditions of the contract.
The buyers rejected them but, before doing so, obtained from an Italian court a sequestration order which gave them the right to detain the goods against payment of damages.
They then negotiated a new contract with the sellers whereby they bought the goods at a price considerably less than the market price — the price being depressed because of the sequestration order.
The buyers nevertheless claimed under the first contract damages based on the difference between the contract price and market price on the date of the breach.
The claim failed.
The second contract could not be ignored since it was not an ‘independent and disconnected’ transaction; the same buyer bought the same goods from the same seller.
On the facts, the benefit of the second contract price being depressed was greater than the loss caused by the breach of the first contract.
Therefore the buyers obtained no damages.
Anticipatory breach
Often a contract is to be performed in the future, i.e. delivery of the goods is to be in the future, either at a fixed date or within a reasonable length of time.
In such a case it is possible for either the seller or the buyer to commit an anticipatory breach of contract, i.e. to repudiate the contract before the time for performance.
This can be done by the seller informing the buyer that he will not deliver the goods or the buyer informing the seller that he will not accept them.
When one side commits an anticipatory breach, the other party (the innocent party) is given an option.
Either he can at once accept the anticipatory breach as a repudiation and immediately claim damages or else he can refuse to accept it as a repudiation and wait until there has been actual failure to perform the contract (as opposed to an anticipatory one).
If the innocent party adopts the latter alternative then he can claim damages if and when the actual breach (non-delivery or non-acceptance) occurs.
In that case his damages are assessed on the principles already given (sections 50 and 51 above, paragraphs 14–03 and 14–04).
Thus the measure of damages is the difference between the contract price and the market price on the date for actual performance.
Tai Hing Cotton Mill Ltd. v. Kamsing Knitting Factory (1978 P.C.) established that the same principle applies where the innocent party immediately accepts the anticipatory breach as a repudiation of the contract.
The measure of damages is still the difference between the contract and the market price.
The relevant market price is still that prevailing on the date for actual performance and not that prevailing on the earlier date of the anticipatory breach.
This is so irrespective of whether the contract had a fixed future date for delivery or whether delivery was to be within a reasonable length of time.
Consider an example.
On May 1, B agrees to buy from S 50 tons of cob nuts at £100-per ton, delivery to be on December 1.
On June 1, when the market price of cob nuts is £101 per ton S informs B that S will not supply the nuts.
B may refuse to accept that as a repudiation by S. In that case B will be able to sue for damages for non-delivery if on December 1 S does not deliver.
The market price of cob nuts on December 1 is £110 per ton.
Thus B is entitled to the market price (£110 × 50) less the contract price (£100 × 50) = £500.
Suppose that B had in June accepted S's repudiation of the contract.
Then the assessment of B's damages would be on the same basis and B would similarly be entitled to £500.
There are just two qualifications to this last point, i.e. which apply where the innocent party immediately accepts the repudiation.
First, if B's claim for damages comes to trial before December 1 (i.e. before the actual date of delivery), the court must determine the market price on that future date as best it can, Melachrino v. Nickoll and Knight (1920 K.B.).
This will often be little more than guess work.
The second qualification is that an innocent party who accepts an anticipatory breach becomes under a duty to mitigate (minimise) his loss.
Thus if B accepts S's repudiation in June and he sees the market price begin to rise, he has a reasonable opportunity to minimise his loss by buying replacement nuts immediately at less than £110 per ton.
In that case the court may well reduce his damages from the £500.
It will do so irrespective of whether the buyer actually used the opportunity to buy replacement nuts.
Suppose now, however, that B, having accepted S's repudiation in June, sees the market beginning to rise rapidly in July and, in an attempt to minimise his loss before the market rises further, buys replacement goods on July 15 at £115 per ton —; only to discover that by the delivery date under the original contract (December 1) the market price has fallen back to £110 per ton.
In that case the court has a discretion (in order to avoid injustice) to award damages at the higher level of £750 (i.e. by reference to the market price at July 15 instead of the later contract delivery date of December 1), Johnson v. Agnew (1979 H.L.).
The duty to mitigate does not apply where the innocent party refuses to accept the anticipatory breach as a repudiation.
Because he is waiting to see if the anticipatory breach turns into non-performance in fact, he is not expected to buy any replacement goods until the date of actual non-performance.
Now suppose that the buyer commits a wrongful anticipatory repudiation of the contract and the seller immediately accepts that repudiation as terminating the contract and sues for damages.
Clearly the seller does not have to remain ready and willing to deliver.
The buyer is the only party to have broken the contract and the seller will be entitled to damages from him according to the principles just outlined.
What, however, is the position if, at the time of the buyer's wrongful anticipatory repudiation, the seller had already been disabled from completing the essential terms of the contract (e.g. the seller's factory making the goods was already so far behind in production that the seller could not possibly have delivered the goods by the contractual delivery date).
In that case the seller's damages would be reduced from the prima facie level in section 50, British & Benningtons v. North West Cachar Tea Co. (1923 H.L.).
To achieve a reduction, however, the burden of proof rests upon the buyer to show that the seller would have been unable to comply with the essential terms of the contract if it had not been terminated, Gill & Duffus v. Berger & Co. (1984 H.L.).
Even if the buyer were able to do that, the greatest reduction the buyer could achieve would still leave the seller entitled to nominal damages.
Late delivery
Late delivery by the seller will normally be a breach of condition (see paragraph 7–05 above).
If the buyer rejects the goods for breach of condition, his damages are assessed as m the case of non-delivery.
If it is only a breach of warranty or if  the buyer accepts the goods, the damages are prima facie assessed according to the difference between the value of the goods on the date they should have been delivered and their value (if lower) when actually delivered.
As always, the prima facie method of assessment may be displaced and damages awarded for any loss which falls within the rules in Hadley v. Baxendale, Victoria Laundry v. Newman Industries (above) is an example of this.
Breach of condition
If the buyer rejects the goods, damages are assessed as in the case of non-delivery.
If he accepts the goods, the damages are assessed as if it were a breach of warranty, section 53.
Breach of warranty
Section 53(2) and (3) provide:
‘(2) The measure of damages for breach of warranty is the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from the breach of warranty.
(3) In the case of breach of warranty of quality such loss is prima facie the difference between the value of the goods at the time of delivery to the buyer and the value they would have had if they had fulfilled the warranty.’
The prima facie rule in subsection (3) can be termed a ‘capital value’ assessment.
In fact the buyer has a choice.
He can claim either his capital loss or his loss of profit.
He cannot claim both, Cullinane v. British Rema (1953 C.A.).
In that case the sellers had warranted that a clay pulverising machine would process clay at six tons per hour.
In fact it could not do so.
The purchaser claimed under two heads, first for the capital loss and secondly for his loss of profits — the latter head being based on the difference over three years between the profits made at the machine's actual rate of output and the higher profits which would have been made at the warranted rate of output.
The Court of Appeal held that both claims could not succeed and disallowed the first (that being the smaller claim).
It was also pointed out that the buyers could have claimed loss of profits for the whole of the estimated useful life of the machine (10 years in this particular case).
In addition to a claim for capital loss or loss of profits, a claim can be made for any consequential loss which falls within the rules in Hadley v. Baxendale, i.e. loss of a type which at the time of the contract could reasonably have been predicted by  both parties as liable (i.e. not unlikely) to occur in the event of the breach.
Indeed this is sometimes the only claim made, as in Frost v. Aylesbury Dairy Co. (see paragraph 7–19 above).
It does not matter that the extent of the damage could not have been  foreseen .
Damage is recoverable provided the type of damage and the way it occurred were predictable.
In Vacwell Engineering v. B. D.H.
Chemicals (1969 Q.B.) the sellers supplied (in glass ampoules) a chemical for use in the buyer's factory.
The chemical was liable to explode on contact with water.
No warning was given of this.
Indeed, the sellers were unaware of it.
The sellers were in breach of the implied condition that the goods should be reasonably fit for their purpose.
Had the sellers known, they could have predicted that perhaps water would come into contact with the contents of an ampoule and cause an explosion.
This is what occurred in the buyer's factory but, because a number of ampoules were being washed together, the explosion was much greater than might have been predicted and the damage much more extensive.
Rees J. held that nevertheless the sellers were liable for all the dam age.
It should be apparent from this case that in assessing what damages are recoverable (i.e. within the rules in Hadley v. Baxendale) for breach of a term as to quality, one does not ask simply ‘What type of damage could the seller at the time of the contract have predicted?’
Rather one asks, ‘Had he known of the defect, what type of damage could the seller at the time of the contract reasonably have predicted?’
A similar point arose in Parsons v. Uttley Ingham (1978 C.A.).
The buyers who were pig farmers bought a 28 feet high hopper which, as the sellers knew, the buyers intended to use for the storage of pig nuts.
On delivery the ventilator on top of the hopper was shut and nobody noticed.
As a result nuts stored in the hopper became mouldy.
A large number of the buyers' pigs died from an infection, E. Coli, triggered off by eating the mouldy pig nuts.
The sellers were in breach of the implied condition that the hopper would be reasonably fit for the purpose for which the buyers required it.
Was the resulting loss of the pigs recoverable under the rules in Hadley v. Baxendale?
E. Coli was a hitherto unknown disease and also, apparently, it could not reasonably have been expected that pigs would become ill from eating mouldy pig nuts.
However, the breach of contract by the sellers consisted not of feeding mouldy pig nuts to the buyers' pigs, but of supplying an unventilated hopper.
If the sellers had known they were supplying an unventilated hopper, could they  reasonably have regarded illness in pigs as a not unlikely consequence of that breach?
It was held that they could and were therefore liable for the loss of the pigs.
It was immaterial that the seller could not have predicted either the particular illness that resulted or the severity of it.
Section 53(1) allows the buyer to set off damages due to him for breach of warranty against the price he owes the seller.
He can of course sue for any excess, section 53(4).
SUB-SALES
Non-delivery
Suppose that on December l, X agreed to buy from Y for £100 one ton of corn to be delivered on January 1.
Y does not deliver the corn and market price on January 1 is £105.
Prima facie X is entitled to £5 damages.
Suppose further that on December 15, X had agreed to sell a ton of corn to Q, delivery to be on January 1.
That sub-sale can affect X's loss.
His loss could be less than £5 if, for example, in his contract with Q the price was £104.
Alternatively, it might be greater if for example the price in Q's contract was £106 or if he himself is liable to Q for breach of contract.
Does the law take sub-sales into account?
Generally, the effect of a sub-sale is ignored and the prima facie rule prevails.
In Williams v. Agius (1914 H.L.) Williams agreed to buy from Agius a cargo of coal at 16s. 3d. per ton.
Later he agreed with a sub-purchaser to sell him a similar cargo at 19s. per ton.
Agius failed to deliver.
Williams' damages were assessed at the difference between the contract price (16s. 3d.) and the market price on the date when delivery should have been made (23s. 6d.).
In Re Hall & Pim's Arbitration (1928) the House of Lords established an exception.
The prima facie rule will be displaced and a sub-sale taken into account when the following circumstances all exist.
(i)
The first contract contemplated the creation of sub-sales — so that the seller could predict from the outset that in the event of non-delivery the buyer might suffer loss in connection with sub-sales.
(ii)
The sub-contract was for the sale, not merely of similar goods, but of the very same goods as were to lie supplied under the first contract.
(iii)
The sub-contract was not an extravagant or unusual bargain.
(iv)
The sub-contract was created before the delivery date under the first contract
If these circumstances all exist then the loss connected with the sub-sale(s) falls within the second rule in Hadley v. Baxendale.
This was the position in Re Hall & Pim's Arbitration.
On November 3 the buyers agreed to buy a cargo of wheat at 51s. 9d. per quarter.
The contract clearly referred to the possibility of sub-sales.
On November 21 the buyers made a sub-sale of the same cargo at 56s. 9d. per quarter.
On March 22, when the seller refused to deliver, the market price was 53s. 9d. per quarter.
The buyers were awarded damages assessed at 5s. per quarter and also damages which the buyers had to pay to their sub-buyer.
Late delivery
From Wertheim v. Chicoutimi Pulp Co. (1911 P.C.) it appears that sub-sales are taken into account more readily in the case of a late delivery.
The contract price was 25s. per ton.
Before the delivery date, the buyer made a sub-contract to sell similar goods at 65s. per ton.
On the date when delivery should have been made under the first contract, the market price was 70s.
When delivery was actually made, the market price had dropped to 42s. 6d.
The buyer used the goods to fulfil his sub-contract.
The Privy Council took the buyer's sub-sale into account and awarded damages assessed at only 5s. per ton.
Breach of term as to quality
Here also it appears that sub-sales are taken into account more readily than in the case of non-delivery.
The buyer can include in his claim for damages, the amount of the damages he has had to pay out to his sub-purchaser for breach of contract, see Godley v. Perry (paragraph 9–05 above).
For this, it is sufficient that the seller knew or ought to have known that the buyer bought the goods for resale.
MITIGATION
The innocent party is under a duty to take reasonable steps to mitigate (minimise) his loss.
Any loss which he could reasonably have avoided will be deducted from his damages.
His duty is to act reasonably.
So, in the case of non-delivery, the buyer is not expected to hunt the globe to find similar goods, Lesters Leather & Skin Co. v. Home & Oversees Brokers (1948 C.A.).
Similarly, a purchaser need not force defective  goods upon his sub-purchaser (even if contractually entitled to do so) if that would involve damaging his own commercial reputation, Finlay v. Kwik Hoo Tong (1928 C.A.).
Sometimes the party in default makes an offer to put things right, e.g. the seller offers to buy back defective goods.
If the offer is a reasonable one then it is likely to be reasonable to accept it.
An unreasonable refusal will be a breach of the duty to mitigate, Payzu v. Saunders (1919 C.A.).
Occasionally, albeit rarely, steps taken by the plaintiff in an attempt to minimise his loss result in fact in increasing it.
In that case the extra loss is recoverable in a claim for damages.
The defendants in Hoffberger v. Ascot International Bloodstock Bureau (1976 C.A.) had contracted to buy a mare from Mr. Hoffberger for £6,000 in October 1973 provided that on that date the mare was in foal.
When the time came the mare was in foal but they failed to buy her and finally refused to do so in December 1973.
Mr. Hoffberger was unable to sell the mare at the December 1973 sales because she was ill.
In an attempt to obtain a good price, he paid a stud fee of over £1,400 to have her covered again so that he would be able to sell her in foal at the December 1974 sales.
In fact the market fell and the mare in foal fetched only £1,085 at those sales.
Mr. Hoffberger was awarded damages of over £7,000.
This sum included all the loss and expenses he had incurred in attempting to mitigate his damages.
This was because those steps had been reasonable ones to take even though they had in the event aggravated the losses.
PENALTIES
Sometimes the contract stipulates how much is to be paid by the party in breach, e.g. ‘£300 per day for each day delivery is delayed.’
Such a clause is a liquidated damages clause and is bind-ing upon the parties provided it is not a penalty.
If it binds the parties, the stipulated amount is the amount payable and that is the case, whether the loss actually caused is greater or smaller.
It is a penalty if it was not a genuine attempt by the parties to pre-estimate the likely damages but was intended to hang in terror over one party to ensure that he carried out the contract.
Some sentences of Lord Dunedin's in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. v. New Garage Motor Co. (1915 H.L.) are particularly instructive:
‘Though the parties to a contract who use the words ‘penalty’ or ‘liquidated damages’may prima facie be  supposed to mean what they say, yet the expression used is not conclusive.
The court must find out whether the payment stipulated is in truth a penalty or liquidated damages…
It will lie held to be a penalty if the sum stipulated for is extravagant and unconscionable in amount in comparison with the greatest loss that could conceivably be proved to have followed from the breach…
There is a presumption (but no more) that it is a penalty when ‘a single lump is made payable by way of compensation, on the occurrence of one or more or all of several events, some of which may occasion serious and others but trifling damage…’
On the other hand: it is no obstacle to the sum stipulated being a genuine pre-estimate of damage, that the consequences of the breach are such as to make precise pre-estimation almost an impossibility.
On the contrary, that is just the situation when it is probable that pre-estimated damage was the true bargain between the parties.’
If it is a penalty, the clause is void and the innocent party can sue in the usual way for whatever is his actual loss.
That loss will lie calculated according to the principles outlined in the earlier parts of this chapter.
AUCTION SALES
IN most respects a purchase made at an auction constitutes an ordinary contract for the sale of goods.
Except in so far as the parties agree otherwise, the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act apply.
ADVERTISEMENTS BEFORE THE AUCTION SALE
An advertisement that an auction is to be held is not an offer or a promise that the auction will lie held.
There is no liability if the auction is not in fact held.
In Harris v. Nickerson (1873) the plaintiff travelled to the advertised place for the auction sale which he then found to be cancelled.
It was held that he was not entitled to claim his travelling expenses from the advertiser.
It seems, however, that if the auction is in fact held, then anything advertised to be ‘without reserve’ must be sold to the highest bidder.
If it is withdrawn, then the advertiser is in breach of contract with any bidder who had come in response to the advertisement.
This was the opinion of the court in Warlow v. Harrison (1859).
SECTION 57 OF THE SALE OF GOODS ACT
Section 57 states: ‘In the case of a sale by auction —;(1) Where goods are put up for sale by auction in lots, each lot is prima facie deemed to be the subject of a separate contract of sale.
(2) A sale by auction is complete when the auctioneer announces its completion by the fall of the hammer, or in other customary manner; and until such announcement is made any bidder may retract his hid.
(3) A sale by auction may be notified to be subject to a reserve or upset price, and a right to bid may also be reserved expressly by or on behalf of the seller.
(4) Where a sale by auction is not notified to be subject to a right to bid on behalf of the seller, it is not lawful for  the seller to bid himself or to employ any person to bid at such a sale, or for the auctioneer knowingly to take any bid from the seller or any such person.
(5) A sale contravening subsection (4) above may be treated as fraudulent by the buyer.
(6) Where, in respect of a sale by auction, a right to bid is expressly reserved (but not otherwise) the seller or any one person on his behalf may bid at the auction.’
 With reference to subsections 5(4) and (5) the consequence of the buyer being allowed to treat the sale as fraudulent is that he can bring an action for damages and that he can rescind the contract, i.e. refuse to pay or take delivery or, if he has paid, demand the return of the price.
RESERVE PRICE
A problem arises if the seller (i.e. the person who puts the goods into the sale) imposes a reserve price and the auctioneer nevertheless accepts a bid for less than the reserve price.
If the reserve price had been notified as allowed by section 57(3), then the bidder has no claim against the seller or auctioneer who will not be liable for refusing to deliver the goods, McManus v. Fortescue (1907 C.A.).
If the reserve price had not been notified and the bidder had no reason to know of it, then the bidder will have an action against the auctioneer for breach of the auctioneer's warranty of authority.
That is the implied warranty given by any agent (whether auctioneer or not) that he is acting within his principal's (in this case the seller's) authority.
EXEMPTION CLAUSES
The principles that apply are those applicable to sale of goods contracts generally.
An illustration is provided by Dennant v. Skinner (see paragraph 3–08 above) where, after the goods had been knocked down to him, the buyer was persuaded to sign a statement that property was not to pass until his cheque was paid.
The signed statement was held to be ineffective since it was given after the contract was made and therefore could not incorporate terms into the contract.
The usual method of incorporation is for the exemption terms to be set out in printed conditions which are commonly attached to or referred to in the auction catalogue and copies of which are usually displayed on the premises.
Reference was made in Chapters 7 and 10 to the very important terms as to title, description, quality and sample which are implied by sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act.
A sale by auction will not in any circumstances be a consumer deal.
Therefore any contractual clause exempting from the provisions of sections 13–15 will be effective provided it is shown to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness in the Unfair Contract Terms Act (see paragraph 10–14 onwards).
POSITION OF THE AUCTIONEER
An auctioneer is agent to sell goods on behalf of their owner.
In Chelmsford Auctions v. Poole (1973 C.A.) Lord Denning M.R. explained that on a sale by auction there are three contracts.
They are:
(i)
Between the owner (vendor) and the highest bidder (purchaser).
(ii)
Between the owner (vendor) and the auctioneer.
(iii)
Between the auctioneer and the highest bidder (purchaser).
The first of these is a simple contract of sale to which the auctioneer is no party.
The auctioneer's rights and obligations arise under the other two contracts.
Contract between auctioneer and owner (vendor)
Of this contract Lord Denning said,
‘The understanding is that the auctioneer should not part with possession of them (the goods) to the purchaser except against payment of the price; or if the auctioneer should part with them without receiving payment, he is responsible to the vendor for the price….
The auctioneer is given as against the vendor, a lien on the proceeds for his commission and charges.’
This last means that the auctioneer when lie receives payment from the purchaser can deduct his commission charges before passing on the money to the vendor.
Chelmsford Auctions v. Poole involved the sale of a car which the auctioneers knocked down to the purchaser for £57.
The purchaser paid an immediate deposit of £7.
The auctioneers retained possession of the car.
The auctioneers, without waiting for further payment from the purchaser, paid to the vendor the full amount of the price less their commission charges (£3.50).
This deduction was  quite proper.
Subsequently the auctioneers sued the purchaser for the outstanding balance of the price.
The terms of the contract between the auctioneer and the vendor can of course be varied by contrary agreement (i. e. usually by the printed auction conditions).
Conflict between auctioneer and highest bidder (purchaser)
In the absence of contrary agreement, the common law implies the following terms into the contract:
(i)
a warranty by the auctioneer that he has authority to sell,
(ii)
a warranty by the auctioneer that he will give the purchaser possession of the goods against the price paid into his hands,
(iii)
a warranty by the auctioneer that the possession given to the purchaser will be undisturbed by the vendor or by himself,
(iv)
a warranty that he knows of no defect in the vendor's title.
The auctioneer, however, does not warrant the vendor's title in the case of a sale of specific goods (or unascertained goods out of a specific bulk) which the purchaser knows do not belong to the auctioneer.
In Benton v. Campbell, Parker Co. (1925 K.B.) the auctioneer knocked down the car to the highest bidder.
It turned out that the person who put the car into the auction (the vendor) was not the owner.
It was held that the auctioneer was not liable to the purchaser.
(The purchaser could, of course, have brought an action against the vendor under section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act.)
As well as giving the implied warranties listed above, the auctioneer has certain rights at common law.
He has a special property in the goods, which gives him a lien over the goods until the whole of the price is paid or tendered.
In Chelmsford Auctions v. Poole it was held that he also had the right personally to sue the purchaser for the price.
Lord Denning further pointed out.
‘…the purchaser cannot avoid his liability to the auctioneer by paying the vendor direct without telling the auctioneer.
If he does so, the auctioneer can make the purchaser pay the full price again, even though it means that the purchaser pays twice over.’
It should be  emphasised that these rights and obligations can be varied by the auction conditions.
AUCTIONS (BIDDING AGREEMENTS) ACTS 1927–69
These Acts are aimed at preventing auction rings.
A ring is an arrangement whereby several dealers all of whom are interested I in a given item agree not to compete in outbidding each other at the public auction but instead to allow one of their number to buy it as cheaply as possible.
The idea is that they subsequently hold their own private auction amongst themselves.
Under the Acts it is a criminal offence for a dealer to offer or agree to give an inducement or reward to another for abstaining or having abstained from bidding.
If goods are sold at an auction to someone who has been a party to such an agreement to abstain from bidding, then the seller can rescind the contract.
It should be noted that these rules relate only to agreements where at least one dealer is involved and also that they do not apply in the case of an agreement to purchase the goods bona fide on a joint account, e.g. where two dealers in partnership together wish to purchase goods for their business and agree that only one of them will bid.
For the purpose of the Acts a dealer is ‘a person who in the normal course of his business attends sales by auction for the purpose of purchasing goods with a view to reselling them.’
Apart from cases where the Auctions (Bidding Agreements) Acts apply, there is nothing illegal in two potential bidders agreeing that one of them will not bid with the result that the one who does bid obtains the property more cheaply than he other wise would.
The auction sale to the one who does bid remains perfectly valid, Harrop v. Thompson (1975 Ch.D.).
MOCK AUCTIONS ACT 1961
This Act applies to auction sales where the goods include ‘any plate, plated articles, linen, china, glass, books, pictures, prints, furniture, jewellery, articles of household or personal use or ornament or any musical or scientific instrument or apparatus.’
It makes it an offence to promote or conduct or assist in the conduct of a mock auction.
The Act defines a mock auction as an auction where persons are invited to buy goods by way of competitive bidding and:
(i) any goods listed above are sold to a bidder for less than his highest bid or part of the price is repaid or credited to him (or stated to be so); or (ii) the right to bid for any goods listed above is (or is stated to be) restricted to persons who have bought or agreed to buy one or more articles; or (iii) any articles are given away or offered as gifts.
‘Competitive bidding’ includes any mode of sale whereby prospective purchasers may be enabled to compete for the purchase of articles, whether by way of increasing bids or by the offer of articles to be bid for at successively decreasing prices or otherwise.’
The defendant in Allen v. Simmons (1978 Q.B.D.) offered just one set of glasses and asked his audience who would pay him 30 pence for the set.
A number of hands went up.
The defendant then selected one of them and then sold the set to that person for one penny.
It was held that the defendant was guilty, since in raising their hands the members of the audience were engaging in competitive bidding — namely in competing against one another for the chance of getting in first by raising a hand before anyone else or for the chance of attracting the defendant's favour in selecting the lucky buyer.
TRADE DESCRIPTIONS FAIR TRADING AND ADVERTISING
THIS chapter deals with certain important pieces of legislation which protect the consumer in ways other than conferring rights upon individual consumers, the Trade Descriptions Act 1968, the Fair Trading Act 1973 and Part III of the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
These all create criminal offences; they all provide similar defences to the accused; they confer powers of enforcement upon local weights and measures authorities; and the Fair Trading Act confers powers and duties upon the Director General of Fair Trading.
There are other Acts of Parliament which also create criminal offences designed to secure consumer protection, notably Part (I of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 and the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
The former has already been considered (paragraph 9–15 above) and the latter will figure prominently in following chapters.
One other provision, the Control of Misleading Advertisements Regulations 1988, will be considered in the present chapter.
Now, the fact that a criminal offence is committed by a trader or creditor does not confer upon the consumer any right to bring an action or obtain redress in the civil courts.
Someone who commits an offence can be prosecuted in a criminal court and fined (or, sometimes, imprisoned).
However, the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, s35, enables the criminal court to give redress to the victim of the offence.
After the offender has been convicted, it can order the offender to pay compensation to the victim.
This can lie done irrespective of whether it was the victim who brought the prosecution.
In the case of magistrates' courts the amount is subject to a maximum of £2,000 on any one order.
A particularly important decision was that in R. v. Thomson Holidays (1973 C.A.) where the defendants had already been convicted of an offence under section 14 of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 by making false statements in a holiday brochure.
It was held that they could be convicted a second time and made to pay compensation to a second victim who had read a copy of the same brochure.
This  was possible because someone can be tried once and convicted once for every separate offence he commits and an offence under section 14 is committed every time someone reads the brochure — since a false statement is made every time it is communicated to someone.
Thus there were as many offences as there were readers.
This case turned upon the wording of section 14 which is set out a little further on.
However, the case is significant in showing that the court did not regard as an abuse of the court's process, a second prosecution whose principal objective was to obtain redress or a second victim.
In recent years the courts have not been making compensation orders as freely as perhaps they might.
This could be in some cases because the prosecutor (often a trading standards officer) does not always suggest it and, in other cases, because magistrates tend to refuse if the defendant disputes the fact, or the amount, of the victim's loss.
An amendment to section 35 of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 (by the Criminal Justice Act 1988, section 104) is designed to increase the number of compensation orders made.
The amendment requires the court to give reasons if it does not make a compensation order in circumstances where it has power to do so.
TRADE DESCRIPTIONS ACT 1968
This Act is a piece of the growing armour which protects the consumer.
However, it in no way enhances his contractual rights (Trade Descriptions Act 1968, s.35).
It aims to secure both that the consumer is not misled and also that he is not left in ignorance of matters of which he should lie informed.
The Act has three main sets of provisions.
First, the Department of Trade is empowered to make certain orders.
These can specify and require information to be included in advertisements or descriptions of goods; they can specify and require instructions to be supplied with the goods.
Secondly, there are offences intended to prevent anyone wrongly claiming to have supplied goods to the Queen (or to anyone else) or wrongly claiming royal approval, e.g. by displaying an emblem resembling that of the Queen's Award to Industry.
Thirdly, and most significantly, the Act creates two offences relating to misdescriptions of goods, and misleading statements about services.
Before considering these offences we must note that the Act is aimed at trade and business.
Its scope does not include the private transaction.
So, for example, the private  man who sells his car — whether privately or to a dealer —; cannot be caught by this Act.
In John v. Matthews (1970 D.C.) a packet of cigarettes, displayed in the bar of a working men's club bore the statement ‘3d. off.’
It was later sold for the full usual retail price.
This was not an offence under the Act because it does not extend to the domestic situation and a club having a private membership enjoys a private or domestic status.
Sale or supply of goods with a misleading trade description — section 1
The principal offence relating to the supply of goods is in section 1(1):
‘Any person who, in the course of a trade or business (a) applies a false trade description to any goods; or (b) supplies or offers to supply any goods to which a false trade description is applied.
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, lie guilty of an offence.’
No offence is committed under section 1 unless a false ‘trade description’ is applied.
No statement is a trade description unless that statement relates to one of the items listed in section 2.
The long list in section 2 includes such things as the quantity, composition, method of manufacture, fitness for purpose and date of manufacture of the goods.
In Cadbury v. Halliday (1975 D.C.) it was decided that the words ‘Extra value’ written on the wrapper of chocolate bar did not relate to any of the items listed in section 2 and neither could they reasonably be taken to do so.
Thus they were not a ‘trade description’ and no offence was committed.
All the items listed in section 2 were matters in which truth or falsity could be established as a matter of fact.
That could not lie said of ‘value’ which was a matter of opinion and not fact.
The courts have added a gloss to the words of section 1 —; namely that the offence is committed only if the application of the false trade description was associated with the sale or supply of goods.
If it is associated with the supply only of services, then section 14 (see below) deals with that.
In Wycombe Marsh Garages Ltd. v. Fowler (1972 D.C.) the garage conducted a M.O.T.
test on a car and stated on the notification of refusal of a certificate that the car's tyres were suffering from ‘tread lift.’
Subsequent expert examination  revealed that they had only the harmless condition known as ‘mould drip.’
It was held that the garage had not committed an offence under section 1 because the false description was not associated with the supply or sale of any goods.
If however an M.O.T.
certificate, which falsely stated the car's approxi-mate age, were shown by a car dealer to a potential buyer of the car, that false statement would be associated with the sale or supply of the car and the car dealer could be guilty, R. v. Coventry City Justices, ex. p.
Farrand (1988 D.C.).
The principle in Wycombe Marsh Garages v. Fowler was applied in Wickens Motors (Gloucester) Ltd. v. Hall (1972 D.C.) where the defendants in fact had sold a car.
Subsequently the purchaser had complained about its performance and in particular about its steering.
He was told ‘There is nothing wrong with the car.’
This occurred some 40 days after he bought the car.
The car was in fact unroadworthy and had been so when sold.
The court held that the false description 40 days later was not associated with the sale and therefore no offence was committed under section J. This does not mean that the offence can be committed only by the immediate supplier.
This fact was emphasised in Fletcher v. Budgen (1974 C.A.) where it was held that even a buyer can commit the offence.
In that case a car dealer who was negotiating to buy a car told the seller that there was no possibility of repairing it and that it was fit only to lie scrapped.
The seller then sold it to the dealer for £2.
The dealer subsequently repaired it and advertised it for sale at £136.
The court held that the section applied to people who in the course of a trade or business applied false trade descriptions and that that could include the buyer.
Apart from adding a gloss to the section, the courts have had to interpret the actual wording.
In Havering London Borough v. Stevenson (1970 D.C.) the question was whether the defendant had applied the false trade description ‘in the course of a trade or business.’
He ran a car hire business.
As was his normal practice he sold one of the hire cars when it was no more use to the business.
A false indication was given as to the mileage it had covered.
The court held that this false description was applied ‘in the course of a trade or business.’
This was so even though the business was not that of a car dealer.
Therefore the defendant was guilty.
The opposite conclusion was reached in Davies v. Sumner (1984 H.L.) where the defendant was a self-employed courier who used his car  almost exclusively in connection with his business as a courier.
He sold the car in part exchange for another vehicle (which was also for his business use).
It was held that his sale of his old car was not in the course of his business.
Where a transaction (here selling a car) is merely incidental to the business, that transaction is not made in the course of the business unless the business regularly makes transactions of that type.
The distinction between this case and Stevenson's case is that in Stevenson's case the defendant had a regular practice of selling his ex-rental cars and also in selling those cars he was selling something akin to stock-in-trade.
Davies v. Sumner is the leading authority on the meaning of the expression ‘in the course of a business’ and has been followed in a case under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, R. & B. Customs Brokers v. United Dominion Trust, where it was held that a business's buying of two or three cars over a period of five years was an insufficient degree of regularity for the latest such purchase to be regarded as made in the course of the business (see paragraph 10–18 above.)
If a defendant merely carries on a hobby, e. g. of buying, refurbishing and re-selling cars, a court might find that a transaction made in pursuance of the hobby, e.g. when he sells one of the refurbished cars, is not ‘in the course of a trade or business,’ Blackmore v. Belamy (1983 D. C.).
However, if he happens also to run a business and sells one of the cars in circumstances suggesting that he is selling it in the course of that business, then he is likely to be regarded as doing just that, Southwark London Borough v. Charlesworth (paragraph 9–20 above).
In Donnelly v. Rowlands (1971 D.C.) the question was whether there was a ‘false’ trade description.
The defendant, a milk retailer, had supplied his milk in bottles each of which was capped with a foil top bearing his name and address.
The bottles themselves were embossed variously with ‘C.W.S.,’‘Express,’‘Goodwins,’ etc.
In determining whether there is a false trade description the court looks at the situation as an ordinary purchaser would.
Lord Parker C.J. said ‘The words on the foil cap were an accurate trade description of the milk, and in their context the words on the bottle did not refer to the milk which had already been accurately described, but merely conveyed, as the fact was, that it was a bottle belonging to the person whose name was embossed.
Looked at in that way, which is the way that a member of the public would look at it, there was no falsity at all in the trade description.’
Section 1 is a powerful deterrent.
Traders do well to be careful in describing their merchandise for the section may catch not just the deliberate liar but also the honest trader who carelessly misdescribes his goods.
In Cottee v. Douglas Seaton (Used Cars) Ltd. (1972 D.C.) the court had to decide to what extent an honest man could be guilty under the section.
The case concerned a rusty old car which had belonged to one M. The structure of the car had rusted at the sides of the engine compartment and M had attempted to repair this with plastic body filler.
He made no attempt to disguise it and sold the car to a firm of car dealers.
They, however, did disguise it by smoothing it down and then repainting.
They then sold the car to W, another dealer, who, although he inspected it, remained unaware that there was anything wrong with it.
He resold it.
Did W commit an offence under section 1?
The court accepted that an alteration of the goods which causes them to tell a lie about themselves may be a false description.
It accepted that someone could be guilty even though unaware of the falsity of the description and even though the description was applied to the goods by another person.
However, W was unaware that the description had been applied to the goods at all.
The court, in deciding that W was not guilty, said that a supplier of goods does not commit an offence under section 1 if he does not know at the time of supply or offer to supply that the trade description was applied to the goods.
Nevertheless, it seems that there is an exception even to this principle — in the case of partners.
In Clode v. Barnes (1974 D.C.) one partner in selling a car applied a false trade description to it.
It was held that the other partner, who was unaware of the transaction in question, nevertheless also committed the offence in section 1 because, as he was a partner, he joined in selling the car.
Perhaps he would have fared better if he pleaded one of the defences in section 24 (see paragraphs 16–22 to 16–25 below).
R. v. Ford Motor Company (1974) caused the Court of Appeal to consider two questions —(i) Had the defendants ‘applied’ the trade description ‘new’when a car was supplied by them to a dealer for him to sell to a customer?(ii) Was the trade description ‘new’a false one in this case?
The dealer had ordered a car from the Ford Motor Company.
The word ‘new’ did not actually appear on the order form but nevertheless it was clear from the form that the car would come either from the manufacturer's stock at the factory or off  the production line.
It was held that the Ford Motor Company had applied the trade description ‘new’ since the car was supplied in response to a request containing an indirect indication of that description and, in the words of section 4(3), it was ‘reasonable to infer that the goods [were]supplied as goods corresponding to that trade description.’
The problem in relation to whether the car was new arose because, before the car was delivered to the dealer, it had suffered some damage in a collision in a compound.
The damage had been repaired before delivery to the dealer —; at a cost of £50.
Fords won their appeal, the court holding that a new car which is damaged but then repaired so as to be ‘as good as new’ can still be regarded as new.
It is clear from that case that much depends upon (a) the type of damage and (b) the quality of the repairs.
Thus a car which is so seriously damaged that its chassis is distorted could no longer be accurately described as new, even after being repaired, whereas if only the engine were damaged the car could be restored to newness by a new engine being installed.
It also seems clear from the case that a car could no longer answer the description ‘new’ once the mileage it had travelled under its own power significantly exceeded the distance from the point of manufacture to the dealer.
That view is in line with the decision in Andrews v. Singer, a civil case referred to earlier (paragraph 10–12).
The expression ‘new’ in relation to a vehicle is capable of meaning not just in new condition but also that the car has not been registered.
In R. v. Anderson (1987 C.A.) the defendant had sold as new a Nissan which, though in mint unused condition, had been registered in the retailer's name.
The practice of registering new cars in the retailer's name was not unusual when retail sales were slack.
This was because car manufacturers gave retailers bonus payments if there were sufficient new registrations during a given period.
The Court of Appeal upheld the defendant's conviction because there was ample evidence that a purchaser would understand the description ‘new’ to indicate that the vehicle had had no previous owner and no previous registered keeper.
A number of successful prosecutions have been brought against car dealers who have had cars for sale on which the odometers (mileometers) showed mileages different from those which the car had actually travelled.
Odometer readings are of course notoriously unreliable as a guide to the distance travelled by the car.
But what is to be done by the honest car  dealer, i.e. the man who wishes to avoid committing an offence?
Although there are in sections 24 and 25 some general defences (i. e. available in relation to any offence under the Act), they have not in the odometer type of case always proved a reliable line of defence.
However, the car dealer will not need to rely upon those defences if he ensures that a false trade description is not applied.
He can do that by either of two methods — by covering up the mileage reading or by displaying a notice disclaiming the accuracy of the mileage reading.
A disclaimer would not be effective if it were merely contained in the small print of a contract or if it were simply the subject of a casual remark by the salesman during negotiations.
To be effective the disclaimer has to be as bold, precise and compelling as the trade description itself (i.e. the mileage reading) and it has to be as effectively brought to the notice of any person to whom the goods might be supplied, Norman v. Bennett (1974 C.A.).
A disclaimer can be used in relation to any trade description of any goods and is not confined to odometers on motor cars.
Norman v. Bennett was in fact concerned with an inaccurate odometer reading where there was a written disclaimer which was, however, not as bold, precise and compelling as the odometer reading.
Nevertheless the defendant was acquitted, for he was on the occasion in question selling the car to another experienced car dealer who well knew from past dealings that the defendant did not guarantee the accuracy of odometer readings on his cars.
It was not the written disclaimer but the understanding between the buyer and seller which meant that the false trade description was not applied in this case.
A disclaimer is an obvious and simple device for a trader to use to avoid committing an offence.
An oral disclaimer can suffice provided that it is bold and compelling enough to neutralise the effect of the odometer reading.
Thus at a car auction a categoric and clear oral disclaimer announced by the auctioneer immediately before he accepts bids on a particular car could lie an effective disclaimer in relation to the odometer reading on that car and in that case the disclaimer would protect both the auctioneer and the vendor.
It is irrelevant on whose behalf the disclaimer was made, Zawadski v. Sleigh (1975 D.C.).
In this case, however, the defence failed because although the auctioneer had regularly made reference to the fact that he did not guarantee the mileage of any car, he had not made an oral disclaimer before accepting bids on the  particular car in question and the disclaimer in the written conditions of the auction sale had not been sufficiently brought to the attention of the buyer.
Thus the effect of the odometer reading had not been sufficiently neutralised.
Before leaving the matter of odometers and disclaimers, an important distinction must be made.
On the one hand is the car dealer who buys and displays for sale a car which someone else has previously ‘clocked,’ i. e. turned back the odometer.
This car dealer commits an offence, not under section 1(1) (a), but only under section 1(1) (b) because he has not himself applied a false trade description.
The defence of disclaimer is available to someone charged under section 1(1) (b).
On the other hand is the car dealer who ‘clocks’ the odometer himself and then displays the car for sale.
This dealer commits an offence under section 1(1) (a) and the defence of disclaimer is no defence whatsoever to someone charged under section 1(1) (a), R. v. Southwood (1987 C.A.).
In this case the Court also said the trader who ‘clocks’ the odometer to zero (or some other figure so absurdly low that a customer who reads it would not believe it) would still be guilty.
Zeroing it amounts to the application — within section 1(1) (a)— of a false trade description.
If the trailer knows that the car he wishes to sell has already been ‘clocked,’ the way for him to avoid committing an offence is, not to ‘clock’it further himself, but to give the customer a candid intimation of its falsity, i. e. a disclaimer.
Before leaving section I, mention should be made of one defence which is not available.
It is not a defence for the defendant to claim he was not ‘offering’ his goods but was making only an invitation to treat.
Section 6 reads:
‘A person exposing goods for supply or having goods in his possession for supply shall be deemed to offer to supply them.’
Thus, the shopkeeper who displays his goods with a false description commits an offence under section 1.
False statements as to services — section 14
Section 14 makes it an offence:
‘For any person in the course of any trade or business,(a) to make a statement which he knows to be false; or  (b) recklessly to make a statement which is false; as to any of the following matters….’
There then follows a list of matters all connected with ‘services, accommodation or facilities provided in the course of any trade or business.’
Thus, whereas section 1 deals with false statements associated with the supply of goods, section 14 deals with false statements associated with the provision of services.
This dichotomy was highlighted by the decision in Westminster City Council v. Ray Allen (Manshops) Ltd. (1982 D.C.).
The defendants displayed outside their Oxford Street shop a sign reading ‘Closing Down Sale’ and were still trading from that shop 18 months later.
Dismissing a charge under section 14, the court held that since section 14 did not deal with a sale of goods, a reference to a shop sale was not a reference to a ‘facility’ within the meaning of section 14.
Similarly in Newell v. Hicks (1983 D.C.) a false statement offering to supply a free gift with a purchase of goods (when in fact it was not free) was held not to fall within section 14 because it was a statement relating to the supply of goods and therefore did not relate to the provision of services or facilities.
In this case the court gave a further reason why the false statement was not caught by section 14, namely that it related to the price at which the goods were offered for supply and section 14 did not cover false statements about prices.
This was applied in Dixons Ltd. v. Roberts (1894 D.C.) where it was held that section 14 did not catch a trader who gave a false indication that a refund would be given on any goods purchased, if within seven days the customer was able to buy the same products locally more cheaply.
It seems absurd, but it also seems to the law, that a recklessly-made false statement that free insurance will be given with every motor cycle purchased is caught by section 14 (since it relates to the provision of a ‘service’) whereas the section does not catch a false statement that a free helmet will be given, Kinchin v. Ashton Park Scooters Ltd. (1984 D.C.).
It is more difficult to obtain a conviction under section 14 than under other sections of the Act because the prosecution must show that the defendant either knew the statement to be false or made it recklessly, i.e. regardless of whether it was true or false.
It must show that the defendant had this knowledge or recklessness at the time he made the statement.
Subsequent recklessness will not render criminal an earlier  statement.
In Sunair Holidays v. Dodd (1970 D.C.) advertising literature described a package holiday in Majorca.
It described the double rooms as having ‘private bath, shower, W.C. and terrace.’
The holiday firm had a contract with the hotel under which the hotel was required to supply rooms fitting that description.
Nevertheless on the occasion in question, a double room was provided which had no terrace.
The holiday firm had not checked that its customers were provided with the correct rooms.
The court held that this negligence subsequent to the statement being made could not render the statement a reckless one.
The statement was not made recklessly.
Another decision along similar lines was that in Beckett v. Cohen (1972 D.C.).
The accused agreed to build a garage ‘within 10 days’ and to build it ‘as the existing garage.’
He defaulted on both these commitments.
However, he was not guilty of an offence because section 14 has no application to statements as to the future, which can be neither true nor false.
The builder, by breaking his commitments, no doubt exposed himself to an action by his customer for breach of contract.
That did not make him a criminal under section 14.
Whereas a statement about services to follow will not be rendered ‘false’ by the services not matching up to the earlier statement, a subsequent statement which is false when made can attract liability.
This is so even though it had absolutely no contractual effect and operated to non-one's detriment.
The defendant in Breed v. Cluett (1970 D.C.) entered a contract whereby he agreed to sell a bungalow.
20 day later, while he was doing some finishing off work on the bungalow, he recklessly made a false statement, i. e. he told the purchaser that the bungalow was covered by the National House Builders Registration Council's 10 year guarantee.
It was held that he committed an offence under section 14.
Sometimes it can be difficult to decide whether a statement relates only to the future and therefore cannot infringe section 14 or whether on the other hand it relates partly or entirely to some past or present fact.
Consider, as an example, a package holiday firm which in December sends out a brochure advertising holidays for the next summer.
Suppose that the brochure mentions a particular hotel and states that it is not yet completed.
Clearly in that case any statements about the services at the hotel can relate only to the future.
Suppose the brochure mentions another hotel, stating that it has been open for several seasons and that it closes every year from November to March.
Clearly statements about the service (e.g.  that English meals are provided or that special dishes for children can be obtained) cannot relate to present facts, for the simple reason that the hotel is closed in December when the brochure is sent out.
The statements could relate to past facts (i. e. they could mean that those services were provided last season) or they could relate only to the future (i.e. that they will be provided next season).
In the latter case there can be no liability under section 14.
If a prosecution were brought it would be for the court to decide what the statements meant.
It is the meaning they were likely to convey to the person to whom they were addressed that matters and not the meaning they might, on analysis, bear to a trained legal mind.
This was the approach laid down by the Court of Appeal in R. v. Sunair Holidays (1973) and confirmed by the House of Lords in British Airways Board v. Taylor (1976).
In the latter case a traveller applied for aircraft tickets and received a letter saying ‘I have pleasure in confirming the following reservations for you…’ and giving dates, times and numbers of the flights.
The airline which sent the letter had an overbooking policy.
This meant that after accepting the traveller's booking, the airline accepted more bookings for the flight than there were seats on the aircraft.
When he turned up, the traveller was thus not allowed to travel on his booked flight and had instead to travel the next day.
Was the reservation letter received by him merely a promise as to the future or was it a statement of present fact?
It was held (a) that it was a statement of present fact, namely that at the time the letter was sent the traveller had a definite and certain booking,(b) that that statement was false because the airline's overbooking policy meant that the traveller's booking was exposed to a risk that it might not give a seat on the aircraft, and (c) that the airline made the false statement knowingly (and not merely recklessly) since the airline was well aware of its own overbooking policy.
It should be noted that the airline's offence lay, not in having an overbooking policy but in making a false statement in its letter to the traveller.
The offence could have been avoided by a clear statement in the letter explaining the overbooking policy and the consequent risk to the ‘reservations.’
It has been seen that for an offence to be committed under section 14 two things need to be present at the same time.
First, the statement must be false and, secondly, there must on the part of the defendant be either knowledge of the falsity or recklessness as to it.
The time at which these two factors must be present is when the statement is made.
Subsequent facts  will not make the statement false; subsequent recklessness will not make it reckless.
Similarly subsequent facts will not make a false statement true.
In Cowburn v. Focus Television Rentals Ltd. (1983 D.C.) the defendants advertised ‘Hire 20 feature films absolutely free when you rent a video recorder.’
As a customer subsequently discovered from the document he was sent upon renting a video recorder, there were two things wrong with the advertisement.
First, he was entitled to only six films and secondly the hire of them was not ‘absolutely free’ because he had to pay postage and packing.
He complained and when the defendants were made aware of his complaint they made sure he received 20 free films and reimbursed him his postage and packing.
It was held that nevertheless the defendants were guilty because the statements in the advertisement were false when made and had been made recklessly.
The defendants' conduct in subsequently honouring the advertisement was irrelevant as it occurred after the offence had been committed.
The question of what amounts to recklessness was considered in M. F.I.
Warehouses v. Nattrass.
The defendants, a mail order firm, issued an  advertisement offering their louvre doors on 14 days' free approval and indicating the price and the carriage charge.
In the same advertisement they offered a set of ‘Folding Door Gear (Carriage Free).’
They intended, when supplying both a louvre door and a set of folding door gear not to charge carriage on the latter.
However, on the occasion in question, a purchaser wrote ordering only the folding door gear.
He was required to pay not only the price but also a carriage charge.
The court found as a fact that a reasonable person would interpret the advertisement as offering the folding door gear as a separate item for 14 days' free approval carriage free.
This had not been appreciated by the defendants' chairman who had considered the advertisement for some 5 to 10 minutes before approving it, but who had not sufficiently thought through the implications of it.
It was held that this amounted to recklessness.
Recklessness does not necessarily involve dishonesty.
The duty not to be reckless places upon the advertiser the positive obligation to have regard to whether his advertisement is true or false — a point reiterated in Cowburn v. Focus Television Rentals, above.
We have seen that a defendant, to be convicted under section 14 must be proved to have known that the statement was false or to have been reckless as to its falsity.
The defendant must lie proved to have had this mental state, i.e.  knowledge or recklessness.
It is not enough for the prosecution to show that some employee of the defendant had that mental state.
What then if the defendant is a company?
Since we are dealing with a criminal offence, the general principles of the criminal law apply.
These require that where a company is charged, the mental state (i.e. of knowledge or recklessness) must be proved to have existed in the mind of a person who was or formed part of the directing mind of the company.
This means that one of the following people must be proved to have had the necessary knowledge or to have been reckless: the ‘directors, the managing director’ or perhaps ‘other superior officers of the company,’Tesco Supermarkets v. Nattrass (1972 H.L.).
The result is that if it was some lesser employee of the company (e.g. a mere store manager or area manager) who put out the offending brochure or advertisement, it may be difficult to get a conviction.
In Wings v. Ellis (1984 H.L.) the directors of a travel company discovered that one of their holiday brochures contained a false indication that the rooms in one of their holiday hotels were air-conditioned.
They recalled copies of the brochure.
Seven or eight months later a customer booked a holiday, relying on an old unamended copy of the brochure.
The House of Lords held that the company had correctly been convicted of making a statement which it knew to be false.
A false statement in a brochure is made when the brochure is published and is made again (or alternatively, continued) when read at a later stage in an uncorrected form by a member of the public.
Thus a defendant who has no knowledge of the falsity (and was not reckless as to it) when the brochure was published, could still lie guilty if he had acquired that knowledge before the brochure was subsequently read.
It is irrelevant that the  defendant did not know that the brochure had been read (i.e. that the false statement had been made).
Thus, once the defendant has discovered the falsity of his brochure, he is liable to commit an offence each time someone subsequently reads the uncorrected brochure.
For his defence, he would have to rely on one of the defences in section 24 (paragraph 16–22 below), which would involve showing that he had taken all reasonable steps (to withdraw the brochure etc.) to avoid committing the offence.
In Wings v. Ellis the defendant mysteriously did not rely upon any such defence.
Defences — sections 2 and 25
If the defendant can establish any of the defences mentioned in section 24(1) he has a good defence to any charge under the Trade Descriptions Acts.
He must prove:
‘(a) that the commission of the offence was due to a mistake or to reliance on information supplied to him or to the act or default of another person, an accident or some other cause beyond his control; and (b) that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid the commission of such offence by himself or any person under his control.’
There are several defences here.
Whichever defence is relied upon, the onus of proof is firmly upon the defendant to prove both ingredients.
In Simmons v. Potter (1975 D.C.) the defendants, second-hand car dealers, succeeded in proving that the commission of the offence was due to‘reliance upon information supplied to him’ but failed to prove that they themselves had taken ‘all reasonable precautions,’etc.
They had sold a car with the wrong mileage recorded on the odometer.
Before doing this they had first made enquiries about the car's history from its previous owner and learnt nothing suggesting that the odometer reading was false.
It was held that the defendants had no defence under section 24 because they had, in failing to display a disclaimer, failed to take all reasonable precautions.
They had failed to adopt an obvious and easy method of avoiding commission of the offence.
If they had displayed a disclaimer (sufficiently bold, precise and compelling) they would have avoided commission of the offence even without having to rely upon section 24 (see paragraph 16–11).
When the defence relied upon is ‘act or default of another person,’ the defendant will have a good defence only if he has also made available to the prosecution such information as he has identifying that other person.
This is to enable the prosecution to find and charge the other person.
The other person will often be the employee of the defendant, as he was in Tesco Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattress (1971) H.L.).
There, the defendant company, which operated a large number of supermarkets, had instituted in their stores an effective system to prevent the commission of an offence.
One of their employees, a store manager, failed properly to carry out the system with the result that Radiant washing powder was advertised in the window at 2s. 11d. when in fact the only packets available in the shop were 3s. 11d. (section 11(d) the Trade Descriptions Act which made this an offence has since been repealed and replaced by Part III of the Consumer  Protection Act 1987, see paragraph 16–28 below).
The House of Lords held that the defendant company was not guilty; the commission of the offence was due to the default of ‘another person’(the store manager) and the defendant company had, by instituting an effective system, taken all reasonable precautions, etc., in the circumstances.
Thus where, for example, the defendant owns a chain of stores he can rely upon the acts of a store manager provided that the defendant can show that he (the defendant) took all reasonable precautions to avoid the commission of the offence.
These precautions will usually consist of instructions sent out to managers.
The defendant must show that he sent out adequate instructions.
He will have no defence if the instructions were such that even if they were followed the offence was still likely to be committed.
In Haringey London borough v. Piro Shoes Ltd. (1976 D. C.) the defendants owned shoe shops in one of which some shoes were sold which were not made entirely of leather but were labelled ‘all leather.’
The defendants had previously sent the shop manager a letter instructing him that these shoes were not to leave the shop without the label first being removed.
It was held that this instruction was inadequate to prevent the commission of the offence (under section 1).
The offence in section I was committed by goods with a false trade description being ‘offered’ for sale.
By section 6 they were offered for sale if they were ‘exposed for supply’(see paragraph 16–12 above).
Thus the letter to the shop manager should have instructed him that the goods should not be exposed or displayed or offered for sale without the label first being removed.
Since the defendants had therefore not taken all reasonable precautions, they had no defence.
When the proper defence is that of ‘act or default of another person,’ the defendant cannot rely upon the defence of mistake.
Thus, the defence of mistake is available only when the mistake was that of the defendant himself, Birkenhead & District Co-op Society v. Roberts (1970 D.C.).
In that case the defendant pleaded the defence of mistake, the mistake being that of a shop assistant who in a lapse of concentration put the wrong label on a piece of meat.
It was held that this was no defence for the defendants who should have relied upon the defence of ‘act or default of another person.’
Section 24(3) provides a defence which is available only on a charge under section 1(1) (b) of the Act.
It provides:
‘…it shall be defence for the person charged to prove that he did not know, and could not with reasonable diligence have ascertained, that the goods did not conform  to the description or that the description had been applied to the goods.’
This defence is capable of applying to the car dealer who has sold a car with a ‘clocked’ odometer.
We have already seen that if the car dealer did the ‘clocking’ himself, he will have no defence at all, not even if he used a disclaimer (paragraph 16–11 above).
If he bought the car already ‘clocked’ he could use a disclaimer.
If he has not used a disclaimer or has not used an adequate one, then the defences in section 24(1) will not be available to him (paragraph 16–22 above).
The defence in section 24(3) may therefore be a last resort.
If the car dealer had made extensive enquiries of previous owners as to the accuracy of the odometer reading, then the defence is likely to succeed, especially if the general condition of the car was consistent with the mileage recorded on the odometer.
Where, however, the recorded mileage was exceptionally low for the age of the vehicle and the defendant had failed to make any enquiries even of the car's immediate previous owner, the defence is likely to fail, Simmons v. Ravenhill (1983 D.C.).
It falls finally to mention the defence in section 25 (available on any charge under the Trade Descriptions Acts).
This is a defence of innocent publication of an advertisement.
So, for example, a newspaper which innocently publishes a misleading advertisement will have a good defence provided the advertisement was received in the ordinary course of business.
Additional or alternative defendant — section 23
The object of section 23 is to ensure that the person who really is to blame can be convicted.
It provides:
‘Where the commission by any person of an offence under this Act is due to the act or default of some other person that other person shall be guilty of the offence…’
In order for the ‘other person’ to be convicted, two requirements must be fulfilled:
(i)
The first person must have been guilty of conduct which either was an offence under the Act or would have been but for a defence in sections 24 or 25, Coupe v. Guyett (1973 D.C.).
(ii)
The situation in (i) must have been due to the act or default of the ‘other person.’
Under sections 1 and 14 someone can be guilty only if he makes a false statement ‘in the course of a trade or business.’
Under section 23, however, it is possible for someone who is not a trader to be convicted.
A private motorist who ‘clocks’ his car before selling it to a car dealer, may well find that he is guilty under section 23, since it may well be his act which causes the car dealer to commit an offence under section 1, Olgiersson v. Kitching (1986 D.C.).
Cadbury v. Halliday (1975 D.C.) also involved a prosecution under section 23.
It was alleged that the retailer committed an offence under section 1 by selling bars of chocolate bearing the misleading label ‘Extra value’ and that this was due to the act or default of the defendants, the manufacturers.
If the retailer had committed an offence it would have consisted of giving an indication that the bars labelled ‘Extra value’ gave better value than other bars of Cadbury's chocolate in his shop.
This indication was false since the bars labelled ‘Extra value’ contained slightly less chocolate for the sale price as the bars not so labelled.
As we have seen (at paragraph 16–05), it was held that the retailer did not commit any offence under section 1 because indications as to value are not ‘trade descriptions.’
If the retailer had committed an offence under section 1, could Cadbury have properly been convicted under section 23?
Cadbury had labelled and then supplied the chocolate packed in sealed cases which were not opened until they reached the retailer.
Cadbury had changed their labelling policy and had issued no warning to retailers.
Nevertheless it was held that any false indication given by the retailer could not be said to be due to the act or default of Cadbury since the retailer could quite easily have compared the weights and prices of his existing stock and the new bars to see if the label ‘Extra value’ was justified.
Enforcement
The task of seeing that the Act is complied with is given to local weights and measures authorities, i. e. local trading standards or consumer protection departments.
In order that they may collect evidence, the Act empowers them to make test purchases, to enter premises and to inspect and seize goods.
It is an offence wilfully to obstruct them.
MISLEADING PRICE INDICATIONS
Part III of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 replaced earlier provisions dealing with misleading price indications.
These were  the Trade Descriptions Act 1968, section 11 and the Price Marking (Bargain Offers) Order 1979.
These provisions had loopholes and proved technical and obscure with the result that enforcement was difficult.
Part III of the 1987 Act takes a different approach to the problem of defining the mischief which it seeks to stamp out, i.e. the giving of misleading price information.
It contains a statement of the offence (section 20) and a generally worded definition of ‘misleading’(section 21) and provides for a code of practice to be approved by the Secretary of State which gives practical guidance (section 25).
Section 20 — the offence
Section 20(1) provides that a person commits an offence:
‘…if, in the course of any business of his, he gives (by any means whatever) to any consumers an indication which is misleading as to the price at which any goods, services, accommodation or facilities are available (whether generally or from particular persons).’
Section 20(2) goes on to deal with the position where price information is correct when given but becomes false afterwards.
If in that situation some consumers might reasonably be expected to rely on the misleading information, the trader commits an offence unless he has taken all reasonable steps to prevent them from doing so.
This could apply where a trader's brochure is accurate when put out and accurate when read by the consumer but becomes inaccurate after that.
It is only if the misleading price indication is given in the course of a business that an offence is committed.
For cases on the meaning of this expression see paragraphs 10–18, 16–04, 16–07 and 20–04.
Section 21 —‘misleading’
Whether a price indication is misleading depends, not upon what the trailer intended to convey, but upon what a consumer might reasonably understand from what he reads or is told.
Thus it is for the trader to resolve ambiguities in his price indications.
The following are misleading:
(a)
an understatement of the price;
(b)
the stating of the price without making it clear, if it is the case, that it applies only to cash customers or that it does not apply to part-exchange deals or applies only in certain circumstances or does not apply in certain other circumstances;
(c)
failing to make it clear, if it is the case, that service is charged extra or that some other additional charge is made;
(d)
a false indication that a price is expected to be increased or reduced or maintained (whether or not for a particular period);
(e)
making a false price comparison, e.g. falsely stating that the price is reduced or comparing the price of a car with that of another model without stating that the price for the other model has since been reduced.
Section 25 — code of practice
The Code of Practice which the Secretary of State has approved is intended to give traders practical guidance.
However, compliance with the code is not necessarily a complete defence.
Compliance or non-compliance is simply something to be taken into account by the court in determining whether an offence under section 20 has been committed.
It is therefore possible, in theory at least, for a court to find that a trader has complied with the code but that such compliance nevertheless involved giving a misleading indication.
In such a case the compliance would doubtless be a strong factor in mitigation of sentence.
Section 26 — regulations
This section empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations regulating the giving of price information.
Such regulations could make specific practices a criminal offence and the giving of specific information mandatory.
No such regulations have been made and at present the government has no plans to make any.
Defences
Under section 24 the defendant has a defence if he can prove any one of the following:
(a)
his acts or omissions were authorised by regulations made under section 26;
(b)
the offending price indication was given, other than in an advertisement, in the media (i.e. radio, television, cable programme service, newspaper, magazine, film or book);
(c)
he was an innocent publisher or advertising agency who was unaware, and had no grounds for suspecting, that the advertisement contained a false price indication;
(d)
the misleading price indication related to a recommended price, which did not apply to the price at which the item was available from the defendant, and which the defendant could reasonably believe was generally being charged, and which was false only because a supplier was not following the recommendation.
This last defence might well be available to a book publisher.
Retail price maintenance still being lawful in the case of books, the publisher might well include the recommended retail price on the cover of the book (or in an advertisement), only to be surprised subsequently to learn that a retailer has been selling at a different price.
In addition to the defences above, it is a defence for anyone charged under the Consumer Protection Act to show that he took all reasonable steps and exercised all due diligence to avoid committing the offence, section 39.
Additional or alternative defendant
Section 40, like section 23 of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 (paragraph 16–26 above), deals with the situation where A commits an offence because of the fault of B. It enables B to be convicted where A has been guilty of conduct which either was an offence under the Consumer Protection Act or would have been one but for one of the statutory defences.
Clearly relevant here is the case law on section 23 (see paragraph 16-.26)— except for Olgiersson v. Kitching.
The latter is not relevant because under section 40 B is not guilty unless his act or default which led to A's conduct in question was committed by B ‘in the course of any business of his.’
For case law on this expression, see paragraphs 10–18, 16–04, 16–07 and 20–04.
MISLEADING ADVERTISEMENT
It has been seen that there are a number of criminal offences relating to advertising.
Another is to be found in the Business Advertisements (Disclosure) Order 1977, which is designed to prevent a business advertising goods, e.g. in the small ads of a newspaper, without the advertisement making clear that the seller is indeed carrying on a business.
It makes it a criminal offence for the advertiser to fail to make it clear that he is selling in the course of a business.
A further offence is to be found in the Mail Order Transactions (Information) Order 1976, whereby written advertisements in which someone in the course of a business invites from consumers mail orders for goods, with  payment in advance, must include a legible description of the name and address of the person inviting the orders.
With any system of control by criminal offences there is always the risk that someone may find a loophole, a way which misleads the public without amounting to an offence.
The Control of Misleading Advertisements Regulations 1988 deal with this possibility.
They require the Director General of Fair Trading to consider complaints (other than vexatious or frivolous ones) about misleading advertisements.
He can bring proceedings for a High Court injunction to stop the publication of a misleading advertisement.
The Director General, before considering a complaint, may require the complainant to satisfy him that alternative methods of dealing with the matter have been tried and found inadequate.
Thus where the advertisement constitutes a criminal offence, it would seem pointless to complain to the Director General.
It would be more sensible to complain to the local trading standards department.
Even where the advertisement does not amount to an offence, the Director General may consider that an approach to the Advertising Standards Authority (a non-statutory body with no legal powers) would be an adequate way of dealing with the complaint.
The Regulations clearly could be useful as a last resort, where the advertisement is not caught by any other legal provision and there is no other effective way of dealing with it, e.g. an advertisement falsely stating ‘closing down sale’(see paragraph 16. -14 above).
Before the Director General can take action under the Regulations, the advertisement must be such that it both deceives or is likely to deceive and is likely to affect the economic behaviour of those whom it reaches or to injure a competitor of the trader (usually the advertiser) whose interests the advertisement is promoting.
By way of exception, the Regulations do not give the Director General powers in relation to commercial radio and television advertisements or to cable advertisements.
Instead, the I.B.A.
and the Cable Authority, respectively, are given powers to consider whether such advertisements are misleading.
FAIR TRADING ACT 1973
This Act creates the office of Director General of Fair Trading.
It has provisions which establish a Consumer Protection Advisory Committee and which give to it, to the Director and to the Secretary of State, certain functions in relation to consumer affairs.
Like the Trade Descriptions Act, it is  designed not to give individual consumers a remedy when things have gone wrong, but rather to prevent things from going wrong.
Therefore it in no way enhances consumers' individual rights, section 26.
We are concerned with three aspects of the Act — the creation of criminal offences, the Director's power to enforce the general law and the control of pyramid selling.
Creation of criminal offences
The aim is to discover, and by Ministerial order prevent, consumer trade practices which adversely affect the economic interests of consumers.
A ‘Consumer trade practice’(see section 13) is one which relates to:
(a) The terms upon which goods or services are supplied.
or (b) The manner in which those terms are communicated to the consumer.
or (c) The promotion (e.g. by advertising or labelling) of the supply of goods or services.
or (d) Methods of salesmanship employed in dealing with consumers.
or (e) The way in which goods are packed or otherwise got up for the purpose of being supplied.
or (f) The method of demanding or securing payment for goods or services.
The Director has the duty to inform himself about consumer trade practices with a view to discovering those which adversely affect consumers' economic interests, section 2.
The Director or any other government department can refer a consumer trade practice to the Consumer Advisory Protection Committee on the question of whether the practice adversely affects the economic interests of consumers, section 14.
The Advisory Committee's only function is to report on such references.
A reference by the Director may include a proposal for a ministerial order dealing with the consumer trade practice, section 17.
Section 22 empowers the Secretary of State to make an order dealing with the trade practice but he can do so only if the following requirements are fulfilled:
(i)
The Director has included in a reference to the Advisory Committee a proposal for an order regulating that trade practice;
(ii)
The Advisory Committee has agreed with the Director's proposal-either as it stood or subject to specified modifica-tion;
(iii)
The order is in the opinion of the Secretary of State such as to give effect either to the Director's proposals or to his proposal as modified by the Advisory Committee; and
(iv)
A draft of the order has been approved by resolution of each House of Parliament.
One important order made under this procedure is the Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976, which bans the use of certain void exemption clauses (see paragraph 10–29 above).
Contravention of one of these orders is a criminal offence of the same type as those in the Trade Descriptions Act.
Thus section 25 provides defences which are the same as those in sections 24 and 25 of the 1968 Act (above).
Also, enforcement is carried out in the same way by the weights and measures authorities, sections 27–33.
It seems that the procedure, just outlined, for the creation of new criminal offences has fallen into disuse.
This may be because it was intended to be a quick method of banning undesirable consumer trade practices and in practice it turned out not to be very quick at all.
The reason was no doubt that it took time for the Consumer Protection Advisory Committee to report.
Power to enforce the general law on protection of consumers
Sections 34–43 give the Director power to act against someone who in the course of business persistently breaks the law (civil or criminal) in a way detrimental to the interests of consumers.
These provisions, unlike those just outlined, are concerned not only with the economic interests of consumers but also their ‘interests in respect of health, safety or other matters,’ section 34.
The Director can ask the offender for an assurance that he will abandon the conduct in question.
If that fails, or if the offender breaks his assurance, the Director can take proceedings against him in the Restrictive Practices Court, which has power to order that the course of conduct be abandoned.
These powers can be exercised irrespective of whether other proceedings (civil or criminal) have been brought.
Pyramid selling
This is a marketing technique, certain aspects of which are undesirable.
In their heyday before 1973, pyramid selling schemes worked something like this.
The typical scheme was  ostensibly concerned with marketing goods or services through a chain of private distributors.
An individual was persuaded to join the scheme as a ‘distributor’(or ‘agent’ or ‘representative’or whatever).
He may have been persuaded to pay a large sum of money (perhaps hundreds or thousands of pounds) for the privilege of joining.
Whether he could recover this sum would depend upon whether he could introduce further people into the scheme, for he would receive a payment for each new participant whom he introduced.
Sometimes the fee he paid for joining was expressed to be payment for a consignment of the goods which the scheme was supposed to be marketing.
However, he could still find it difficult to recoup his joining fee if he could not find new members for the scheme, because he would find it difficult to sell the goods.
It was not always easy for a private householder to find buyers for a large number of packets of soap!
Sections 118–123 deal with pyramid selling.
Section 120(3) makes it an offence for a promoter or participant to receive any payment or the benefit of any payments which some other participant is induced to make by reason that the prospect is held out to him of receiving payments or other benefits for introducing other persons into the scheme.
Further, section 119 empowers the Secretary of State:
(i)
To make regulations governing literature which is designed to attract new participants.
(ii)
To make regulations for the purpose of preventing participants being unfairly treated.
These powers have been used thereby effectively banning pyramid selling as it was previously practised.
CONSUMER CREDIT
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITION OF HIRE PURCHASE
A Contract of hire-purchase, as its name suggests, contains two elements.
It is a contract of hire which also gives the hirer an option to purchase the goods.
Hire is a form of bailment which is a word used to describe the situation where one person is put in possession of goods belonging to another.
The hirer is a bailee.
Thus a hire-purchase agreement is an agreement for the bailment of goods whereby the bailee has an option to purchase them.
Two particular contracts relating to goods have long been recognised by the law, one of bailment and one of sale.
Of which type, then, is a hire-purchase agreement?
Is it bailment or is it sale?
To put it another way, is it hire or is it purchase?
The emphatic answer is that it is not a contract of sale.
Thus the parties to a hire-purchase agreement are termed, not ‘seller’ and ‘buyer,’but ‘owner’and ‘hirer.’
Under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 they are termed ‘creditor’ and ‘debtor.’
Distinction between hire-purchase and sale
It is the hall mark of a contract of sale of goods that the parties enter into a mutual commitment that the buyer thereby acquires or shall acquire ownership of the goods.
A ‘buyer’ is described in section 61 of the Sale of Goods Act as ‘a person who buys or agrees to buy goods.’
If the buyer does not commit himself to acquire ownership of the goods there is no contract of sale and indeed it is inaccurate to describe him as ‘buyer.’
This was made clear by the House of Lords in the leading case of Helby v. Matthews (1895).
The agreement in that case was between the owner of a piano (a dealer) and his customer.
The latter agreed to hire the piano for 36 months at a rent of 10s. 6d. per month.
The agreement provided that the piano would become the property of the customer on payment of all the instalments of rent but that he could at any time before then terminate the hiring by returning the piano to the dealer.
In the event of the hiring being terminated, the hirer  would be liable only for arrears of rent in respect of the period prior to the termination.
The House of Lords held that this agreement was not a contract of sale and that the customer was not a ‘buyer.’
The fact that he could terminate the hiring meant that he was under no commitment to acquire ownership of the goods.
He had in effect an option to purchase, which he could exercise by not terminating the agreement and by paying all 36 monthly instalments.
An option is not a commitment.
Their Lordships said that the option was an irrevocable offer by the owner to sell.
That offer could be accepted only when the option was exercised.
Until then there was no purchase and no contract of sale.
Therefore the hire-purchase agreement was not a contract of sale within the meaning of the Sale of Goods Act.
Thus a hire-purchase contract is a contract of bailment, albeit one with a difference — namely an option to purchase.
In deciding Helby v. Matthews their Lordships distinguished the case of Lee v. Butler (1893).
In that case the agreement provided that the customer should have immediate possession of the goods (furniture) and should pay £1 on May 6 and £96 on August 1.
These sums were termed ‘rent.’
The agreement further provided that the furniture would become the customer's property when the instalments had both been paid and not before.
There was no clause in the agreement giving the customer the right to terminate it, although there were provisions entitling the dealer to do so (and to  repossess the goods) if the customer defaulted.
The Court of Appeal held that this agreement was a contract of sale.
The difference between this and Helby v. Matthews is that here the customer was committed to making all the payments and therefore to acquiring ownership of the goods.
It will be observed that in Lee v. Butler the goods were not to become the buyer's property until he had paid all the money.
This, however, did not prevent the agreement from being a contract of sale.
Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 3, sections 17 and 18 of the Sale of Goods Act expressly recognise that property passes to the buyer at the time the parties intend it to.
In each of the cases mentioned above, the customer disposed of the goods (in return for money) to an innocent third person and he did so before completing his payments.
The importance of the distinction between hire-purchase and sale becomes apparent when it is realised that different legal results followed.
In neither case was the customer owner of the goods at the time he disposed of them.
In Helby v. Matthews he was merely hiring them and in Lee v. Butler it had been expressly agreed that the  furniture was not to become his property until the payments had been completed.
However, in Lee v. Butler he was a ‘buyer’ in possession of the goods and thus, although he was not the owner, he could pass good title to an innocent purchaser (Factors Act, section 9, see Chapter 5 above).
So in Lee v. Butler the dealer could not recover the goods from the innocent purchaser to whom his customer has sold them.
In Helby v. Matthews, on the other hand, the dealer was held entitled to recover the goods.
Someone hiring goods under a hire-purchase agreement is not a ‘buyer’ and therefore cannot pass good title under either the Factors Act, section 9 or the Sale o Act, section 25.
Therefore, from the dealer's point of view, the hire-purchase transaction has the advantage that he will not be prevented by either of those sections from recovering the goods after they have been passed on by the hirer to an innocent third party.
It should be remembered that there are other provisions which could in certain circumstances prevent him from doing so (see Chapter 5 above).
In particular the Hire Purchase Act 1964, Part III can have this effect in the case of a motor vehicle.
Also note that, since Lee v. Butler, sections 9 of the Factors Act and 25 of the Sale of Goods Act have been amended.
The result is that the rule in Lee v. Butler (that under those sections a buyer under a conditional sale agreement can pass good title to an innocent purchaser) applies only if the conditional sale agreement is not regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (see paragraph 5–34 above).
Conditional sale and credit sale agreements
Each of these is a type of contract of sale of goods and each has the characteristic that the buyer is committed to acquiring ownership of the goods.
‘Conditional’ and ‘Credit’are commonly used to describe contracts of sale of goods where the price is payable in instalments.
In that respect they therefore have some similarity with hire-purchase agreements.
At common law there is only one difference between a credit and a conditional sale agreement.
It is that in a conditional sale agreement the passing of property to the buyer is expressly postponed until some condition (usually all the instalments being paid) is fulfilled.
So, the agreement in Lee v. Butler can be described as a conditional sale agreement.
In a credit sale agreement there is no such condition to the passing of property and the goods therefore normally become the buyer's immediately the contract is made (Sale of Goods Act, section 18, Rule 1).
Thus under a credit sale agreement, the buyer will as soon as he takes delivery, be in possession of goods of which he is the owner.
Under a conditional sale agreement the buyer will be in possession of goods which will continue to belong to the seller until all the instalments have been paid.
Apart from this, there is at common law, no difference between credit sale and conditional sale agreements.
Although this is the position at common law, we shall see that the Consumer Credit Act 1974 radically alters the position with respect to conditional sale agreements regulated by its provisions, thus making them significantly different in effect from credit sale agreements.
The finance company
In both the cases so far considered in this Chapter, the customer took the goods under an agreement between himself and the dealer.
There was no intermediate party.
No doubt some dealers still do business in that way.
Today, however, it is common for the dealer to sell goods for cash to a finance company which then parts with them on instalment terms to the customer.
Thus today's customer often finds that he is hiring or buying the goods, not from the dealer, but from a remote and powerful finance company.
This is a classic example of a weak party (the customer) contracting with a strong one (the finance company).
Finance companies, by adopting a ‘take it or leave it’ attitude used to insist on inserting terms that were very onerous for the customer — terms to the effect that all implied conditions and warranties were excluded; that in the event of the customer's payments falling into arrears the finance company could repossess the goods; that in order to repossess the goods the company's agents could trespass upon the customer's premises; that in the event of the customer terminating the agreement he should pay a large sum of money to the finance company, etc.
The Consumer Credit Act 1974 and the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 largely prevent these abuses, but it is true that, in so far as those Acts allow them to, finance companies still insist on the terms being as beneficial to themselves as possible.
The usual process by which the contract is made is as follows.
The customer selects the goods from the dealer's stock.
He asks for instalment terms.
At the dealer's request (and sometimes with his assistance) he fills in a form.
This form will have been supplied to the dealer by a finance company with whom the dealer maintains regular contact.
When completed and signed by the customer, it will constitute an offer to the finance  company by the customer to take the goods either on hire-purchase or on credit sale or conditional sale terms.
The customer will leave that form with the dealer.
The dealer will himself complete another form which will constitute an offer by him to the finance company to sell it the goods.
The dealer will send both forms to the finance company which will either accept or reject both offers.
It will accept offers only if made on its own forms and thus incorporating the terms that it wishes to include.
If it accepts the offers, the finance company will have agreed with the dealer to buy the goods from him and with the customer to supply the goods to him on hire-purchase (or credit sale or conditional sale) terms.
The dealer
Much of the following chapters is devoted to the contractual relationship between the customer and the person (often a I finance company) from whom he hires or buys the goods.
However, a little time should be spent considering the position of the dealer who sells his goods to the finance company.
(i) Dealer and customer
The relationship between these two is not that of seller and buyer, because the dealer has sold the goods, not to the customer, but to the finance company.
It follows that, if the goods prove defective, the customer has no action against the dealer under section 14 of the Sale of Goods Act, Drury v. Victor Buckland (1941 C.A.).
Nevertheless he may well still have a remedy against the dealer.
In Andrews v. Hopkinson (1956 Q.B.) the dealer told the customer ‘It's a good little bus.
I would stake my life on it.’
After this the customer made a hire-purchase contract, in the usual way, with a finance company.
Soon after taking delivery of the car, he had a crash in it, due to its defective steering mechanism.
McNair J. held that the dealer was liable in damages to the customer for two reasons.
(i) There was a contract, albeit not one of sale, between the dealer and the customer.
The contract consisted of the dealer promising that the car was a ‘good little bus’ in return of the customer applying to the finance company to acquire it on hire-purchase terms.
The dealer was therefore liable for breach of his warranty (i. e. his promise).
(ii) The defect in steering mechanism was due to negligent lack of inspection and servicing by the dealer who was therefore liable — irrespective of whether there was a contract — to anyone  foreseeably injured by his negligence.
This was an application of the general principle in Donoghue v. Stevenson (see paragraph 9–04 above).
(ii) Dealer and finance company
The relationship of dealer and finance company is primarily that of seller and buyer.
Their contract will therefore, in the absence of contrary agreement, be subject to the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act.
However, the finance company will often require the dealer to take on further obligations and to enter into a recourse agreement.
The extent of the dealer's liability under one of these will depend upon the terms of his particular agreement.
Often it will be worded so as to constitute a contract of indemnity under which the dealer must make good any loss suffered by the finance company in the event of the customer defaulting on his payments or terminating his agreement.
The question of to what extent the dealer in dealing with the customer is agent of the finance company will be discussed in Chapter 22.
Guarantors and indemnifiers
There are risks involved in credit trading.
Apart from the chance that the customer may default on his payments (perhaps even go bankrupt), there is the risk that he may also sell, damage or even destroy the goods.
In the typical transaction, it is the finance company which runs these risks.
The finance company can to some extent safeguard itself by including certain terms in the contract it makes with the customer.
For , in the case of a motor vehicle the contract may require the hirer/buyer to have comprehensive insurance.However, this does not provide any safeguard against the irresponsible customer who does not comply with such terms of the agreement or against the out and out rogue who, having paid his initial deposit, disappears with the goods without trace.
Thus it is quite possible for a finance company to insist that some third person acts as a safeguard against the finance company making a loss on the transaction.
The contract made between the third person and the finance company will, depending upon its terms, be a contract either of guarantee or of indemnity.
The difference between these two types of contract has already been considered (in Chapter 2, paragraph 2–11 above).
From the finance company's point of view a  contract of guarantee is the less satisfactory, for two reasons.
First, it is enforceable only if there is sufficient written evidence of its existence (Statute of Frauds 1677), though this is perhaps not very important since the agreement will usually be in writing anyway.
Secondly, a contract of guarantee is enforceable only if the principal contract is valid (i.e. the one between the finance company and the customer).
To put this another way, if the customer has a defence to a claim against him under the hire-purchase agreement, then any guarantor will also be able to use the same defence.
An indemnifier, however, can be liable when the customer has a valid defence and can sometimes be liable to a greater extent than the customer (see Goulston Discount Co.
Ltd. v. Clark, paragraph 25–25 below).
It is useful at this stage to indicate that guarantors and indemnifiers are of two types, those who act as such at the request of the customer and those who were not requested by the customer to do so.
An example of the latter is the dealer who has a recourse agreement with the finance company.