

PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The Professional Development of Arts Teachers
Paul Tweddell
Introduction
This chapter seeks to examine the state of professional development in the arts using the writer's own research (Tweddell, 1988) as its chief source.
However, as one of the main findings of this research was that arts educators were not aware of recent changes in modes adopted to undertake professional development generally, the first part of the chapter concerns itself with a review of this issue, exemplars being drawn from arts education where these are available.
The reason for entitling the chapter's second main section ‘Factors inhibiting professional development’ is that, despite a number of favourable features being observed during the writer's research, not least the support given to arts education activities by local authority non-arts administrators, it is the difficulty which arts educators face in mounting a coherent and sustained programme of staff development which is the predominant theme.
These difficulties, it is argued, although in part the result of the marginalization of the arts in British education at national level, are also caused by the failure of arts educators to come to terms with the reasonable expectations of those charged with administering INSET at local level and thereby exploit more effectively the support for the arts of those charged with administering education.
Arts educators' uncertainty about the objectives of arts education, appropriate pedagogic strategies to adopt and a lack of interest in coming to terms with the contemporary trends of education create a difficult climate for the provision of professional development for  Britain's teachers in the arts.
INSET: A Broad View
Although in everyday professional speech the phrase the in-service training of teachers (INSET) is often used to denote formal courses operated collectively with groups of teachers, this view of INSET must be perceived as too limited to describe the many practices which are used in the professional development of teachers (Gordon and Lawton 1978, Becher and Maclure 1978).
The improvement of teacher practice is influenced by a large range of strategies of which courses are only one.
Besides the formal courses organized by local education authorities (LEAs), initial training institutions and HMI, one must include public reports upon educational developments (Warnock, Bullock, Plowden), and, published privately, the Gulbenkian Report (Gulbenkian Foundation, 1982) in the arts education domain; the reports of curriculum development programmes, for example, the Schools Curriculum Development Committee (SCDC) Arts in Schools Project bulletins; digests of research, descriptions of practice and opinion which appear in professional journals; formal and informal contact with LEA advisory services, including the growing number of teachers seconded for professional development purposes; inspections; long and short award bearing courses; changes in examination syllabuses (of which the recent introduction of GCSE is an example); even teacher contact with the representatives of educational suppliers.
It is also necessary to distinguish two parameters of professional development.
The first, concerned with the objectives of professional development, has at one pole the intention to improve existing practices, whilst at its other is the desire to make radical changes to classroom practice.
Examples of the former would include the development of greater skill in the use of available equipment, whilst the second attempts to develop fundamental changes in school and classroom practices.
The second parameter concerns means, and centres upon the extent to which teachers should be expected to understand the implications of their teaching actions.
Although one might wish to believe that a profound understanding by teachers of their actions would be the sine qua non of educational action (Kelly 1982, Easen 1985), the presence of various forms of teacher-proof materials in use suggests otherwise.
The existence of a variety of systematic teaching methods suggest a belief that teachers are not always able to evaluate teaching methods and materials appropriate to their pupils.
A recent study of primary school practice across the arts supports this view.
Sharp and Dust (1987) found that teachers rarely perceived art teaching as little  more than giving pupils a title, providing materials and allowing the assignment to progress without any more guidance or evaluation.
It suggests that many primary teachers (probably due to the inadequacy of their initial training) do not understand the significance of the arts procedures they adopt in the classroom.
Opinions currently differ as to the effectiveness of strategies in the professional development of teachers during the last twenty years.
On the one hand increased INSET activity is seen as the way forward especially by the Department of Education and Science (DES, 1985b and 1986; MSC, 1987).
Blenkin, for example,(1980) believes ‘the most recent generation of teachers has worked through the most rapid period of curriculum development in the history of state education’(p. 45).
On the other hand Richards (1983, commenting on primary education), Raven (1984, on secondary education) and Desforges (1985, commenting generally on classroom practices) believe that, despite extensive attempts to create change, there is little to observe in classrooms as a result of this action.
Cassidy's (1986) dispirited view is that the ‘major obstacle to curriculum change is the resistance of teachers.
Demands for change from examinations boards and advisers are accepted with philosophical resignation’(p. 31).
Historical Perspective
After the first Education Act of 1870 and until the end of the nineteenth century, control of schools and their curricula was exercised through the enforcement of public education codes by regular inspectorial visits mainly for the purpose of testing pupils in prescribed activities.
In the arts domain these were singing and drawing.
By the 1890s the deleterious effect of the regular testing of limited pupil activities and relating this to teachers' salaries became apparent
(i)
in the limited curricular diet pupils were receiving;
(ii)
in the difficulties of effecting curriculum changes by central  diktat ;
(iii)
in the practice of teaching solely to the tests HMI were obliged to administer to pupils annually; and not least
(iv)
in the serious psychological effect upon the pupils of the test procedures themselves.
This created the climate for a degree of loosening of central control on the curriculum in the 1902 Education Act.
Local education boards were established to have oversight of the day-to-day operation of the schools within their area, although they were to be firmly guided on the details of the curriculum by means of the Elementary Code of 1903.
However, in this latter, the arts remained essentially unchanged with singing and drawing remaining the arts  curriculum diet of pupils, whereas the opportunity was taken to advance curriculum change by the inclusion of science in the Code (Gordon and Lawton, 1978; Dent, 1982).
The next sixty years were to see a rise in the classroom autonomy of teachers allowing them growing discretion within their classrooms.
As a result the mechanisms by which new teaching practices were disseminated during this period remained problematic.
Davis (1980) suggests that the reports commissioned by governments during this period aimed to stimulate and inspire teachers to change.
Salter and Tapper (1981) go even further and suggest that the report writers' aim was to encourage radical ideological changes in teacher attitudes.
This was particularly true, they feel, of the 1926 and 1932 Hadow Reports which sought to encourage teachers to adopt more progressive curriculum practices.
However, looking at these changes with the INSET concepts of a later date, it is interesting to note that the four major texts upon the history of curriculum change (Bernard, 1962; Boyd, 1961; Gordon and Lawton, 1978; Dent, 1982), whilst extensively detailing the changes which were the subject of public intention, make no mention of either the machinery whereby the new ideology was introduced to teachers nor of the effects upon teacher practice in the schools.
The manner in which some of the practices of arts education began to change from didactic teaching towards more creative approaches during the first half of the twentieth century would support the view that it was the inspirational qualities of recommended change which secured their diffusion.
Nor is it surprising that it was one of the two arts areas in the curriculum pantheon at the time, art, with its claim to encourage pupil's imaginative abilities, which was able most readily to respond to the changed educational climate.
As early as 1917 Marion Richardson, through her initial teaching role at the London Institute of Education and subsequently from within HMI, introduced the work of the Austrian educator Franz Cizek to Britain.
This was ‘the ‘Child Art’ movement, now an established practice aimed at encouraging the creative side of young children — a reaction against the imitative nature of previous [art]teaching' (Gordon and Lawton, 1978, p. 218).
Thus, when the aesthetic ideas of Collingwood (1938), which emphasized the ‘artistic’, intellectual activity of the artists' mind rather than manual, ‘craft’ activities, were introduced to education through the writings of Herbert Read (1943) a teaching strategy was already in place to exploit a progressive, child-centred philosophy.
Alongside demands for increased professional autonomy for teachers, their professional organizations were also pressing to be included in the education decision-making processes.
This was ultimately  conceded in 1964 when teachers were given majority representation on the Schools Council for the curriculum and examinations.
Increased teacher autonomy was also enhanced by a more passive attitude to central enforcement especially in the decreased intensity of HMI inspections (Simons, 1984).
The 1944 Education Act had avoided the issue of curriculum control by ambiguously dividing control of school curriculum between local authorities and governing bodies and (reflecting the strength of the church lobby) listing only religious education as a curriculum issue worthy of legislation.
Clause 1 of the 1944 Act, which details the Secretary of State's responsibilities to supervise education, was benignly administered (certainly until the Wilson government's request for greater progress in the reorganization of secondary education on comprehensive lines, Circular 10/65), nevertheless (as events in the 1980s were to demonstrate) there lay in the wording of this clause the potential for a draconian control of education.
This was recognized by parliament in 1944 (Dent, 1944) but was largely forgotten for two decades as subsequent Secretaries of State avoided its use (Gordon and Lawton, 1978, Davis 1980; Salter and Tapper, 1981; Raggatt and Weiner, 1985).
It is possible to identify the start of the present professional development era in the early 1960s with the establishment of the Schools Council and with the Nuffield Foundation's involvement with curriculum developments in science and mathematics.
During the 1950s the view was gaining ground that a more systematic and determined effort should be made towards teachers' professional development and this was to become the justification of the Schools Council's existence.
As the thinking in the Schools Council unfolded, so there arose a growing desire that as much attention should be paid to the means of effecting change as to what those changes should be.
Two overlapping strands can be identified in the progress in the subsequent years in developing machinery to assist this process (Salter and Tapper; 1981; Kelly 1982).
One, the Instrumental form, can be observed in the increase in outside intervention in school and teacher practices partly by LEAs (Parsons and Steadman, 1984), and more recently by the DES (Davis, 1980; Lawton, 1984; Raggatt and Weiner, 1985).
The other, the individual approach, has encouraged teachers to take a greater responsibility for their own professional development (Ruddock, 1981; Easen, 1985).
Very recently (i.e. since 1984), it is possible that the Education Support Grant (ESG) and Grant-related In-service Training (GRIST) programmes, herald a new, mixed category which aims to create a balance between two of the three major models of dissemination theory, instrumental and individual.
In this form central government determines and funds broad  categories of curriculum development whilst schools and teachers identify their own needs in the light of government support available.
Initially the Schools Council, besides undertaking the necessary illuminative studies into education practices in schools of which the most quoted in arts education is Enquiry I (Schools Council, 1968) in which the low esteem pupils assigned to their arts experiences in schools was exposed, also established a specific type of programme.
An area of concern was identified and a project team was set the objective of finding a solution.
The project then proceeded through a series of rational steps.
The first was a programme of research to develop new knowledge in the agreed area on the basis of which the development team produced suitable material and strategies to trial in the schools and colleges of particular LEAs.
Once the initial problems encountered in the trial were sorted out, the results were seen as suitable for general dissemination.
This remains an attractive option for some educators as can be seen in the Design Council supported Design Dimension Project (Baynes, 1985) and there are echoes of it in many of LEA programmes supported by the Arts in Schools Project (Schools Curriculum Development  Committee , 1986a, 1986b and 1986c).
Compared with the early stages of the Schools Council, the Nuffield Foundation's involvement in curriculum development paid greater attention to mechanisms for the diffusion of ideas (Redknap, 1977; Weindling et al, 1983).
Local centres, professionally staffed, were set up in many LEAs to act as focuses for the dissemination of each project's materials.
The purpose was to increase efficient dissemination by offering more personalized support to teachers.
This was achieved by contact between teachers and members of the project team through centre group-meetings and in classrooms (where this was acceptable to school staff).
These (often extended) contacts acted as a form of INSET to teachers whilst offering feedback on the effectiveness of the teaching styles and materials advocated by the particular project (Slater, 1985).
The later stages of the Schools Council Music in Secondary Schools Project adopted this approach (Paynter, 1982).
Both the Schools Council and Nuffield approaches shared in most of the projects they supported an essentially instrumental view in that they were based upon the managerial assumption that the initiators determined the content and progress of the programme (although Arts and the Adolescent (Schools Council, 1975) was a notable exception).
The Schools Council's early projects have been criticized in that they rarely took account of the context of the individual institutions where change was sought and ignored the fact that there was little consensus amongst teachers about the value of change anyway (Becher and Maclure, 1978; Kelly, 1982; Richards, 1983; Cassidy, 1986).
Both approaches, whilst encouraging interaction between teachers and project staff, left the teacher in the less influential position.
Awareness of the need for concern with the mechanisms of dissemination was strengthened by two subsequent reports.
The first, the James Report (DES, 1972), followed growing concern at the slow rate of change in the education service (Parry, 1972).
At the time of the James Committee's deliberations two research programmes were gaining educators' attention which confirmed the anxieties of those who set up the Committee.
Miles (1962, reviewed in Georgiades and Phillimore, 1975) had found that, although the rate of implementation of changed practices in institutions had improved from 1930 (when it had been estimated that fifteen years needed to elapse before something like 3 per cent of schools adopted a particular change), in the 1960s it still required seven years before 11 per cent of schools adopted an innovation.
The second item of research was that undertaken by Morrison and MacIntyre (1969, also quoted in Georgiades and Phillimore, 1975) who had found that ‘changes in sensitivity towards pupil/ teacher relationships developed during initial training were reversed as a result of full time teaching within a relatively short time’.
As a result the James Report articulated the notion that emphasis should be laid upon professional development as a continuing process throughout the professional life of a teacher.
The Report rationalized the process into three ‘cycles’— the first concerned with initial training; the second with a probationary period but enhanced by further professional training and of longer duration than the one year then (and still) in force; the third cycle covered the remainder of a teacher's career until retirement.
The Report recommended that the final cycle should include two interwoven strands.
The first should consist of short courses for teachers brought about by expanding the teachers' centres set up for the Nuffield mathematics and science projects, and should include a one-term secondment in every seven years.
In the second strand these centralized activities were to be supported by an intensive in-school programme in which the implications of staff development were contextualized within the individual institution.
Although the government response to the James Report was lukewarm, not least because of its financial implications (Redknap, 1977), it is possible to identify the origins of many subsequent INSET decisions as a form of implementation of the Report without the additional expenditure the Report expected (Tweddell, 1988).
The second report was that of the Redcliffe-Maud Committee  (Department of the Environment, 1972) which formed the basis of the reorganization of local government which occurred (outside London) in 1974.
Appreciating the central role local education authorities would increasingly play in the development of education, this Report's recommendations included the proposal that authorities must have access to an adequate level of specialist educational guidance (Bolam et al, 1978).
This, the Committee believed, should be brought about by the establishment of education advisory services with one adviser per 20,000 population and with a minimum staff of fifteen to ensure adequate curriculum cover.
There was at the time of reorganization a considerable expansion of advisory services to meet the desire for increased curriculum coherence and the staff appointed were to take on much of the short course organization and guidance to schools for school focused INSET.
Previously many LEAs had employed advisers (often called ‘organizers’) in subjects like music, occasionally in drama, and in physical education (with the girls' PE organizer often being interested in dance).
The arts organizers were usually perceived by the LEA as primarily servicing centralized performance activities, whilst the PE staff offered specialist advice in the provision of expensive capital plant — gymnasia and playing fields — especially where safety was concerned.
However, advisers in English, mathematics, science, etc., without these roles to perform, were able to concentrate upon the provision of classroom support for teachers.
The result was combined schools workshops (Ruddock, 1981), speakers on topics of mutual interest to teachers, and some attempts to encourage teachers to consider basic curriculum planning through group activity (Small, 1982; Oldroyd et al, 1984; Easen 1985).
Lambert et al(1985) identifies the chief function of advisers as ‘collaborative evaluation’ in which an institution seeks the help of an outside agent to undertake a problem solving programme without the outsider having a detailed involvement in the process.
Such changing adviser practices seem to have had an impact upon arts advisers which can still be observed in the tension they feel between a commitment to the professional development of the general class teacher and the supervision of centralized performance activities (Tweddell, 1988).
Within these changed professional development practices it is possible to observe a managerial shift towards a more sensitive response to the specific circumstances within which changes in schools were expected to take place.
By concentrating on the diffusion stage, which was perceived as the weak point of instrumental approaches, interactive approaches sought to ensure the spread of change by taking into account the way in which the social relationships affected the adoption  of an initiative (Slater, 1985).
Two types are of interest here; in one an innovation, usually already in existence, was introduced by an outside agency to an influential person (adviser, headteacher, administrator) who would act as an intermediary.
If the innovation proved successful in the trial institution it was hoped that it would be adopted permanently.
Such a strategy assumes not only that the user will be persuaded by the rational appeal of the initiative (as in instrumental approaches) but that it will be ‘legitimized by a range of social and cultural values, attitudes and skills to ensure commitment on the part of the initial users to adopt it.
Rational argument is thus supplemented by affective appeals’(ibid, pp. 450–1).
In its most rigorous form (of which the Schools Council's Integrated Humanities Project is probably the best known), the project is closely monitored and an evaluator is appointed to guide institutions participating by means of careful questioning and thus shape the project's development (Shipman, 1985).
Where arts projects follow this model (the Art and the Built Environment Project show some features of this approach) there seem to be difficulties in persuading participants to respond to the evaluator's findings (Pring, 1984).
Another interactive approach is more phenomenological, aiming to take into account the influence of informal interest groups ‘such as civil rights and student power (where) changes in values and attitudes of a more subtle and less deliberate kind are developing’(Kelly, 1982) '.
These are characterized firstly by the espousal of partisan viewpoints with attendant activities for mutual support.
Secondly, facing other groups with different views, they are obliged to engage in arguments in order to defend their ideology.
Kelly continues by asserting that ‘(this model) has potential for curriculum change but this must be questionable, since it is a model which appears to offer no basis for the development of any specific model’(ibid, pp. 131–2).
However, the writer would suggest that a number of associations offer a service to their members in this particular form.
The manifestations of the most recent example can be followed in the pages of the education press.
Here are ranged such organizations as the National Association of Language in Education Centres (NALEC, 1985) on the one hand, whose membership commands direct access through professional development teachers and initial training lectures to classroom teachers and who take the predominantly phenomenological approach to language of ‘reading through real books’.
On the other hand, more mechanistic approaches are advocated by supporters of prepared, systematized reading schemes.
There are similar, although less prominently publicized examples of such conflict in arts education.
The advocacy and  proof of the feasibility of more creative, composition based practices in music furnished by the Music in the Secondary School Curriculum which led to the inclusion of composition in the GCSE music criteria (DES, 1985a) has also been subjected to adverse correspondence similar to that of the language development example above.
From 1977 onwards the DES sent a series of circulars to LEAs asking how they were discharging their duties under the 1944 Education Act to monitor the curriculum in the schools.
It was apparent from LEA replies that LEAs had but limited awareness of their schools' practices (Shipman, 1985).
A number of documents were published to help schools manage the process of developing their own responses to the professional development staff needs within schools (McMahon et al, 1984; Oldroyd et al , 1984; Parsons and Steadman, 1984; Easen, 1985) whilst HMI published guidance upon curriculum building (DES 1981, 1985a and 1985b).
The process was supported by the enactment of the Schools Information Regulations in 1981 requiring all schools and colleges to publish annual descriptions of their curriculum and organizational arrangements.
Lying behind this shift in opinion about professional development lay the knowledge that, whether instrumental or interactive, such projects faced two major problems in creating coherent normative practices in classrooms.
Firstly, it was difficult to ensure that teachers would act as anticipated by those who had set the project objectives — changes were not internalized by teachers and made routine in their classrooms (Richards, 1983; Slater, 1985).
Secondly, the perceptions of those adopting a change varied with the context in which each person worked, even within individual institutions.
Both problems limited or negated the impact of development projects, giving greater scope for those who wished to resist change to argue against their continued implementation (Philips and Fraser, 1982).
As a result of a growing awareness of the effects of these inhibiting factors and of the lack of success of previous strategies at user level in the late 1970s, the individual approach came into fashion supported by a number of initiatives.
Individual approaches recognize either the school or the classroom as the significant unit for change and ideally take both into account, for change in one is unlikely to happen without change in the other (Easen, 1985; Slater, 1985).
A commonly cited example of an individual approach to institutional change is that in which the problems of the users are the starting point for seeking solutions.
In this the basic assumption is that a particular change is but one part of a dynamic, continuous process in which the users are engaged.
The user group perceives a problem, which is  analysed , and  potential solutions scrutinized.
This stage is followed by a search for means to implement the desired change and over a period of time a cycle of problems are handled by this method.
However, one of the chief difficulties in creating an improvement of schools' practice at grassroots level is that schools, when faced with the challenge presented by self-examination and with a relatively limited knowledge of available strategies and resources, tend to use the process to reinforce existing (perhaps inadequate) practices rather than to seek new, more fruitful relationships between curriculum areas or to develop more appropriate teaching methods.
An example of this can be seen in the list in Parsons and Steadman (1984, pp. 43–50) of a school's possible objectives set against possible means of achieving these.
Whereas other curriculum examples from this list describe the ways in which teachers will help pupils develop their own skills and perceptions through carefully considered assignments and evaluation procedures, those for the arts, and for art in particular, refer only to influencing pupils' tastes, with no description of pupil activity or of programme development in the arts.
It is as though the process of influencing pupils implicit in ‘making the school environment as interesting, stimulating, colourful and varied as possible’(p. 46), whilst undoubtedly important, was sufficient to ensure a personal artistic response from pupils.
Although guidance for schools was readily available, it does not appear to have been sought.
The fundamental issue here (especially for the arts in education) appears to be how schools can be more effectively alerted to developments in education.
Sullivan and Thomas (1981) take this concern one stage further by commenting upon an even more extreme form of school curriculum isolation.
‘Some schools are eager to change, but others are merely busy with purposeless and repetitive activity: complacently cut off from the ideas and challenges that society provides’.
(Sullivan and Thomas, 1986).
The DES seem to have been aware of this problem by 1984 when Educational Support Grants (ESG) were established (DES, 1984) offering funds to LEAs to appoint consultant teachers who would work with pupils alongside classroom teachers developing practices in curriculum areas which the DES perceived as important.
Unfortunately the only categories included in the criteria for grants which might be exploited by the arts do not appear to have been designed for this purpose.
These were categories aiming to broaden the curriculum experiences of pupils in small rural schools and to develop curricula appropriate to Britain as a multicultural society.
It could be that the dissatisfaction already felt by a handful of LEAs with existing professional development strategies at this time and the resultant establishment  of professional development support teams were the inspiration of ESGs.
Although there is no public evidence available for this assertion, ESGs copy many of the features of LEA programmes — secondment of teachers with good classroom practice, centralized LEA deployment to schools and intensive curriculum development support for the central team.
Despite the relatively narrow curriculum concern of ESG teachers, there are signs that some LEAs (Walsall, 1981; Tameside, 1981; Birmingham, 1986; and possibly Nottinghamshire, 1986) are using this strategy to establish broader, holistic curriculum aims.
Following the ESG programme, government curriculum intervention has increased most notably with two initiatives, Grant Related In-service Training (GRIST) initiated through Circular 6/86 and the establishment of a National Curriculum (DES, 1987) as outlined in the Education Reform Bill.
The former seeks to control the delivery of INSET to conform to financially favoured national curriculum priorities (DES, 1986) and allows LEAs to decide less favourably resourced local priorities.
The national priorities are predominantly concerned with the development of areas of the curriculum seen as economically useful and neither the humanities nor the arts are included in this category.
However, in a regional survey of LEA policy initiatives in the arts, Tweddell (1988) found that a high proportion of LEAs had included the arts within their individual local priorities.
The National Curriculum, whilst being consistent with the other government sponsored programmes in its instrumental-vocationalist view, has made provision for the arts through music and art as second tier essential subjects with drama mentioned for possible inclusion with art, music and design in a joint arts option for older pupils.
The National Curriculum proposal has been subjected to extensive criticism not only for the vagueness of the curriculum theory it espouses but also for its inadequate consideration of the value of the arts to the development of all pupils.
Factors Inhibiting Professional Development in Arts Education
Lack of Research
Marland (1986) and Tickle (1987) point to the limited extent to which ethnographic study has been made of arts classrooms to enlighten knowledge of arts teachers' practices.
Thus, they argue, decisions  about the development of these latter can be based upon little more than uninformed hunches.
In addition other researchers (Raggatt and Weiner, 1985; Ribbins, 1985; Shipman, 1985) express the view that little is known about the initiation and progress of policy making in LEAs.
Yet such initiatives such as ESGs, GRIST and the Manpower Services Technical, Vocational and Education Initiative (TVEI) rely predominantly upon the INSET practices of LEAs.
Thus the subject matter of this chapter, combining as it does both practices in the teaching of the arts and LEA's INSET policies, has hitherto been virtually unresearched.
The rest of this chapter relies extensively upon the research the writer undertook in 1986 and 87.
The purpose of the writer's research (Tweddell, 1988) was to examine practices in arts INSET for serving teachers at a time when the government's intention to develop a coherent programme of INSET through GRIST was being initiated (at Easter) 1987 and to find out how the arts were faring in an educational climate which many observers were declaring inimical to the arts.
It sought to explore the provision of professional development to serving arts teachers offered by a group of educators carrying out varying staff development activities within one region of England and Wales.
Although employed by various institutions, these staff were linked through the collaboration which recent national developments in INSET have begun to enforce.
The research was predominantly concerned with the opinions and actions of LEA central staff, administrators, advisers and what have been called ‘professional development teachers’.
However, it was also necessary to include a number of staff from initial teacher training institutions following the enhanced role colleges were expected to play as ‘INSET providers’(DES, 1986).
In all thirty-two different educators were interviewed in a manner which allowed respondents to express their own priorities within arts' INSET.
Thus, in a cumulative response, consensus, dissensus and, possibly, conflict of opinions on matters concerning the management of change and on curriculum theories in action, could be examined between and within the different groups.
Arts Education Influences
Although the present section of this chapter is entitled ‘Factors inhibiting the development of arts INSET’, it is possible to report one pleasing finding, with, perhaps, the one reservation reported below.
All five LEAs examined in detail had arts development projects in progress and a survey across the region showed this to be true of 85 per cent of  LEAs.
In justifying the establishment of these arts in education initiatives, two influences were cited by the great majority of respondents.
These were the Gulbenkian Report (Gulbenkian Foundation, 1982) and HMI's support for arts education, often, the interviewees felt, against the prevailing instrumental ethos of the DES (cf.
 Hargreaves , 1982 and Lawton, 1984).
In the Gulbenkian Report the clear exposition of the idea that the arts mediate between an individual's inner being and the external world, and that this gives an educational role to arts activities in the development of pupil personality, appears to have impressed not only arts educators but almost all those administrators, such as GRIST coordinators, who were responsible for programmes which included an arts element.
This is not to say that everyone could name the book (one chief adviser described it as ‘the shiny red book which the drama adviser insisted I read’), nor in some instances was its actual existence known although its influence could be recognized.
For example, a county GRIST coordinator (formerly a mathematics teacher) who claimed that he knew of the Report but had not read it, made the following eloquent and not untypical statement:
The ‘feeling curriculum’ which the arts enhance is seriously underrepresented in the school experiences of young people.
Nor do examinations in arts subjects help, for these press assignments into preordained formulae rather than liberate innate ideas.
In that the influence of exams upon curriculum practices starts long before pupils make exam options choices, so this unsatisfactory narrowing of pupils' experiences pervades much of their school careers.
A number of arts professional development teachers reported that their involvement in schools was often initiated by primary headteachers feeling that staff were giving inadequate time to an area of the curriculum vital to the personal development of the pupils.
Over half those interviewed recognized the support offered by HMI through the concept of a ‘broad and balanced’ education for all pupils of statutory school age which permeates almost all HMI pronouncements since the Primary School Survey (DES, 1978):
As Primary Education in England demonstrated, there is an association between a broad curriculum and successful performance in aspects of language and mathematics.
(DES, 1985, p. 42)
Whether the support of HMI is as secure as many of these interviewees perceived is questionable.
Only three respondents expressed reservations about the nature of HMI support and one must suppose that the  critiques of HMI practices in the formation of education opinion and the relevance of these criticisms to the concept of ‘broad and balanced’ are not widely known.
One adviser and one professional development teacher questioned whether arts HMI were genuinely committed to cooperation across the arts implicit in the concept of an aesthetic domain within the curriculum.
The adviser pointed to the documentation LEAs receive about HMI disposition (DES, 1986) in which HMI remain organized in separate subject sections, whereas the managerial implication of their recent curriculum rationale would suggest they would be more satisfactorily arranged in ‘domain groupings’.
A professional development teacher interviewed pointed out the ambiguity of HMI expounding an aesthetic domain in Curriculum Matters 2 (DES, 1985c) and continuing to publish further booklets in this series under subject headings.
Following her analysis of the use of arts/aesthetic terminology and the level of perception of arts issues in DES documentation, Redfern (1986) confirms the impression of uncertain HMI understanding.
A further reservation about HMI support originates in the inadequacy of HMI research methodology.
Hargreaves (1982) and Lawton (1984) believe the publication of HMI ‘findings’ are more concerned with influencing the climate of public opinion than illuminating knowledge of schools' practices through controlled research.
The publication of HMI inspection reports has allowed examination of HMI methodology and has exposed its limitations (Lawton and Gordon, 1987).
The observational basis which led HMI to believe that a ‘broad and balanced’ education is an imperative for raising educational standards does not appear to have been examined.
However, a similar  leitmotiv of HMI and DES documents, the high level of mismatching of tasks assigned by teachers to pupils and pupils' ability, has been explored in a carefully researched programme undertaken by Bennett and Desforges (1985).
HMI methodology was found to be inadequate and the research findings of Bennett's team contradict HMI ‘findings’.
It would be a serious matter, in the light of so many LEA (and college) arts staff reliance on ‘broad and balanced’, if this claim should prove as unsubstantiated as that for ‘mismatching’.
The National Ideology
Salter and Tapper (1981) suggest that:
…for an aspiring educational ideology to be able to mount a serious challenge at the national level it has to link three  concepts together: the desired society, the type or types of educated individuals necessary for that society, and the educational means to fulfil these two ends.
(p. 13)
The current state of professional development in arts education could be explored in the light of these three categories and in each one cause for concern be found.
To many observers (e.g. Davis, 1980; Salter and Tapper, 1981; Hargreaves, 1982; Whitty, 1985; Ranson, 1985) the ‘desired society’ and ‘types of education’now reflect an ideology shifting towards instrumentalism and seeking vocationally trained citizens conforming to a narrow prescription defined by the perceived economic needs of the state.
However, notions which are the antithesis of this have a strong currency in the arts.
Arts education makes great play of its ability to develop pupils' independent judgments and personal insights.
As is evident from the extent of objections in the educational journals and in the summary of responses (Haviland, 1988) to the National Curriculum consultation document (DES, 1987), the writer's research uncovered a substantial resistance to this ideological shift from the teaching profession.
For example, the Head of INSET at an initial training institution commented typically:
I would wish to resist the outburst of instrumentalism in the thinking of central government.
Without the inclusion of creative activities, education does not achieve those objectives which those with rather narrow views claim for it, especially in terms of personal development.
The third of Salter and Tapper's concept, the ‘means’ to support change, has not been offered to arts education, whereas funds for the development of more vocationally orientated education have been forthcoming, as a glance at the original categories of ESGs, TVEI and GRIST demonstrates.
The concern of Marland (1986) and Tickle (1987) about the lack of research quoted earlier is one of the signs of how the arts are being starved of funds whilst other curriculum areas, most notably the development of the ‘balanced science’ curriculum programme through the Secondary Science Review (Association for Science Education, 1987), have been aided by ethnographic research supported by the DES.
As Hargreaves (1988) points out, arts education would be greatly assisted by the development of a ‘balanced arts’ programme, but the necessary ground work on which this could be based does not seem likely to be financed.
The conclusion to be drawn is that whoever decides funding criteria must believe either that the arts are  irrelevant , or too low a priority, or that current arts practice is satisfactory (Arts Education Forum, 1987).
Yet, despite the financially less favoured position granted to those areas of the curriculum which are not perceived as ‘national priorities’, every LEA surveyed in the writer's research had established the arts as a local priority, and assigned funds to support it.
In addition a survey of all LEAs within the region from which the writer's research sample was taken revealed that almost 80 per cent had done the same.
Is it possible to argue, as the writer has suggested elsewhere (Arts Education Forum, 1987) that, if every LEA were to establish the arts as a local priority, it would become de facto a national priority?
Another effect of the low priority assigned to the arts by the DES appears to be the exclusion of the arts from the ESG programme.
The damage inflicted is particularly severe since Fonseca and Williams (1988) suggest that professional development teachers have been the most effective agency for stimulating a desire for change in schools.
Three out of the five LEAs in the writer's sample had developed arts programmes which included this type of teacher.
However, it was reported that, as LEAs are always under pressure from schools to assign teachers to direct teaching posts, funding professional development teachers appeared to remain insecure as long as no external financial support was available from central government.
GRIST also seems to have worsened what has been an increasing difficulty in arts professional development programmes during the last decade.
GRIST regulations (section 9, DES, 1986) allow the curriculum component of advisers' work to be a charge against DES funds and this has released a number of posts frozen by local government cut-backs.
But the opportunity has been used to create positions in ‘new areas of interest, information technology and craft design and technology’, rather than to replace lost arts posts.
This process appears to have accelerated the non-replacement of LEA arts advisers and, hence, contributed to the gradual overall decline in numbers.
There is some evidence (ILEA, Oxfordshire) that LEAs may also be responding to the view that the arts coordination is more consistently served in advisory services by a single member of staff with cross-arts responsibilities than through the informal cooperation of individual arts subject advisers.
The writer's research suggests that in some cases arts advisers' posts have been replaced by positions at the lower status level of ‘professional development teacher’.
Arts advisers recounted the personal effects of the decline in their numbers, in particular on their ability to monitor the arts work within schools and (where they exist) the work of the professional development teachers.
Thus, a facility which at first appeared a useful addition to arts development resources had become a source of extra responsibility   for many advisers, consuming time they could ill afford.
A drama and English adviser stated:
Ten years ago four of us were available to cover the arts curriculum, art and design, music, dance (the speciality of a primary colleague) and myself.
Now only I remain, over-committed and unable to give the intellectual leadership to the arts project team.
The Climate of Opinion Among Teachers
A measure of support from LEA staff for arts education has already been identified above despite reservations about the attitude of government and the DES.
What, then, can be said of the contribution of teachers to the climate of opinion?
Sharp and Dust (1987), as already reported, found little priority given to arts activities by primary teachers.
Batowski (1986) suggests that secondary arts teachers are unsure of their colleagues' support.
Delamont and Galton (1987) think that arts teachers may be attempting to overcome the low esteem in which their work is held by other teachers by adopting even more rigorous practices of pupil work assignment and evaluation than is to be observed in the practices of teachers in other areas of study thereby establishing their academic credibility.
The writer's research elicited similar comments of which the most eloquent came from a chief education officer:
In education one of the fundamental problems is the attitude of the general teaching force to arts education.
It is difficult to persuade teachers that the denial of valid arts experiences to themselves during their own school days has denied them an enriching experience and offered them instead an impoverished education.
Indeed it is easier to persuade the clerks in the education office of this than the teaching staff in schools.
The response of teachers is probably due to the conditioning they have undergone, both in school, and during their teacher training.
However, there was also a considerable consensus from the non-arts staff of LEAs and colleges that arts teachers were not helping the advancement of the case for the arts in a number of ways.
Firstly, there was a widespread opinion that arts staff do not give the priority to INSET which other areas of the curriculum do.
One respondent reported that ‘recruitment to arts INSET courses was almost invariably poor, being viable only when concerned with things to do in the primary classroom at Christmas’.
A number of GRIST coordinating staff doubted whether arts teachers would avail themselves of the opportunity to comment on their INSET need, as GRIST, section 27. i., requires.
They felt there would be two consequences to this which would disadvantage the arts in relation to other curriculum areas.
One was that the arts INSET programme could be deficient as the views of arts staff would not be represented when INSET decisions were being made.
The second would be that arts teachers would not benefit  from the experience their fellow teachers were gaining in curriculum building and which would be useful to practices in the arts.
Secondly, arts teachers' views would not be represented at educational management level.
Coordinators of education management courses interviewed spoke of the difficulty this poses both for the curriculum balance of courses and for the image of the arts as a serious concern of education.
One interviewee who organized advanced courses in education management commented:
Management strategies must grow out of consideration of such questions as the desirability of balance within the curriculum and how best management techniques might serve this…especially when making medium term decisions (say five years)…
It is important to develop this critique, for without it teachers do not come to understand the implications of short term decisions upon a balanced curriculum.
In particular, there can be serious outcomes on what are perceived as ‘soft’ subjects, like the arts, which are unexpected and frequently unintended by schools.
Unfortunately a major difficulty is posed by the lack of representation of the arts perspective on management courses.
Non-arts teachers are obliged to empathize the arts position — a less than satisfactory method of proceeding.
One predominant reason was given for this low level of concern about professional development amongst arts teachers, although two very distinct responses were given.
The approving and majority response was typified by the following comment from a non-arts educator:
Requests by arts teachers for both short and long courses have been very poor.
Arts teachers appear to be involved in their own arts activities, often semi-commercially.
This seems to be the best way for arts teachers to preserve their competence and thus their credibility with pupils and perhaps this is how it should be.
Disapproving comments, however, although only a minority view, were expressed with much greater emphasis:
It is most important that arts teachers see themselves first and foremost as teachers and only after carrying out their duties in this respect to see themselves as artists.
If they are serious in their intentions to offer the insights in the arts to which pupils have a right, then the latter should be able to expect a well considered programme, to achieve which requires extensive teacher preparation of which INSET is a part.
There is, in my view, a second reason for arts teachers' reluctance to participate in INSET.
This is related to the idea that the chief purpose of INSET is normative, i.e. its intention is to create a conformity of practices in classrooms (Slater, 1985).
Such a view lies at the heart of the reasons given by the writers of the National Curriculum consultative document (DES, 1987) for a common curriculum in all state schools.
The emphasis in recent DES actions upon INSET activities would be consistent with this interpretation.
Inevitably, the arts view of the importance of individuality (as commented upon earlier) does not synchronize with the DES views as to the purpose of education which is seen as ‘centrist, extremely bureaucratic and mechanistic in style’(Lawton, 1984, p. 10).
Arts teachers are also not seen as helping their own cause in as much as classroom practices in the arts might not be living up to the expectations of other professional staff.
In the secondary school this was typified by this comment (from a non-artist):
I have the impression that the arts should be first and foremost about developing pupils' autonomy, not only in terms of the artistic skills which were being achieved, but also in valuing the vital quality of independent thinking.
Regrettably I have rarely seen this in the practices of arts teachers, even those who have expressed this as a crucial attribute of their work.
At primary level anxiety appeared even more intense, reflecting the concern expressed by Sharp and Dust (1987).
Over half the interviewees were worried about the arts in primary schools, sometimes about the excessively routine consideration of techniques at the expense of generating artistic ideas, but more frequently about the lack of any coherent programme.
One GRIST coordinator, whilst pointing to the need to develop a more sophisticated understanding in teachers' responses to their INSET needs, exemplified the difficulties of arts education by quoting a survey carried out by one LEA into teachers' views of their own INSET needs.
This found that, without guidance, teachers gave what was little more than a reflexive response — all that the majority of primary school teachers appeared to wish to receive was more basic skills training.
Another interesting, although minority, opinion was expressed by staff of an LEA which had decided not to participate in the SCDC Arts in Schools Project.
Although they had no objection to the presence of professional artists in schools as a means of stimulating pupils and demonstrating the valuable work which artists offered the community through their own professional activities, they were concerned that the  artists in schools programme appeared to be subverting the search for a coherent arts programme for all pupils.
They felt that a number of questions about the random nature of intervention by artists should be posed before embarking on such a strategy.
For example, at what stage in the pupils' artistic development should the artist be introduced and in what way do artists help?
Are there times when the intervention of the artists' ideas might conflict with the development of a pupil's own ideas?
How can such a scarce  resource be equitably distributed amongst so many pupils?
That none of these crucial issues seemed to have been addressed must raise questions about the way arts educators are managing their own affairs.
Managing Professional Development in the Arts
During the past ten years considerable attempts have been made in education to develop understanding of the management of change and, in particular, to relate it to the curriculum needs of institutions (Wilcox, 1978; Rudduck, 1981; Oldroyd et al , 1984; Easen, 1985; Hughes et al , 1985; DES, 1985c).
Evidence has already been quoted above of an educational management course which required participants to articulate the curriculum base from which management decisions should stem.
Unfortunately, despite this growing support for a sensitive curriculum stance in educational management strategies, there was little evidence in the writer's research that some of the lessons available from this source were being exploited by arts staffs of LEAs responsible for professional development.
As a result there were a number of unsatisfactory features of arts projects which appeared to have arisen from this lack of knowledge.
The research revealed widespread anxiety about the lack of a range of supportive actions for staff involved in arts INSET.
Professional development teachers rarely seemed to have been offered an induction programme or had their work regularly reviewed.
It is possible that this may have been the result of overcommitment of advisory staff and thus arisen from difficulties in attending to this detail.
Induction had been considered in one LEA, but a plan to use a local college's advanced courses had not been implemented.
For professional development teachers the result was that they had only been able to learn through personal experience and had thus done so more slowly than was necessary:
I received no initial guidance as to how I should proceed when I  started this job.
Originally my colleagues and I used to give demonstrations whilst the teacher observed and then tried to copy.
It took us some time to reach the conclusion that this was ineffectual, for the class teachers, in copying the professional development teacher, had failed to adapt their teaching to the new context, creating a rather sterile repetition of the initial lesson…
Thus at the end of the programme class teachers were left without the intellectual means to continue their development.
Recently, joint planning, evaluation and some theoretical discussion have become an integral part of the programme.
It has also become apparent that, as well as trying to change teachers' practices, there must be a determined attempt to make concurrent changes in the school as a whole.
This empirical and time consuming search for an effective strategy was mentioned by many arts interviewees, although every advisory teacher appears to have come to similar conclusions ultimately about which classroom practices were effective and which not.
There was also a deep sense of isolation amongst professional development teachers who regretted the lack of mutual support which arts advisers were able to enjoy through regional subject meetings with HMI.
The arts professional development teachers of the one LEA in the sample which had a cross-curriculum team looked enviously at colleagues in other curriculum areas who had national associations where they could meet to exchange curriculum and strategic information.
The only possible arts organization, the National Association for Education in the Arts (NAEA), was seen as too diffuse in its objectives and interests, and too uncertain in its arts educational stance to be useful in this respect.
The SCDC Arts in Schools Project, although spoken of by the one LEA in the sample which was a participant in terms of gratitude for the support the Project's staff had given, was criticized by staff in the other LEAs for the limited help it had given to them.
It is possible that, not being aware of the limitations brought about by the Project's staffing numbers, non-participants had expected an unreasonable level of support.
Two interviewees also commented on the emphasis in the Project's documentation upon pupil-events rather than on details of staff development strategies questioning the validity of using the dissemination model of ‘good practice’(cf.
Raven, 1984).
Some LEA staff also reported difficulty in gaining the details of participating Project LEAs, despite invitations to do so in the Project's b bulletins.
The research showed there to be virtually no knowledge among arts projects personnel of available strategies for guiding schools in staff  development except for a recognition of criteria by which to identify schools ready for development (Shipman's concept of a ‘healthy school’ in Slater 1985; viz. a recognition of the need for change by the school staff, a supportive headteacher, the active involvement of a senior member of staff, and a professionally interactive staff).
Other features of change management were not recognized, including the time it takes to embed changes in institutions (Georgiades and Phillimore, 1975), negotiating with institutions (Easen 1985; Hughes et al, 1985), approaching individuals (Easen, 1985 and 1987) and challenging avoidance (Bolam, 1975; Janis, 1977; Phillips and Fraser, 1982).
Ironically, a number of LEAs had advisory staff with managerial expertise, yet arts staff did not appear to have sought it.
Further, there appeared to be no long-term strategy adopted by each LEA arts Project.
Those projects observed had been in progress for over a year and most had established a good opening strategy as might be expected from their ability to identify schools with good potential for change.
From then on development staff appeared to leave their programmes simply to unfold.
There seemed to be no consideration given as to how a management strategy would serve the processes desired, little attempt to anticipate possible outcomes or to arrange for specific progress points when reviews could be undertaken, nor to establish criteria against which a programme's effectiveness would  ultimately be evaluated.
At the time of the interviews, there was a growing feeling in some LEAs that projects had developed unintended procedures which would be difficult to dismantle.
There appeared to be a mismatch between the expectations of the non-arts staff responsible for organizing arts projects in LEAs and courses in colleges, and the arts staff responsible for their delivery.
For the purpose of this research the writer had identified three basic curriculum stances in the arts (Musgrove, 1968; Bernstein, 1971; Pring, 1976; Kelly, 1982).
The first was the traditional stance of discrete arts subjects which is reflected in a number of organizational structures in education, for example, the majority of initial training course structures, GCSE subject descriptions, most single art subject associations, etc.
The second was the collaborative approach in which the main objective is to bring together the skills and concepts of predetermined subject areas.
This approach can be seen in a number of LEA projects supported by SCDC Arts Project (SCDC, 1986b, 1986c and 1987).
The third approach was the ‘integrative’, in which new material ‘renders the original elements irretrievable in any meaningful sense’(SCDC, 1986d).
The details of this mismatch can be observed in table 3 below.
There proved to be considerable confusion in terminology used in the responses of interviewees.
This table is based upon interviewees' detailed descriptions of their desired practice, not upon terms they used to describe them.
One chief adviser commented on this use of curriculum terms:
The arts collaboration practices I have so far observed have been inadequate models of curriculum practice.
The reality of these practices is best described as a melting pot of disparate arts subjects, the outcomes of which rely as much upon luck as upon professional foresight.
Examining the responses in table 3, on the one hand, the preferences of administrative staffs are strongly biased towards integrative/collaborative approaches (their reasons seeming to be based upon a belief that collaboration is the mode de rigueur across the curriculum at present).
On the other hand, in the opinions of arts staff there is a decided skew towards discrete subject preference.
At one of the interviews where both an arts adviser and an administrator were present, differing views were expressed, but surprisingly, the ambiguity of this did not appear to be apparent to either interviewee.
Finally, as summarized in table 4, there seemed to be little interest in some of the current general matters of concern in education.
The inference of arts teacher curriculum isolation seems unavoidable.
Summary
Arts educators are probably right to feel anxiety about the low esteem accorded by many outside arts education, not least the DES.
However, if the non-arts staff in LEAs and colleges who did wish to offer a higher priority to arts education were to find the climate of opinion changed so as to create an environment more conducive to the arts, it is difficult to imagine how the current state of thinking amongst arts staff might   contribute to an improvement in arts education practices.
A number of crucial issues remain to be attended to.
Without a stronger espousal of INSET practices, a greater knowledge of general education strategies in staff development and a clearer consensus about which arts teaching and curriculum strategies will best serve the interests of pupil's education, arts education must continue to languish in its present marginalized position.
Does Gender Matter?
An Evaluation of the Arts Curriculum
Patricia Picard
‘Sex’ refers to the biological division into male and female; ‘gender’to the parallel and socially unequal division into femininity and masculinity.
(Stoller, 1968)
What is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing — the result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others…
Unnatural generally means uncustomary.
(Mill)
Introduction
The usage embodied in the first of these quotations is now well established in the literature, and the sentiments expressed in the second serve to remind us that the idea of the ultimately contingent nature of what is often taken to be ‘natural’ has a long and distinguished pedigree.
Both viewpoints serve to highlight the deep-rootedness in cultural learning of the concepts ‘male’ and ‘female’.
To what extent can these concepts be said to influence some of our arts curriculum practices?
Are such influences beneficial or detrimental to the personal and social development of our pupils?
This chapter attempts to answer these questions partly by reference to work in the field and in part through a review and analysis of works of fiction typically used as ‘whole class readers’ in the lower years of six secondary comprehensive schools and falls into two parts.
In the first part I argue for the inclusion of gender awareness as a valid dimension of educational analysis of the arts and, as a vehicle for this argument, posit a set of four general criteria which might legitimately be used by arts educators as part of a re-evaluation of the arts curriculum in this regard.
It is interesting to note that included in the government-funded School Curriculum Development Committee's Arts in Schools project (1986) there was an equal opportunities section which clearly recognized the need to take this issue seriously.
Their reminder that:
The arts are a potentially powerful means through which stereotyping can be countered.
echoes similar sentiments expressed in the 1982 Gulbenkian Foundation report The Arts in Schools which emphasized arts education as provider of,
…a style of education…which values the ideas of width, diversity, and personal autonomy.
The set of general criteria generated in the first part of this chapter is intended to provide a framework of maximum support for this style of education.
The second part of the chapter comprises a narrowing of the focus from arts education in general, to one area in particular , namely English lessons and the fictional literature typically offered to whole classes of pupils in the lower years of secondary schools; the ‘class reader’.
Teachers' reasons for selecting the most popular texts are discussed, as are their views about gender as a potential organizing principle for their work.
The most popular ‘class readers’ are briefly  analysed using a list developed by the International Reading Association Committee on Sexism and Reading (1977) and adopted for use by the Equal Opportunities Commission.
Teachers' responses to this checklist are compared with my own, and the text voted most popular of all,(The Machine Gunners, by Robert Westall), is examined in further detail.
Finally, implications for future practice are discussed and some ways forward are proposed as a result.
Gender Awareness
The notion that arts education should become more ‘gender aware’ in a general sense rests on two assumptions:
1
that a culturally sensitive arts education risks failing to exploit to the full its potential to culturally enrich the lives of its pupils by being, largely, ‘gender blind’;
2
that such an arts education fosters those long established cultural  traditions and normative assumptions about gender which tend to be inhibitive rather than enriching of personal development and sensibility, and discouraging rather than encouraging of purposeful action in the world.
In the words of Eliot Eisner,
Education is a normative enterprise; it seeks to realize certain virtues.
The point here is that ‘norms’, including normative assumptions about gender, change.
Following Gramsci, though the power of the dominant ideas in society may appear natural, it is in fact provisional, through the process of ‘winning and shaping of consent’.
Teachers are at the ‘sharp end’ here; the values we hold are part of this process.
If, then, we want our arts education to genuinely serve the needs of both boys and girls without unfairly favouring either group, upon what criteria should such a ‘gender aware’ arts education rest?
(Specific processes which might be considered unfair will be discussed later.)
General Criteria for a ‘Gender Aware’ Arts Education
There would seem to be at least four such criteria.
What follows is an examination of each with examples of how each might be justified.
First Criterion: Gender differences should be seen as situational and interactional rather than global and structural.
The justification for this criterion resides in the risk of behaviour becoming ‘pre-adaptive’.
For example, since boys are well adapted to tasks which require strenuous physical activity, there is a danger, if this behaviour is overgeneralized, that they are encouraged to develop the appearance of strength even when its exercise is not needed.
In the same way, girls (as part of the same process) can be socialized to assume a posture of physical ineptitude even when it may be inappropriate.
Michelle Stanworth provides a pertinent example of this process at work with regard to pupils' assessment of their own competence.
She conducted research in schools investigating the assumption of strength and competence, and the assumption of ineptitude and incompetence.
She found that in her sample, all of the girls in the class underestimated their rank (as supplied by the teacher) in relation to the boys.
And, with the exception of one boy, the boys overestimated their rank.
Again, the boys, having valued themselves highly as pupils, apparently proceed to ‘discount’ the girls.
In primary schools for example, whilst the girls tend to know the names of everyone in the class, the boys know the names of the boys only.
This area has also been researched by Matina Horner in the United States of America.
She worked with groups of college undergraduates who were asked to write four-minute stories in response to several verbal cues, of which the following was the sixth,
At the end of first term finals, Anne finds herself at the top of her medical school class!
Horner described three major kinds of themes that might indicate what she called ‘fear of success’ in the students' responses.
The themes she thought might indicate such a fear were:
(a)
social rejection or fear of losing friends as a result of Anne's success;
(b)
internal fears and negative effects because of the success; Anne feels guilty, unhappy, unfeminine, abnormal etc…;
(c)
bizarre or exaggerated hostile responses, or denial altogether.
Two extracts from students' responses will illustrate the sort of four-minute stories that were written:
Anne feels guilty…
She will finally have a nervous breakdown and quit medical school and marry a successful young doctor.
It was luck that Anne came out on top because she didn't want to go to medical school anyway.
(my emphasis)
According to Horner, 62 per cent of the female undergraduates revealed this ‘fear of success’ imagery in their stories, while only 9·1 per cent of the male undergraduates did so.
They were also asked to write about ‘John’ finding himself at the top of his medical school.
For Horner, this kind of evidence at least suggests that;
…femininity, and individual achievements which reflect intellectual competence or leadership potential are desirable, but mutually exclusive goals.
It would seem then, that girls act, and ‘agree’ to act, as a negative reference group for boys, thus enhancing boys' images of themselves.
(Perhaps this is why it is claimed that boys' academic performance is higher in ‘mixed’ schools than in ‘boys only’schools: they benefit from having a whole group to be better than!
An issue thoroughly  investigated by Deem in Co-education Reconsidered .
In the preceding examples, gender differences are not being seen as situational and interactional, rather, overgeneralization has been learned and internalized so that such differences are perceived as global and structural.
Our first criterion then suggests that this is a process about which arts teachers should be aware, and in which they should not collude.
Second Criterion: Children should be seen as individuals
Female teacher: On the other hand…
Nick, being a boy, he's rather slapdash.
Girls write more diligent essays.
The treatment of pupils around the notion of girls keeping clean and tidy, and boys being a ‘bit of a tearaway’ is an obvious barrier to the requirement that they be treated as individuals.
Whilst most teachers would view with distaste the ascription of such ‘global’ traits to whole groups of children on the basis of class (Nick, being working class, tends to be rather slaphappy!), or race (Anne's an immigrant, immigrants try so much harder).
Such generalizations appear to be viewed as acceptable when referring to sex differences.
There is some evidence that such differing expectations (in this case that boy's work is ‘better’ than girls' work), are being brought into play in the marking of children's work:
On five different occasions (and in three countries) I have asked teachers to mark essays, projects, assignments, and I have sometimes indicated that they were by boys and other times that they were by girls.
Whenever teachers have assumed they were marking the work of boys, they have consistently rated it as ‘better’ than when they have assumed it was written by girls.
Goldberg provided college students with a series of articles to evaluate, and the same article sometimes bore the name of a female author and sometimes the name of a male author.
Whenever the students thought they were evaluating the work of a man, they assessed it as far more impressive than when they thought it was authored by a woman, whose efforts were labelled mediocre.
Goldberg was surprised by his results because the students were all women.
But, as Spender points out,
…it is not at all surprising that women should learn the lesson so repeatedly taught in the classroom, that boys are brighter than girls.
Third Criterion: The model of ‘difference’ offered by arts education should be interpreted bilaterally
We might at least be fair about the ways in which we account for pupils' behaviour.
It seems, however, that we are not.
When girls perform well such behaviour is frequently explained in terms of their ‘conformity’, for example, they ask the right questions because…it is expected of them, not because they are bright; they follow the rules because…they are passive and dependent, not because they are anxious to do well; their work is neat and tidy, therefore not creative.
The work of Clarricoates shows that when boys do not do well, the tendency is to explain it in terms of their ‘independence’ and their ‘free spirits’; their wrong answers are an indication of their ‘divergent thinking’; their failure to follow the rules as evidence of their intellectual non-conformity.
We should not be surprised perhaps that children can grow up holding some very strange ideas:
Jennifer informed me her father was a helicopter pilot.
‘Would you like to be one?’
I asked.
‘Oh no.
Women would fall out of a helicopter, whereas men wouldn't…’
To summarize this third criterion then, if we believe the evidence from these schools, it seems that if girls are neat and tidy then their work can be devalued; if girls are untidy and present their material poorly, then their work can be devalued.
If boys are untidy and present their material poorly their work can still be praised, and if boys are neat and tidy, their work can be praised too.
Criteria are not being applied bilaterally it would seem.
Fourth Criterion: Equal access to educational resources should be viewed as necessary, but not sufficient
This criterion is intended to signal the need for a healthy scepticism concerning the supposition, embodied in the HMI report The School Curriculum (1981), that given equal access to educational resources, the strengths of each child, male or female, would be more fully realized.
As we have seen, because of prevailing teacher and pupil attitudes deeply embedded in the cultural foundations of our educational system, and the social relations to which they give rise, this ‘equal curricular opportunity’ is not enough.
Indeed, it is an educational paradox that  at present‘free choice in a co-educational system can place boys and girls at a disadvantage in attempting to realize their personal potential; in addition , such ‘choice’ can place girls at a disadvantage in obtaining challenging employment, through their subject ‘options’.
The coercive nature of gender classification, whether manifested in a weak or strong sense, mitigates the liberating power of ‘choice’.
At this point it is appropriate to note that gender, as an organizing principle of the school structure and of wider social relations, varies considerably in the strength of its ‘framing power’.
As Byrne points out, ‘class’ is an influencing factor here.
Epstein also highlights the influence of ‘race’.
Clearly, then, gender as an organizing principle operates differentially on a black upper class boy and a white lower class boy.
This is an important point to note if the impression is to be avoided (given the brief of this study) that the particular division of gender is the only or the most important one:
It is not a question therefore of one [set of social divisions]being more ‘real’ than the others or a question of which is the more important.
However it is clear that the three divisions prioritize different spheres of social relations and will have different effects…we suggest that each division exists within the context of the others…
Consideration of gender, then, needs to be contextualized within class and ethnic divisions.
In the case of Clarricoates' work, for example, she found that the strength of gender stereotyping encountered in schools varied according (in part ) to the social context in which the school operated.
These were typified as, ‘traditional working-class’(a Dockside school), ‘suburban rural middle class’, ‘council estate’, ‘small rural’.
In schools serving either the suburban middle classes or the semi-skilled occupational groups on a council estate the classification of children by gender was weaker than that found in the ‘traditional working-class’ school.
In Deem's view, it is not surprising that the dominant gender code of schooling in Britain is that of strong classification since there is a strong sexual division of labour within British society.
Importantly, in her evaluation of Clarricoates' work, Deem points out that:
In none of the primary schools studied by Clarricoates could one say that the gender code was characterized by weak classifications (i.e. equality between the sexes) and weak frames (freedom to negotiate the definitions of gender).
To return to the notion of choice, and its illusory nature in such circumstances, a final example (again from Clarricoates) will serve to illustrate, and to ring a familiar ‘warning bell’ for arts educators with regard to the way in which their subjects are often conceptualized by teachers.
Seven-year-old Michael had written in his diary, ‘On Saturday I helped my mum bake a cake and I made a dress for my doll’.
The teacher replied, ‘Couldn't you play football or something?’
She justifies her response by saying that she is merely ‘…trying to protect him from the rest of the class; you know, children (my emphasis) can be so cruel’.
Then:
The headteacher, a kind and progressive woman, remarks that Michael is confused between masculine and feminine roles and she suspects that he has ‘feminine genes’.
If he is not ‘cured’ by the time he leaves school, she suggested to me, then the only solution to his ‘problem’is that he enter the world of the arts, drama or music where ‘that kind of behaviour’is much more acceptable.
The Case for Gender Awareness
My case for a ‘gender-aware’ re-evaluation of the arts curriculum (including teacher skills, expectations and modelling as well as the physical facilities and option offerings of curriculum areas) rests on the preceding four criteria and the evidence presented in justification of each one.
Such a re-evaluation would aim to make explicit previously implicit assumptions about sex differences and might also serve to ‘screen out’ undesirable classroom processes.
Finally, Ann Sherman in an interesting journal article entitled ‘Questions that those concerned with non-sexist art education should ask’, provides a very good example of just such a re-evaluation designed for use by art teachers.
Extended quotations from her article drawing on the work of Belotti, Berger, Kuhn, Ricks and Pyke and Levitan and Chanamine will:
(a)
…show how many of these questions apply across the arts curriculum and as such are easily ‘borrowed’ by music, dance, English or drama teachers;
(b)
…allow inclusion, by way of reference to notes, of much  interesting work in the area which, due to constraints of space, have hitherto been excluded.
The questions are:
1
Do you generally rely upon girls to perform the helping activities in the classroom (for example, passing out supplies, collecting work, etc.)?
2
Do you generally rely upon boys to perform duties such as moving tables, mixing batches of slip, pulling down the screen, etc.?
3
Do you discourage disproportionately selfish and helping behaviour in both sexes?
4
When showing female and male nudes, do you discuss the role of the observer and the idea of person as object?
Do you discuss how these ideas have been influenced by the mass media as well as by the fine arts?
5
Do you examine the gender stereotypes present in mass media images?
6
Is work in the arts seen by both sexes as crucial to self-development as well as to a possible vocational choice?
24
Do you avoid the responsibility of countering sexist attitudes by viewing them as a natural part of the society's framework which students expect you to reinforce?
Do you maintain a similar position with regard to racist attitudes or attitudes about the frivolity of the arts?
25
Do you reward dependency in girls but not in boys?
The above selection (out of fifty-two questions presented in the article), represents the kind of general questioning being advocated as a necessary first step towards a more detailed analysis of each subject area.
An Exemplifying Analysis
What now follows is an example of one such analysis in the area of English; the use of the ‘class reader’ which attempts to answer the question: ‘Does the selection of such texts take into account the above criteria?’
A useful definition of what is usually meant by the term ‘class reader’ is provided by Foggin in Protherough's book, Developing  Response to Fiction.
In his chapter, ‘Building on the class reader’, Foggin echoes the views of many of the English teachers to whom I spoke when he describes his English teaching as being substantially class reader based for the reason that:
…we expect books to generate ideas for exploration, we try to choose books that will challenge and ask questions of our brightest children and yet provide an accessible experience for the weakest.
Again, like many of the teachers contacted in the course of this study, Foggin is clear about the basic assumptions from which class reader work should proceed.
The assumptions shared with the teachers contacted, were,
…the work done should not simply start from the book, but should constantly return and refer to it,…much of the work, including writing, should involve small group work and…books should involve us in ‘ improvising upon representatives of reality’
All five of the most popular texts identified here are described by teachers as providing one or all of these opportunities.
Clearly, the class reader so defined, claims a central role in much English teaching since it frequently provides a nucleus of activity through which the needs of pupils — both girls and boys — are addressed.
The reappraisal undertaken in this section seeks, in part, to examine the validity of this claim.
Background to the Study
That English, in a variety of ways, including the use of the class readers, fails to meet the needs of its female pupils is a contention which has by now been well researched.
Contributory factors cited are:
…the major use of texts which ignore or belittle the traditional interests of girls.
(Rose, 1983)
…the dearth of texts with positive images of both girls and boys.
(Stones, 1985)
…women who do appear being shown by way of a narrow range of images; mother sufferer helper provider of food.
(Rose, 1983)
…the inherited legacy of early books showing the covert message of the passive domesticated girl and the active boy.
(Lobban, 1977)
…the preponderance of pictures of males in prizewinning picture books; a ratio of 11:1 over five years, increasing to 95:1 including animals with an obvious identity.
(Czaplinski, 1976)
…
C.S.E.
texts which reinforce undeviating sex roles with each novel studied: For example, in Kes, Mrs Casper, neglectful and ineffectual as a parent, appears to be responsible for Billy's aberrant behaviour, while the absconding father is romanticized and apparently blameless.
The anti-hero in Billy Liar is surrounded by doting young women aspiring to be his wife.
A male teacher in To Sir With Love actually instructs his female pupils in ladylike behaviour, modesty, charm and attractive appearance.
(Rose, 1983)
As Rose points out in Sexism in the Secondary Curriculum,(1983), despite the fact that English is a subject popular with girls, and one in which they often succeed, it is also the subject which can damage a girl's self-esteem and aspirations.
That English also fails male pupils in different, but important, ways has also been acknowledged.
The work of Askew and Ross (1982) stresses the ever-present fantasy images of the tough, macho heroes and challenges its appropriateness as a sole model of manhood.
Their work highlights the dearth of fictional male characters who have vulnerabilities and emotional needs.
These features take on particular interest when combined with the findings of Squire (1964) whose study of readers not only found evidence of a considerable need on the part of adolescent readers for association and empathy with the characters in a work of fiction, but also a clear correlation between emotional involvement with a story and the formulation of literary judgment.
If, as Ross suggests, one of the special processes and priorities of the arts is,
to adapt the world of sensation to create a vehicle for affective development and articulation.
and if, through the arts,
our sensibility is deepened and enlarged and thereby our capacity for responding sensitively to the world.
then an urgent question arises.
How might such processes be affected in female readers' responses to stories about males, which concern traditionally male interests and which frequently exclude them altogether or restrict them to a passive role?
Such stories would seem to offer a much less effective vehicle for such affective development and articulation.
Such stories would also seem to offer girls fewer opportunities for association and empathy with the characters in a novel, with negative implications, according to Squire for the development of their literary judgment.
A brief reflection on early reading habits by Okely (1986), herself a prolific writer, will serve to illustrate this point.
When reading of inspiring heroes with or without female adjuncts, I identified with the hero as if I were also male.
I saw my dissociation from limp heroines as an achievement rather than a betrayal of my sex.
The female reader of the male text may have to do this to avoid defeat.
(Okely (1986) Simone de Beauvoir)
Again, it is surely relevant to ask what the cumulative effects on boys might be when responding to a literature which, unlike the world outside the novel, is populated entirely by the masculine.
Bettleheim in The Uses of Enchantment provides an apt summary of what a story must do to hold a child's interest and ‘enrich his (sic) life’.
[The story]must at one and the same time relate to all aspects of his (sic) personality — and this without ever belittling but, on the contrary, giving full credence to the seriousness of the child's predicaments, whilst simultaneously promoting confidence in himself (sic) and his future.
The following analysis of data rests on an acceptance of these criteria for a story and seeks to identify features of well used school stories which fail to meet them.
Which Novels or Stories are well used, as Class Readers, in Schools?
Through working with an admittedly small sample of six secondary comprehensive schools (three city, two town and one rural) an overall list of thirty ‘well used’ texts was identified as being in fairly frequent use as class readers.
Where a title appeared as a class reader in three or more  schools it was regarded as ‘well-used’ overall.
The list generated is as follows:
This overall list was further divided into those texts which were in frequent use in all six schools, those which were in use in five of the six schools and those in use in four of the six schools.
In the case of the texts in frequent use in all of the six schools, a quick estimate suggests that these five books were being encountered and worked on by approximately 2000 pupils.
The Machine Gunners, for example, was cited by sixteen of the twenty-seven teachers to whom I spoke as being both consistently popular with pupils and also as being readily accessible to them because of the recent television serialization which caused  heightened interest.
Three of the schools visited made regular use of a video recording of The Machine Gunners as a basis for a further topic work.
It became clear therefore, that this text, as a class reader, had a large audience for sustained periods of time.
The sub-divided list is as follows:
(a)
Titles in frequent use in all six schools:
Hines, B. A Kestrel for a Knave
Lingard, J. Across the Barricades
Orwell, G. Animal Farm
Steinbeck, J. The Red Pony
Westall, R. The Machine Gunners
(b)
Titles in frequent use in five of the six schools:
Barstow, S. Joby
Falkener, J.M. Moonfleet
Frank, A. The Diary of Anne Frank
Garfield, L. Smith
Lee, L. Cider with Rosie
Serraillier, I. The Silver Sword
(c)
Titles in frequent use in four of the six schools:
Bawden, N. The Witch's Daughter
Dahl, R. Danny, the Champion of the World
Hemingway, E. The Old Man and the Sea
Kemp, G. The Turbulent Term of Tyke Tyler
Lee, H. To Kill a Mockingbird
Lively, P. The Ghost of Thomas Kempe
Naughton, B. The Goalkeeper's Revenge
Schaefer, J. Shane
Sherry, S. A Pair of Jesus Boots
Sperry, A. The Boy who was Afraid
Zendel, P. The Pigman
As a final check of the validity of the above lists each of the six schools was visited and the above selections were shown to the Head of English (and frequently, also to the members of the English Department) for their comments.
Further data, for example, concerning teachers' reasons for using these texts, were collected during these visits both through informal discussion and through the use of questionnaires which were completed by some of the staff and returned at a later date (see appendix 1.)
Not all of the twenty-seven staff who returned questionnaires completed all aspects of each.
Heads of Department and staff were also  asked to use the International Reading Association check list in relation to the most popular texts so that their responses could subsequently be checked with mine (see appendix 2 for check list and annotation).
Teachers' Views
In essence, the views of practising English teachers were sought in order to:
(a)
discover teachers' reasons for selection and use of the most popular texts;
(b)
discover any differences of perception regarding ‘what counts’ as stereotypical portrayal;
(c)
find out teachers' views about the significance, or otherwise, of such portrayals;
(d)
investigate how teachers feel about possible action on their part aimed at redressing the ‘gender balance’ of fictional texts used as class readers.
Teachers' Reasons for Selection of Texts
A teacher's choice of fiction to read with a class is inextricably bound up with that teacher's view of what reading is for.
Given the complexity of the issues involved here, and the fact that discussions which gave rise to teacher comment were frequently lengthy and often contentious, any attempted summary of remarks is necessarily difficult.
In addition to discussion, therefore, each Head of Department wrote down reasons for their choice against each of the most popular titles (for full details of all responses see appendix 3).
In essence, teachers said that they selected books for their capacity to elicit the personal involvement of pupils; their potential to link with other curricular areas; to promote discussion and because they were popular with pupils.
It is interesting to note here Yorke's survey of teachers reported in English in Education (1974 and 1979).
Yorke found a great similarity of reasons given by staff despite the age/sex/type of schools canvassed.
He asked teachers to rate nearly 100 objectives for teaching literature on a scale from ‘extremely important’ to ‘totally unimportant’.
Of most importance to teachers were affective aims relating to the personal development of children.
Teachers thought it most important that pupils should gain emotional pleasure, develop positive attitudes towards reading, develop personally and socially through empathy, become tolerant and gain insights into relationships.
The next most important set of aims cited might be summarized as ‘curricular’.
For example, that pupils' own creativity be enhanced and communication skills be fostered through opportunities for discussion/topic work.
Rated least important in Yorke's survey were what might be regarded as literary qualities, concerned with acquiring literary and critical values and gaining knowledge about books and authors.
The views of teachers in the six schools involved in the present study closely parallel those in the Yorke survey.
They too, spoke enthusiastically about, for example, the opportunities offered by The Machine Gunners for emotional empathy with the world of the child versus the world of the adult; the emotional pleasure pupils frequently found in empathizing with Billy's relationship with the hawk, and the themes and topics raised by Kes; the complex nature of the link between humans and animals offered as a theme in The Red Pony; the thematic possibilities of the Irish location of Across the Barricades together with its handling of prejudice; and the understanding of allegory and its special features which might be well illustrated by a reading of Animal Farm.
Since The Machine Gunners found the biggest audience, it is useful to look in some detail at the range of reasons offered by teachers for its popularity.
Why Teachers Use The Machine Gunners
Teachers felt that this text offered them many opportunities for the development of the understanding of parental roles and it was thought to be a book from which all sorts of related topic work could be derived.
Its appealing theme of adventure and war was mentioned and under the heading ‘reasons for selection’, ‘good adventure story’, ‘gory in places’, ‘parents versus children’, ‘children wanting to fight their own war themselves’ are all offered as significant features.
When prompted during discussion, some teachers conceded that by ‘children’ in some of these phrases they probably meant the boys.
An illuminating example of this kind of recognition on the part of teachers is provided by a lengthy continuation sheet clipped to one of the returned questionnaires and sent back by a member of one of the departments.
An extract reads,
A number of texts currently used did form part of our previous girls only school.
I must admit however that there are texts I used frequently with girls which I have not chosen to read with a  mixed class, feeling that they would not attract the attention of the boys.
I wonder how many teachers do give consideration to ‘what the boys will like’ when choosing a class text, and expect the girls to be more tolerant of the choice made.
Curricular considerations are also cited as reasons for using the text, ‘provides lots of material for discussion’; ‘discussion work on relationships possible’; ‘set in the war so plenty of related work’; ‘recent TV version gives added interest’; ‘regional dimension adds further scope’.
Few teachers commented on the literary qualities of the text, and where they did, extreme variation was instanced.
‘Good dialogue and story-line’ and ‘I did not like the story’.
Five of the twenty-seven staff who made written responses gave the book two stars for pupil popularity, i.e. ‘very popular’; two of them reported that girls had complained about ‘having to read about male heroes’ and that The Machine Gunners, which ‘girls see as a boy's book’, had frequently been the impetus for such comments.
(Another member of staff related similar comments from third year girls after reading Kes and Lord of the Flies.)
On one occasion, when time had been scheduled in a departmental meeting for discussion of my questions, ten out of twelve members of staff present indicated that they had at one time or another received complaints from girls (usually in the third or fourth year) about the male bias of their overall literary ‘diet’.
When asked how important the teachers felt such complaints to be they tended to demur and suggest that though they should be taken into account wherever possible and perhaps explicitly discussed (‘Where are the alternatives, though?’), other features of a book deserved more attention.
The gist of this view seemed to be that if the book were ‘good enough’, the girls would not notice.
Again, as one member of staff said, ‘only a few of the girls complain in any one class’.
Not all members of staff in this department of thirteen felt the same degree of commitment to The Machine Gunners as a class reader.
At least two of the staff never used it in this way (considering it more suitable as a library book).
This sporadic use of even the most generally ‘well used’ texts is a recurring feature of overall book use.
Interestingly, the teachers who did not use The Machine Gunners said things like, ‘I like other books more’(for example Conrad's War and The Ghost of Thomas Kempe) and went on to describe very positive pupil responses to these alternative titles.
These teachers felt that their own favourite was just as popular with the pupils they taught as was The Machine Gunners with others.
This is a salutary reminder of the powerful implications of  teacher enthusiasm: no doubt at least part of the popularity of any text has as much to do with the way it is taught, as with characteristics embodied in the text itself.
In summary then, the reasons for choosing The Machine Gunners include the opportunities it offers for various aspects of personal involvement on the part of the reader and its curricular potentials with regard to related topic, theme, and language work.
One of the unintended consequences of its use, however, as we shall see later, is that it also offers to readers an unusually rigid and frequently biased conception of gender.
The point here is that unlike myself, who am after all, in a fairly privileged position of being able to examine texts in detail from a single point of view, i.e. gender, teachers are in the business of bringing together children and books in the busy context of the school classroom, and with a multiplicity of aims.
In the words of Protherough:
The teacher is the third man (sic), in the middle, a kind of literary pander, forever introducing kids and books to each other in the hope that they'll fall in love.
From the point of view of teachers, then, the category of gender is but one critical perspective of many.
It must compete for their attention with many other features of the text which must seem equally, if not more, important when it comes to matching book to class, or book to the prevailing personal, curricular or literary purpose of the lesson, week, term, or year.
To ‘add in’ gender as a specific category with a compelling need to be addressed is to increase rather than decrease the teacher's predicament.
However, what follows is an attempt to give powerful currency to the notion that such an addition to the list of significant textual features is nonetheless crucial since it raises our awareness of the cultural paradigm within which our critical perspectives are themselves shaped, and goes some way toward making visible an otherwise invisible dimension of our teaching.
It is important to note here that although an analysis of individual texts follows, the point of this approach is to provide an overall picture of a pupil's literary diet across a range of texts met in the lower years of the secondary school.
After all, the likely effects over three or four years of coming into contact with one or two class readers which blatantly fail to meet the needs of boys or girls will be qualitatively different from the effects of, say, every other one being of this kind.
What ‘Counts’ as Stereotypical Portrayal?
English teachers in each of the six schools were asked to  analyse four of the most popular texts using the Checklist for  Analysing Children's Literature.
These were, The Machine Gunners, Kes, The Red Pony and Across the Barricades.
(After discussion with staff in schools it was agreed that the checklist was an inappropriate means of analysis for a satirical fable such as Animal Farm.)
As can be seen from the summary in appendix 4 of responses to the checklists, there is general agreement between the responses of this writer and the responses of the staff in schools.
Overall teachers rated the ‘gender dimension’ of these texts in the same way as myself; that is as fairly stereotypical.
From the thirty-five checklists used to  analyse the four titles there is general agreement that:
girls and boys are RARELY represented in equal balance;
girls RARELY participate equally in both physical and intellectual activities;
whilst girls RARELY receive positive recognition for their endeavours, boys ALMOST ALWAYS receive positive recognition for their endeavours;
RARELY are mothers or fathers shown participating in a wide variety of domestic chores not only the ones traditional for their sex;
RARELY do boys and girls have a variety of choices, RARELY are they encouraged to aspire to a wide range of goals;
whilst boys are ALMOST ALWAYS shown developing independent lives and independently meeting challenges and finding their own solutions, girls are RARELY shown doing either of these;
RARELY are women and men shown in a variety of occupations.
Subsequent to the analysis by teachers of the four most popular titles, with the exception of Animal Farm, the writer completed a checklist for each of the remaining eighteen texts so that all twenty-two class readers in use in four or more of the schools were included in the analysis.
The ‘grand total’ of responses to each of the ten questions in the checklist is shown in appendix 4, and from this we can see that one or two particularly striking polarities stand out.
Shown separately these are:
The use of such checklists is not without problems.
For example, the need for some modifications became apparent; the rephrasing of some questions and a refocusing of emphasis towards texts used in Secondary schools would have been helpful.
One Head of Department found the checklist particularly frustrating to apply and wrote that it was ‘impossible to complete usefully’.
It transpired that he wanted to be able to comment on each question in more depth and indeed some staff did so on separate sheets.
It is certainly true that whilst such lists can provide an important first step towards making visible the nature of gender bias, it is the consequent further and more detailed thought concerning each question which often results in:
(a)
the kind of qualitative comment welcomed for debate by teachers; and
(b)
a realization of the depth of stereotypical portrayal involved in any one text.
A closer analysis of The Machine Gunner will serve to illustrate these points.
The Machine Gunners — Gender Analysis: Substantive Detail
Question One:
Are girls and boys, men and women consistently represented in equal balance?
Question Two:
Do boys and girls participate equally in both physical and intellectual activities?
It is true that there is a relatively small number of girls and women in this novel compared to boys and men (one girl to seven boys, and twelve women to twenty-one men).
Of greater significance than this number count however, are the particular descriptions and character traits of those male and female characters who do appear.
Again, there is relatively little intellectual activity described in the narrative, an action packed story.
The fact that such intellectual activity is generally ascribed to two of the leading male characters is of less significance than what kind of ‘other’ activities the rest of the cast indulge in, and what this tells us about their contribution to the overall development of the plot and tone of the story.
It is this kind of detailed information which is needed in order to properly answer questions one and two.
The following points provide a summary of such information and draw their substance from a detailed Character List which notes those activities associated with each character as that character is introduced to the reader (see appendix 5 for full list).
1
There are twenty-eight male characters and fourteen female characters in the book.
2
Ten of the fourteen female characters are introduced in pejorative terms,
(i)
a great fat woman;
(ii)
she was having kittens because she thought the bomber was diving on her personally;
(iii)
‘Where are you going?’ asked a bossy female voice;
(iv)
she had fat knees in ginger stockings which kept straying apart…he could see she was wearing apricot knickers;
(v)
a blond girl…
‘She won't be getting any you know what for a bit;
(vi)
a ‘wobbly voice’(the woman was drunk)— still wearing her dressing gown though it was past four o'clock…she wasn't wearing much;
(vii)
a fat woman…frightened and fainted in the street;
(viii)
‘Oh Lord,’ thought the sergeant, ‘She's one of those!’;
(ix)
old lady — avid for a cigarette, ‘She sucked in the smoke…like a baby having its bottle.’;
(x)
ineffectual female operator — half hysterical and sobbing.
For the majority of female characters, then, shared character traits, mainly pejorative, include:
fatness,
excessive emotion,
unwarranted fear,
impropriety of various forms (dishevelled dress, drunkenness),
infantilism and
 anonymity 
Of the fourteen female characters in the book, eight remain nameless; of the twenty-three male characters, only three fail to gain an identify in this way and are given no name.
3
Of the twenty-three male characters in the book, only two are introduced in pejorative terms:
(i)
‘West Chirton rubbish’— a council estate lad (sic)
(ii)
Fatty Hardy — an inept policeman —‘Stupid’
By comparison, the remaining twenty-one male characters are introduced in unambiguously positive terms.
Between them they are initially shown as sharing such traits as:
competence,
decisiveness,
daring patriotism,
authority,
imagination,
tenacity and
sporting prowess.
4
The initial treatment of two of the major characters in the book, Bodser Brown and Audrey Parton, provides an interesting contrast.
Bodser Brown a bully, who develops as a decidedly unsympathetic character eliciting mainly censure from the narrator (and probably the reader) is nonetheless introduced positively:
Bodser Brown has fifteen [tail fins].
Bodser had the best collection of souvenirs in Garmouth.
Everyone said so.
There had been some doubt until Bodser found the nose-cone of a 3·7 inch anti-aircraft shell, and that settled it.
Audrey Parton, on the other hand (the only female member of Chas' ‘mixed’ school we hear of), is introduced differently.
Audrey, a lively girl (previously the leader of her own gang and described in the book as a ‘misfit’), develops as a decidedly sympathetic character and elicits mainly admiration from the reader.
She is the only female character allowed into the fortress den and as the story develops she is shown to be both sensitive and sensible.
Despite this, when we first  learn about her it is her ‘bossy female voice’ which is brought to our attention, as well as the low esteem with which the boys apparently regard her, ‘Faff off Audrey Parton’.
5
Girls as objects is yet another way in which girls and women in the book are treated pejoratively.
Over half (nine) of the female characters are initially typified by reference to physical characteristics.
Fatness, blondness, bosominess, muscularity and stoutness are all identified as features used to introduce these characters.
None of the male characters is initially typified by reference to physical characteristics in this way.
It is relevant to note here the author's inclusion of scenes of a physically titillating dimension.
Nicky's mother's dressing gown falling open so that Chas feels ‘all queer’ and Mrs Spalding allowing Chas sight of her apricot knickers.
These scenes, in which Chas' burgeoning sexuality is alluded to, appear in the same context as his obvious distaste when actually faced with the prospect of kissing, ‘Eeurk!’ or his hair being touched by a girl: ‘Chas felt his hair suddenly prickle, as if it was full of nits’.
His description of Audrey as ‘little cow’ and Mrs Spalding as ‘silly bitch’also reflect this distaste.
Of course, this kind of ‘Yuk, horror!’ response can be taken as a perfectly legitimate and very welcome literary expression of the ubiquitous emergence of sexuality in young adolescents, a stage they ‘go through’.
This is an inadequate explanation, however, since the young adolescents in question are invariably male.
It is, therefore, a phase of male sexuality which is purportedly being portrayed with the result that female readers are frequently belittled and diminished as they read about girls who are at one and the same time both the object of male disgust and the arousers of male sexual interest.
This is a double standard which fails to interpret fairly an important aspect of male-female differences.
The matter of sexually abusive language in texts is in some senses a separate issue.
As Sue Lees shows, the way pupils use sexually abusive language to insult each other in schools presents particular problems for teachers.
It is often difficult to know when and how to intervene without reinforcing the insult by drawing attention to it.
Nevertheless, just as ways have somehow to be found of taking on the sexually (or racially) abusive language heard in the classroom, so, surely, ways have to be found of taking on sexually (or racially) abusive language read out to pupils from class novels.
Question Three:
Do girls and boys each receive positive recognition for their endeavours?
In order to investigate this aspect of the novel I shall look at one particular episode in the book; the occasion of the assumed invasion of Garmouth by Nazi soldiers.
This is a tense time when everyone firmly believes (wrongly) that German soldiers are about to ‘take over’.
The omniscient author in Chapter 15 gives the reader a ‘bird's eye view’ of each family group as it struggles to survive.
The children in each group are shown trying to escape from their parents in order to meet at the fortress ‘den’.
A brief analysis of the ways in which the endeavours of the two main characters and their families are handled should therefore help to answer the question.
Chas
…manages to give his mother the slip by claiming the need to ‘go to the lav’.
…although his knees were shaking with fear he walked calmly down the path thinking rationally.
‘He even remembered to open the lav door and close it with a bang, like he always did’.
He remembers to think about his rabbits, ‘they too deserved a chance’.
He releases them from their hutches thus giving them their freedom.
He escapes, running for the fortress.
Audrey
…is ‘flung’ into the car by her father (who is angry with Mrs Parton's concern for the safety of her many hatboxes), his anger is expressed as ‘Shut up you silly cow’
…she eventually succeeds in escaping the family but is distressed to the point of tears because she has been forced to disobey her father.
…she jumps out of the car and runs; instead of running efficiently for the fortress like the others, she ‘ran not looking where she was going’ and consequently tripped and fell.
Eventually she reaches the fortress ‘limping and sobbing’.
Once again, the ways in which the author shows the children trying to escape their families and reach the fortress, and the ways in which adults are shown coping (or not) with the emergency, reflect either positive recognition in the case of boys and men or mild derision in the case of girls and women.
For example, when Audrey has previously been described as ‘a strapping lass’…who ‘fought boys…’‘led her own gang’…was ‘as good climbing trees and drainpipes as any boy’, why is it that she is the only one to reach the fortress ‘limping and sobbing’?
Again, most of the children were shouted at by their parents when they escaped, and yet Audrey is the only one to be distressed to the point of tears by this.
Question Four:
Do boys and girls, fathers and mothers, participate in a wide variety of domestic chores, not only the ones traditional for their sex?
An outline of some of the domestic chores undertaken by Mr and Mrs McGill will help to answer this question.
Mrs McGill fries bread for breakfast, takes Chas to bed, cooks supper, lights oil lamp and nurses Nana.
Mr McGill repairs a window to make it safe, paints the air raid shelter door, does some concreting in the garden.
An example of the pervasiveness of domestic thoughts, as far as the women in the book are concerned, is Mrs McGill's conversation during an early air raid; a time of acute danger:
And I was cooking fish and chips when the siren went, and I had to turn the gas off and now they're ruined, and I don't know what else we're going to have for supper…
With regard to the children in the book, the fortress-den might be regarded as their ‘domestic sphere’.
The children built it themselves, underground, and it was their ‘secret place’ which they filled with useful domestic items as well as making a place for the gun.
Significantly, as the only girl to have gained access to this den, Audrey's source of influence is as the provider of food:
I'm not going back into camp to make tea until you put that nasty great thing away!(the gun)
We'd better do as she says or we'll not get a cup o' tea.
Sometimes permission is needed before food is distributed:
‘He (Rudi) looks hungry,’ said Audrey.
‘Can I give him a mug of tea?’
Clearly, this ascription of traditional domestic and non-domestic roles to the female and male characters in the book could be construed as a result of its historical context.
The book is set in the 1940s and this is how things were then, so to expect a different kind of portrayal would be unreasonable.
This explanation is inadequate on two counts.
First, it is easy to see from everyday experience that other ‘time-bound’ features of the story are no longer with us (houses are no longer being bombed, we no longer have air raid shelters in our gardens).
It is not so easy in the case of traditionally defined domestic tasks since despite the fact that these have, and are, changing over time, popular mass images of all kinds still perpetuate an out of date portrayal which goes largely unchallenged.
Though a literary portrayal of such rigidly defined domestic roles is not in itself a problem, an uncritical reading of these in an English classroom probably is.
Especially if the contemporary texts in the ‘literary diet’ on offer similarly contain such assumptions.
Second, if the ‘historicist’ argument is to hold good, then at least some of the female characters in such texts should be seen in non-traditional roles since this is one period in history when women were called upon to enter previously ‘male’domains.
Questions Five and Six:
Do both girls and boys have a variety of choices and are they encouraged to aspire to various goals including non traditional ones if they show such inclination?
Are both boys and girls shown developing independent lives, independently meeting challenges, and finding their own solutions?
Chas is certainly shown as aspiring to a variety of goals; these include his aim to have the best war souvenir collection in Garmouth, to detach the machine gun from the crashed aeroplane, to dig his own underground air raid shelter, to build a gun emplacement and to fire the gun.
He is shown to succeed in all of these goals, frequently through independent action and choice.
Also, when Chas behaves in what might be regarded in this book as a ‘non traditional way’, for example, in aiming to look after Nicky whose family has been killed, his endeavours in this regard are also portrayed positively.
He is shown to have a warm and sensitive side to his character which serves to increase its appeal.
With regard to Audrey it is difficult to identify the goals to which she aspires since these are rarely explicitly referred to, and she appears less often.
She does want to be ‘one of the gang’ and to be admitted to the fortress den and in this she is successful.
Though, as we have seen, once there she fulfils the traditional roles of provider of food, nurse and comforter.
In these traditional roles she is shown to be effective.
On the other hand, when she behaves in what might be regarded as ‘non-traditional’ ways her failure is dismal; such behaviour adds nothing to her character's appeal.
For example, when she accompanies the boys on an illicit night-time visit to the woods in order to retrieve the gun from the crashed aeroplane, she drops the torch, breaks it (having previously failed to hold it straight), and begins to cry at the thought of dead bodies.
As regards the long-term goals of the male and female characters in  this story, there is little evidence available.
We might infer, however, that Audrey's ‘big-eyed’ response to the birth of a baby implies the inclusion of motherhood in her long-term plans.
No other hint of possible aspirations is included in the text.
We are given insight into Chas' thoughts of a future through his own phantasizing dreams:
He could have been the finest brain surgeon England has ever seen…even blind he is a superb concert pianist…
No hint of possible fatherhood is mentioned in the text.
In summary, then, a picture emerges of Chas aspiring to goals in both traditional and non-traditional domains and succeeding in both.
Audrey aspires to goals in both traditional and non-traditional domains but succeeds in the traditional domain only.
With regard to independence, Chas is shown as both wanting independence and in practice being independent.
Audrey is shown as wanting independence, but in practice usually failing.
When she is successful, this success is attributed, not to her as a female character, but to the fact that she is a ‘tomboy’; as the author makes clear.
She had always wanted to be a boy.
Question Seven:
Are women and men shown in a variety of occupations, including non-traditional ones?
When women are portrayed as full-time home makers, are they depicted as competent and decisive?
The major part of this question has already been answered by the previous discussion of the pervasive quality of domesticity in relation to the female characters in the book.
In connection with the depiction of home makers as competent and decisive, the reader is offered two important insights here.
The first is through the ways in which Chas thinks about his parents, often stream-of-consciousness fashion, in their absence.
The second, is the way in which opportunities for ‘light relief’ or humour are distributed in the story.
First then, the ways in which Chas regards his mother and father.
This happens on eight occasions in all; on three occasions he is thinking about his father and on five occasions he is thinking about his mother.
On the three occasions when his father is the object of Chas' thoughts his attitude is one of admiration:
…his father's hacksaw would cope with that.
All his father's tools were wonderful, powerful, could cope with anything.
…
When my father went on an embalming course he saw one fellah eating his sandwiches, reading a book propped against a body.
…his father understood the way kids really felt about things…
On the five occasions when his mother is the object of Chas' thoughts, his attitudes comprise frustration, boredom, relief from shame, disgust and exasperation:
frustration…
She would never understand that you didn't get the stick for being late these days.
boredom…
Chas lay on his back and let her words drift over his head…
relief from shame…
His mother's legs, dangling over his head had pinker stockings, and thank God she always kept her knees together.
disgust…
How much soot and oil she must have swallowed since marrying him.
(…his mother had just kissed his father who was very dirty.)
exasperation…her grasp of geography was not very great.
Chas could never convince her that Edinburgh was not near London.
Despite Mrs McGill's endeavours in the domestic sphere, her competence in this regard fails to emerge in her son's considerations of her.
Mr McGill, however, gains the admiration of his son despite his relative ‘distance’ from things domestic.
With regard to the matter of decisiveness mentioned in the question, it is interesting to note the ease with which Mrs McGill's notional authority in the domestic sphere, in this case ‘child care’, is successfully challenged by her husband:
‘Don't take the bairn, Jack,’ said his mother, fingering her apron.
‘He's going’, said his father grimly.
‘He'd better wear his best suit then.’
‘Don't be daft woman’.
‘Come on, son’.
Second, the handling of humour in the book provides valuable insights.
Bearing in mind that all the women who appear are portrayed as homemakers of one kind or another, it is significant that on the occasions when potentially humorous situations emerge, women are  the ‘butt of the joke’ on six of these occasions (and Audrey as a potential one), despite the fact that there are fewer women overall.
A few examples will illustrate the kind of humour involved.
In selecting them I have tried to imagine an audience of 11–13-year-olds, and consequently what they might regard as ‘funny’:
…
‘Lead on, MacDuff’, said Audrey, patting him on the head as the bogie rolled past.
Chas felt his hair suddenly prickle, as if it was full of nits.
…
Chas eyed her [Audrey's]bulging muscles speculatively.
That machine-gun was heavy.
She might come in useful.
Besides, the dead German would scare the little cow silly.
She wouldn't interfere with men's business again.
…
Above the chugging [there was an air raid in progress]came a kind of rhythmic panting — screeching…a kind of dragging-hopping, like a kangaroo in its death throes.
It was even more frightening than the chugging, and it came right up to the shelter door.
A body fell through.
It was Mrs Spalding.
‘Is she dead?’ said Mrs McGill.
‘No, but she's got her knickers round her ankles’, said Mr McGill.
Question Eight:
Do characters deprecate themselves because of their sex?
Do others use denigrating language in this regard?
Characters in the novel do not denigrate themselves because of their sex.
As we have seen already, however, boys do denigrate girls through such phrases as:
‘Girls aren't allowed to look.
They can't stand it.’
‘Girls!’ they all shouted together.
‘What do girls know about it?’
Again, the word ‘woman’ is frequently used in a denigrating way too:
‘I don't mean that kind of spring, woman.’
‘Don't be daft, woman.’
Question Ten:
Is inclusionary language used?(for example‘police officer’ instead of ‘policeman’, etc.).
Again the use of such language may be a problem in a novel intended to be historically accurate.
People didn't use that sort of language then…
Nonetheless, pupils know that language occurs in many forms: they are being invited to listen to Geordie speech here for example, yet they know that not  everyone speaks in this way.
Pupils also know that language changes over time, they will be used to the idea of ‘fashionable’ words and phrases which drop into and out of popular usage, even in their relatively short life-spans.
The lack of inclusionary language in the book is only a problem, therefore, if it is ignored by the teacher.
Given a suitable time, discussion of this facet of the novel could enrich and enliven its reception.
Further Comment
It is necessary to make the point that had different criteria been applied when  analysing this text, some of its merits, hitherto unremarked, would have been revealed.
For example it has a good story, exciting in parts, amusing in parts and with some memorably drawn characters.
Again, given the story's setting and plot, it would have been easy for an insular national chauvinism to have been the prevailing tone.
Though enunciation is given to such feelings on occasion, it is by no means pervasive.
The most sympathetic male character in the book, with the exception of Chas' father, is Rudi, the German pilot.
He is portrayed as showing sorrow at the destruction caused by German bombers and it is he who ‘saves the day’ by first giving himself up and then being shot by Clogger.
The scene in which Nicky takes leave of Rudi is touchingly drawn, and heartening in the sense that Nicky is moved to tears and is not ridiculed for it.
In this scene at least, the narrative departs from its generally macho tone.
In his article Machismo Rules, Not O.K (1985) Rees, a prolific children's book writer, claims that too many books extol ‘macho male values…
’ His is a closely argued polemic and in it he cites The Machine Gunners as a classic instance of just such a book.
For Rees, macho characteristics comprise ‘guts rather than integrity’ and the portrayal of violence as an admirable personal quality.
The following passage exemplifies, for Rees, macho characteristics:
Clogger moved like greased lightning.
His steel toe-cap caught the first minion on the knee, leaving him writhing in the gutter.
Such macho tendencies are potentially limiting, rather than enriching for the boys who read such stories, and serve to perpetuate the myth of the ‘boys don't cry’ syndrome.
So too do macho attitudes to the  opposite sex.
Macho man usually prefers talking to his own sex because it's safer, and he's more interested in proving he's as ‘male’ as his peer group than in entering a relationship which requires an ability to give, to love, to be tender.
In conclusion, one of the English teachers contacted during research for this study spoke warmly of his own reasons for liking to work with a particular text.
He said that he liked a novel when, ‘it promotes fusion of response between teacher and pupils’.
This is why he said that he needed to like the book personally.
Another reason given for his own preference was the ability of his favourite novel to ‘allow pupils to be drawn into the emotional climate of the book.’
These conclusions are very close to my own.
With regard to The Machine Gunners, a Carnegie Medal winner, I would at best be ambivalent, and at worst, reluctant to invite pupils to share its particular emotional climate.
The thesis of this study is that through a gender aware approach, we would at least be on safer ground when issuing such invitations.
Teachers' Views about the Significance or Otherwise of Stereotypical Portrayal, and the Validity of Taking Steps to Avoid It
Teachers' responses to questions about gender suggest that they are aware of the issue and are, indeed, ready to consider possible ways forward.
Although the planners, writers, illustrators and publishers of textbooks and children's books in general have the power to influence attitudes and to develop a sense of equality and respect for all, it is frequently the teachers' selection of texts on a ‘gender-aware’ basis, and with a view to the overall literary diet of pupils, which is a deciding factor.
Their awareness of gender as an important issue in this context is therefore crucial.
The responses of the teachers contacted in this study illustrate their awareness and commitment, albeit in embryo.
For example, twelve out of sixteen teachers wrote ‘yes’ in response to the question, ‘Do you think it is important to raise the issue of ‘sex stereotyping’should you encounter it in texts?’
Also, when staff were asked what features of a text would cause them to reject its use as a class reader, ‘sexism’ was volunteered as one such reason by staff in three of the six schools visited.
Other reasons cited were:
lack of depth to themes handled (cited by three schools);
lack of opportunity for pupil empathy;
does not ‘read out’ well;
does-not ‘ring true’;
patronizing in tone;
racism;
portrayal of unacceptable attitudes;
inappropriate language;
amorality;
tedious handling of story line;
biased, racially, sexually, politically (unless the text was being used to highlight one of these);
text which confirmed pupil prejudice;
text I/we didn't like;
gratuitous violence.
(See appendix 6 for full details of teachers' responses to this, and other, questions about gender.)
All staff in the schools stated that they would welcome the addition of texts showing girls and women as main protagonists of the plot so long as these texts were also ‘well written’ and ‘interesting’.
Four of the six schools said they would be prepared to take positive steps towards ‘searching them out’.
This kind of ‘searching out’ or conscious selection is an important feature.
Whilst general claims about the prevalence of such awareness and commitment in the teaching population as a whole can not be made from such a small sample, it would seem safe to assume that the ‘scene is set’ as regards‘good will’.
Some Suggestion for Progress
Some practical suggestions, or ways forward, aimed at capitalizing on this kind of ‘good will’ might be:
1
To provide teachers with the means to easily and quickly identify sexism in children's literature should they wish to do so ['sexism' here to include explicit sexism, i.e. a refusal to acknowledge diversity resulting in a stereotypical portrayal, and implicit sexism, i.e. a tacit acceptance of prevalent inequalities on the basis that these reflect currently accepted norms].
Some examples of checklists designed for this purpose, including a modified version of the ‘Checklist for  Analysing Children's Literature’, are shown in appendix 7.
These include a checklist based on the outline of a Norwegian study in 1983, and a checklist forming part of a UNESCO study in 1986.
Though any such checklists may be viewed by busy teachers as a necessary evil rather than a welcomed virtue, nonetheless, it may frequently serve as a useful catalyst to further and more detailed thought on the matter.
A typical comment from teachers was that even though they may never use such a checklist again, having to use it, albeit reluctantly, this time had certainly made them ‘think’.
2
To disseminate to teachers the work of other interested parties (publishers — research organizations) and the outcomes of their attempts at finding solutions to the problem of explicit and latent sexism in children's literature
A particularly apt example of the kind of information which might prove useful in validating and supporting the work of staff in this area is the McGraw Hill Book Co.
Guidelines for Equal Treatment of the Sexes issued to all their contributors.
The Guidelines offer detailed practical advice based on the firm conviction that ‘educational and reference material…should reflect a deep conviction that every human being has a dignity and worth that is her or his own, no more dependent on sex than on race and colour…’(see appendix 8 for full guidelines).
This kind of statement, issued by a large and highly successful international publishing company could help to mitigate the sense of isolation often felt by those teachers attempting to tackle these issues, often in less than supportive circumstances.
3
To continue to applaud, rather than to call into question the already prevalent style of English teaching which makes space for pupil involvement with texts on a number of levels, and in a variety of ways
Through such an active, investigative approach to texts, the author's portrayal of male and female characters becomes a legitimate part of authentic critical analysis.
In the words of one of the teachers (when answering the question about the need to raise issues of sex stereotyping in texts), ‘Yes, it's certainly worth questioning — all part of the critical approach to literature.’
4
To include in teacher training ‘respect for others’ as a first principle and to support this by the development of teaching materials and activities which foster a practical understanding of its significance
The Born Free programme (see appendix 9), developed in 1976 by the College of Education of the University of Minnesota is a good  example of such material.
The original experiment was intended principally for teachers and the parents of their pupils and entailed attending training workshops for one year.
The materials which eventually evolved from this study include a questionnaire devised by the group and which has subsequently been used as a basis for further in-service training sessions in their schools.
These training sessions take place during working hours with the agreement of the school Principal, and require teachers to assume an active role.
Clearly, the relevant funding body in England, the LEA, would need to be highly committed to the aim of ‘equal opportunity’ before making the necessary financial and administrative arrangements.
Recent initiatives in this country include the current survey of teacher training courses being undertaken by the Equal Opportunities Commission, and the Schools Curriculum Development Committee's work in this area which resulted in the ‘Genderwatch’ pack of self-assessment schedules for use in schools: this pack would provide valuable support material for arts teachers wishing to monitor this aspect of their work.
5
To furnish teachers with the means to critically appraise their pupil-teacher relationship for signs of discriminatory behaviour, should they wish to do so.
Clearly, it is futile to try to eradicate unfair portrayals of male and female characters in texts without an equally vigorous attempt to eradicate unfair treatment of female and male pupils by teachers in their classrooms.
The questionnaire shown in appendix 10, is intended to enable teachers to personally assess their behaviour towards pupils of both sexes and is proposed, by the Canadian Committee on the Status of Women of the Government of Quebec, to be distributed to all teachers.
6
To regularly disseminate to teachers, annotated lists of new titles published which are aimed at children and adolescents
What has become known as ‘teenfic’ is now big business and regular mailings of selected titles, with plot summaries would greatly help busy teachers to select books for future use.
Professional associations would seem to be well placed in terms of expertise and disinterest to carry out this kind of selection.
Virago and  Women's Press are two publishers who have recently issued series aimed at adolescents, particularly girls; Upstarts and Livewire have received a wide readership already.
None of these new titles claim to be feminist, rather they tend to  address fears and desires hitherto ignored.
Where such stories differ from many adult ‘romances’ is in the inclusion of strong female characters and the relegation of romance to the edge and not the centre of the girl's world.
The Livewire and Upstart series confront issues which traditional teenage fiction avoids (sexual violence, racism and unemployment).
It is to be hoped that future titles will move on from here and handle some of the visionary, imaginative and fantastic possibilities of fiction also.
Obviously, it would be shortsighted as well as unfair to suggest that action taking place entirely within the school system is powerful enough to eradicate undesirable gender-based stereotypes.
Action outside the school system is necessary also; though it is outside the brief of this work to investigate the wider social arena in detail.
Suffice it to say that in some countries where great importance is attached to the tackling of sexual prejudice there is planned action by national authorities, as well as decentralized and private initiatives.
Such a combination would seem to suggest that society as a whole is aware of the problem and is trying to find a solution.
In Norway, for example, the government has instituted a system of approval which authorizes persons designated by the Ministry of Church and Education to ask the authors of school texts to remove sexist passages.
This planned initiative runs alongside individual action and studies show that this system is not deemed by the teachers to be incompatible with their creative freedom (Bjerke, 1983).
When current trends have begun to make some impact, further questions will no doubt arise.
For example,
1
How do pupils, particularly the girls, respond to the new titles designed with them in mind?
2
How do the boys in those classes where these stories are used, respond?
3
Do teachers find such books acceptable and/or worthwhile?
4
How do boys respond to male fictional characters who exhibit traits traditionally defined as feminine?
The wholesale abolition of rigid portrayals of gender stereotypes in school texts is not a sufficiently subtle response to the problem, and should not be attempted.
Firstly, because in some contexts such portrayals are a necessary part of the work of art, and serve to furnish pupils with a valuable opportunity to learn about the notion of contextualization.
Secondly, such portrayals can provide excellent opportunities for the kind of critical discussion and reflection necessary  for a sophisticated response to text.
The wholesale abolition of unthinking, unnecessary and taken-for-granted stereotypes, however, is vital.
This kind of voluntary censorship will be fraught with difficulty and a matter of value and judgment since the cultural concept of gender is a contested one.
It is nonetheless an unavoidable predicament for those working in the field of arts education to encounter if their aim to encourage both the personal and social enrichment of their pupils is to be fulfilled.
As John Davies, Director of the Educational Publishers Council, points out, publishers should take on board legitimate public concern about racism and sexism in school and children's books.
However, the accent should not be on censorship or prescription, but on the encouragement of an enlightened attitude to the treatment of race and sex in books.
In his words:
Understanding should be fostered rather than censorship.
It will be far better for us all if we move towards a greater understanding of each other rather than towards Clause 28 and all that.
The ensuing dilemma that arts educators find themselves in is no less than the struggle to transform reality into something which more fully reflects the astounding potential that both boys and girls have to construct their own lives; to make their own mark.
EXAMINATION AND ASSESSMENT
Assessment and Examination in Arts Education: Teachers Talking
Paul Cartwright
There are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words.
They make themselves manifest.
They are what is mystical.
The major difficulty confronting (music) teachers is how to work to any one board's specific requirements and apply the necessary assessment techniques.
(Cathie Shore, a Chief Moderator for GCSE Music)
Introduction
The stark juxtaposition of these two statements sums up the whole dilemma facing arts teachers, and consequently illustrates the central issue I want to discuss in this chapter.
For, at one extreme, we have a description of that unique quality for which the arts, and the arts in education in particular here, are quite properly prized: namely their existence, according to Ross, as ‘special ways of knowing’, in which our ideas and feelings are expressed through an engagement with ‘sensuous forms’ using that form of direct symbolization identified by Langer, which, by definition, relies upon non-discursive forms of communication that by their very nature defy translation into words.
At the other extreme we have the reality that faces arts teachers, in the secondary and tertiary stages of education.
A situation in which the creative and artistic endeavours of children are frequently assessed and examined according to externally pre-determined sets of criteria and standards, that ‘measure the measurable’ often at the expense of those qualities arts education professes to develop.
For instance, in the introduction to Assessment and Progression in Music Education (1986) the Music Advisers National Association (MANA) states:
It is a generally held perception that formal assessment has hindered and distorted work in the secondary classroom through laying too much emphasis on what is easily examinable, regardless of its relevance as musical experience.
(p.6).
Given that the main aims of most arts departments, and of the examination syllabuses in arts subjects, refer to the development of such qualities as ‘imagination’, ‘creativity’, and the ‘ability to respond expressively to given stimuli’; qualities that are essentially concerned with that same kind of engagement with ‘sensuous forms’ mentioned above, and we are left asking the question ‘Can, or even should, children's work in the arts be examined at all?’
The fact that in recent years a very large number of children have had their work in art, music, drama and dance submitted for public examinations (Vickerman, 1986) suggests that there are some compelling reasons why arts teachers seem to be willing to overcome their basic feelings of unease about this process.
But does this apparent wide-scale support for examinations disguise another motive, that has little or nothing to do with either the practicality or desirability of examining children's work in these subjects?
What, moreover, is the real relationship between the examination process in particular arts subjects and the way these arc actually taught?
Are examination syllabuses seen as an unwelcome intrusion into the normal pattern of teaching in those subjects, or are they a natural extension of what is already happening?
Does the final examination bear any similarities to the ways children's work is assessed during the rest of the course, or are they two totally different and separate activities?
Finally, and in many respects most crucially, what has been the impact of the GCSE syllabuses in these subjects?
Have they, as Sir Keith Joseph intended, made examinations accessible to a greater ability range of pupils, increased children's motivation by emphasizing positive achievement and also exercised a formative effect upon the way subjects have been taught, through establishing greater breadth, balance, relevance and differentiation into the syllabuses being taught?
Obviously it may be too early to answer some of these questions fully, but the fact that I, in common with the majority of arts teachers working in secondary schools in this country, have been grappling with the very difficult process of assessing, marking and moderating the work of the first batch of pupils to take the GCSE examination will, I believe, give added force to some of the things I intend to say.
As well as using evidence of my own experiences, and those of other arts teachers with whom I work, I shall support my argument and conclusions with  evidence from a small-scale research project, in which I explored the ways arts departments in four fairly typical secondary schools approached the problems of assessing and examining children's performance in art, music and drama.
Since I carried out this survey, education has become a central issue in public debate, particularly as a result of the changes contained within the Education Reform Act.
In addition schools throughout the country have been preparing schemes for the extension of the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI), as well as implementing the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education (CPVE).
All of these developments will have massive implications for the arts in education, both in terms of organization, teaching styles and assessment techniques.
Some of these are already leading to the introduction of modular courses in arts subjects, as well as cross-arts initiatives.
Furthermore, the date for the introduction of records of achievement is fast approaching, heralded by pilot schemes such as the OCEA scheme in Oxfordshire.
I shall consider the implications of these developments more fully in the conclusion, as some of them have obvious connections with, and consequences for, the examination system.
Before embarking upon a review of some of the findings from my survey, the scene needs to be set with a brief summary of the main arguments and counter-arguments concerning assessment.
Research over the past few years has led me to observe elsewhere (Cartwright, 1984) that in education in general— and arts education is no different in this respect — assessment comes in all forms and guises, and that the type of assessment practised is dependent upon the reasons for its use.
Hence, the more formative and diagnostic the intention is the more informal it tends to become.
Furthermore, the relationship between the method used and its purpose form a kind of continuum from this ‘soft’ end of formative assessment to the ‘hard’summative end which is characterized by external examinations.
This may seem to be a rather unsurprising observation, but I feel it has very important consequences for arts education, underlining as it does the unease teachers feel about examinations in these subjects.
For, as Witkin noted in The Intelligence of Feeling,(1974), the type of engagement in those areas of arts education where the emphasis is placed more clearly on the productive realm, such as visual art education, frequently leads the teachers to:
…establish a more intimate relationship with the pupils in respect of work produced than many of the teachers of academic subjects simply because of the very personal nature of the work.
(p. 114)
The fact, therefore, that much of art education is concerned with a direct pupil/teacher interaction, in which informal discussions about problems, and their possible resolution, establishes a crucial but essentially informal kind of diagnostic assessment, means that many art teachers view any externally imposed structure upon this process as not only  irrelevant , but potentially damaging to that very quality of personal involvement and development that characterizes good work.
One of the major criticisms, therefore, that arts teachers have advanced against formal systems of assessment, whether for internal or external purposes, appears as Goodman (1981) observes, to rest on the argument that the majority of assessment techniques used in education are inappropriate or inadequate for use in the aesthetic area, since they invariably tend to emphasize mathematical and statistical forms of measurement.
Thus it is hardly surprising to find Barrett (1979) warning art teachers to:
avoid formulae and strategies which others, from different disciplines, insist that we adopt so that they can achieve a unified standard.
(p. 57)
This point has now been made frequently over the past few years, as for instance in this passage from the Gulbenkian Report, The Arts in Schools (1982):
The arts enable us to assert ideas and judgments which we may recognize collectively to be true which cannot be proved in other ways, through empirical experiment, for instance.
Intuitive judgment must be recognised as a legitimate element in evaluating this work in schools.
Attempts to make the arts accountable by submitting them to forms of assessment which properly belong elsewhere may actually make them appear wanting by looking for inappropriate forms of proof.
(p.86).
The use of inappropriate forms of assessment to grade and rank-order pupils' work for the purpose of making comparisons or to achieve so-called ‘unified standards’ is illustrated by the worst abuses of norm-referencing, which has been roundly and justifiably criticized by many writers, even in those areas of the curriculum where one might expect this system to be welcomed.
On the surface, then, it would appear that the move towards criterion-referencing would be seen as a major step forward.
Unfortunately the dividing line between norm and criterion-referencing is far less distinct than it would appear, since the establishing of standards of performance used for assessment criteria must by definition imply the use of some form of yardstick or norm.
(Rowntree, 1974) Ross (1987) here warns of the dangers of either approach:
…whether norm or criterion referenced, the examination entails rank-ordering, even where a range of grades is not in the strictest sense being competed for.
The competitive element is, on the whole, damaging to artistic endeavour, especially in the school situation where co-operation and mutual encouragement in a non-judgmental environment are often of the essence.
In contrast, others have set about finding solutions to the dilemma caused by assessment and examinations in the arts.
Undoubtedly the motivation for this search has been accelerated by the renewed public, and especially governmental, interest in standards and accountability in education as a whole.
This has generated an understandable concern that the arts are particularly vulnerable in this respect.
Hence, in recent years, we have witnessed the publication of the Gulbenkian Report, the report by the APU Working Party on Aesthetic Development, and the setting up of various national arts organizations, such as the National Association for Education in the Arts, all of which have argued the philosophical justification for arts education.
In addition, there has been much space devoted to the discussion of assessment, with the APU Report offering the most comprehensive attempt so far, with its proposal of an actual model of how this might be structured.
The APU Working Party rested its case firmly on the philosophical groundwork of Best (1980), who over recent years has pioneered the argument that the arts are amenable to judgments that are as ‘objective’ as those employed in scientific research.
However, it must be pointed out that what he has consistently proposed does not require the arts to be subjected to ‘scientific or quasi-scientific’ forms of measurement.
In fact he goes to great lengths to argue that the most important consequences of educational progress actually require ‘sensitive judgment’ using ‘interpretative reasoning’, and that in the arts this means that valid and reliable assessment can only be achieved through what Best calls ‘inter-subjective agreement’.
Similarly, Aspin (1986), in his article ‘Objectivity and assessment in the arts’, agrees that the arts are ‘objective’:
…but it is a different sort of objectivity than that permitting and defining  assertibility in the sciences and impossible to verify or vindicate by their kinds of instruments and tests.
(p. 44)
The problem Aspin sees is how to overcome the variety of, at times, contentious and dubious interpretations caused by artist's adherence to  different philosophies and interpretations of the concept of art.
A point that is amply demonstrated by Smith (1980), with his description of the muddled and frequently contradictory values and beliefs exhibited by art teachers in their styles and strategies of teaching.
Nevertheless, the view that the arts can, and should, be assessed is one that has begun to receive widespread support, with the authors of the Gulbenkian Report stating quite unequivocally the need for schools to provide basic information to parents and employers about:
(a)
adequate teaching of certain skills:
(b)
continuing improvements in the general standard of educational attainment;
(c)
adequate information to be made available about pupils' actual achievements and personal potential.
(p.81).
A view which is echoed by Eisner, who states:
…not to evaluate children's art is to be educationally irresponsible.
Education is a goal-directed activity, as teachers are concerned not simply with bringing about change, but with bringing about desirable change.
If the teacher does not evaluate what children do, how can he determine if what he is doing is contributing to or hampering their growth in art.
Similarly, Allison has come out strongly in favour of assessment, as the following demonstrates:
Whatever the curriculum there is no reason in principle why some appropriate means should not be devised to assess the extent to which any pupil has achieved some desirable level of understanding, knowledge or competence as a consequence of following that curriculum.
(p.117).
But Allison has gone further than just stating the theoretical arguments for the process, he has already begun to explore the actual practicalities of implementing assessment techniques with the aid of students in his department.
What is particularly interesting about these experiments is that they are all based upon the theoretical and philosophical framework Allison has devised, in which he has identified four ‘interactive and interdependent’ domains:
Where the issue of assessment and examining in the arts becomes problematical is in those instances where the justification can be seen to be overtly influenced by external factors.
This is undoubtedly the case in instances where the rationale has more to do with ‘status, political weight and viability’ of the subjects within the curriculum.
Which leads some to argue that:
A subject as vulnerable within the curriculum as art education needs to be seen by pupils, teachers, headteachers and administrators to be functioning in a healthy state and that judgment is likely to be made in terms derived from educational theory and include the results of assessment procedures and examination performance whether art teachers consent or not.
(Stevenson, 1983)
Others are highly critical of this type of reasoning, which is often cited as the main justification for examining in the arts, but which the critics argue confers only a ‘spurious legitimacy’ at the expense of much that is valuable in the arts.
The problem is that despite all the well-intentioned efforts of those who have devised the various syllabuses, whether for the old CSE/ ‘O’ levels or the new GCSE, what can be accurately assessed may only represent a small part of what arts education is all about.
For example, in an article aimed at secondary headteachers, Ross (1987) identifies huge shortfalls between the aims described in the National Criteria for the GCSE art and design and music examinations, and what the assessment objectives prescribe should be looked for in these subjects:
The following terms appear as aims for art but do not get a mention as objectives:
‘experimentation’,
‘innovation’,
‘expression’,
‘creative intentions’,
‘invention’,
‘intuitive and imaginative abilities’.
One aim seems to have been excluded entirely: to promote ‘the individual's special aptitudes and interests and to foster and encourage confidence, enthusiasm and a sense of achievement’.
There will be a great many art teachers for whom this particular aim and the other concepts listed above will represent the whole raison d'etre of their work.
In this article, Ross acknowledges the current pressures upon arts education are such that it would be unwise for any arts teacher to declare ‘UDI’ from the examination system, hence his decision to aim his argument against examinations in the arts at headteachers, who are in a position to remove the arts from this form of damaging restriction by placing them within a protected, and non-examined core.
The majority of the discussion so far has been concerned with the assessment of children's artistic rather than their aesthetic development.
The APU document, for example, is at pains to try and disentangle the two, but in the end comes down in favour of artistic development as being the only aspect that can reliably be assessed.
This, as we have seen, is very much at odds with the philosophy of writers like Ross and Witkin, who have emphasized the need for arts education to address the problem of aesthetic development, or what Witkin terms the ‘intelligence of feeling’.
Likewise, Ross (1978) has consistently argued the case for arts education to be centred on the philosophy of aesthetic development, but as he acknowledges:
Having a policy for aesthetic education means making a coherent statement about the nature and scope of aesthetic experience, about the school's provision for aesthetic development and including an account of the criteria by which student progress will be measured.
However, given his previous remarks, and his other writings, we can be sure that Ross means something very different from the conventional approach to assessment, more along the lines of a ‘collective celebration’(1986)
Outline of the Research
My research project, carried out during the spring term 1987 consisted of a survey of the attitude, and approach to assessment and examinations in the art, music and drama departments of four neighbouring secondary schools in the Midlands.
It took the form of a combination of taped, structured interviews with members of the arts departments in each school, together with at least one representative from the senior management of each school These interviews were transcribed and cross-referenced with documentary evidence in the form of observations of actual teaching, departmental syllabuses and other written material that either the departments or the schools were able to provide (for example, school handbooks; curriculum statements; assessment policies; etc.)
Three of the schools in the survey are situated in fairly small country towns, in a county which still operates a selective system.
The fourth school is situated on the edge of a large industrial city which operates a completely comprehensive system.
For the purposes of this chapter I have given the four schools fictitious names.
The ‘Pope John Paul Comprehensive’ is a large Roman Catholic aided co-educational 11–18 comprehensive, with a large and thriving sixth form, offering a wide range of courses including some not normally found in LEA schools, such as‘A’level philosophy.
The school has no uniform, and members of staff are addressed by pupils with their forenames, giving the school a remarkably relaxed but purposefully informal atmosphere.
It operates a separate subject slip style of reporting to parents.
During the lower school period there are no grades on these report slips.
The school had been selected to participate in a research project set up to test some of the recommendations of the Gulbenkian Report, The Arts in Schools (1982), and had chosen to use the extra finance from this project to institute a number of residencies for artists, writers, musicians, etc.
J.F. Kennedy School is a 12–18 co-educational comprehensive, situated on the south-western edge of the county town, with approximately 750 pupils.
The school operates a fairly strict assessment policy which requires subject teachers to give each pupil attainment grades at the end of their first term at the school, this is used to place the pupil in either high or mixed ability groups.
These grades have to conform to the normal curve of distribution.
The school was one of those selected to take part in the county's TVEI pilot scheme, but neither the art nor music department were involved in work on this project at the time of the research.
At the time of the survey there was no drama specialist on the staff, although a drama/English teacher had been appointed for the next year.
Pupils wear a distinctive uniform, and the atmosphere in the school could be described as quite formal.
St. George's is a large Church of England aided 11–18 comprehensive, with approximately 1300 pupils, currently in the process of changing from all boys to a co-educational school.
It is situated on the Eastern outskirts of a large industrial city, with a fairly high level of children from different ethnic origins.
As such, therefore, it was the only school in the survey that presented a multi-cultural perspective on the issue.
For a variety of reasons it was not possible to hold interviews with members of the music and drama departments, or with any representative of the senior management.
All information about the school has, therefore, been obtained from my interviews with members of the art department, and from various documents provided by the Head of Art.
In addition to the changes resulting from the move to become co-educational St. George's was also in the process of reviewing its curriculum and pastoral structures, both in the light of the different demands that the presence of girls would make, but also as part of a city-wide review of secondary schools resulting from the effects of  falling rolls, and the expansion of TVEI.
The school was also involved in the OCEA programme.
Pupils wear a uniform, and the school has a fairly formal atmosphere.
Redbrook Secondary School is described in its prospectus as a ‘restricted range comprehensive’, with over 1200 boys and girls aged between 11 and 18, including around 120 in the sixth form.
The school is situated on the south western edge of a medium-sized country town.
In the fourth and fifth years, in addition to being available as separate examination options, art, music, drama and dance are involved in a compulsory multi-media course for all pupils.
This media course was set up as the school's response to being chosen, like school A to participate in the Gulbenkian Research Project.
Redbrook Secondary appears to be run on fairly formal lines, with all pupils wearing a uniform.
Summary of Replies to Interview Questions
Before exploring some of the attitudes held towards the issue of assessment by the arts teachers interviewed, it might help to look at the philosophies being advanced by them towards the teaching of their respective specialisms.
For instance, at ‘Pope John Paul’ the Head of Music expressed the strongly held view that he operates as a practitioner involved in education rather than the transmission of an established body of knowledge.
As he says in the following extract:
…my job is as a musician in education, not a teacher of music,…because I feel that one of the essential jobs that we do is bring out the music, or help out the music that's already there…not imposing musical ideas upon kids, whether they're classical, traditional, ethnic, Hungarian or whatever.
So we've got to start from where the kids are, where their musical experiences are mostly.
Of course they're rock and pop now, I suppose,…and I'm talking about from 1st years onwards.
I'd say that composition is the main starting point for all our work, because the nature of composition involves performance at the end, and of course the whole process involves various ways of listening…so composition is the crux of all our work here.
Here then we have a very clear description of an approach to music education that places the emphasis firmly on the creative exploration of the medium, in a way that is refreshingly new compared with the approach found in more traditional music departments.
Although  composition through  improvisation is the major thrust of this department's practice, this is carried through in a manner that allows children to become skilled in the basic techniques of certain musical instruments.
As he goes on to explain:
…first of all…they do need to acquire manipulative skills in order to play a xylophone, french horn, synthesizer, whatever…so they learn these as and when they need them…through to recording techniques and so on and so on, but always when they need them…
In the music department of J.F. Kennedy School I met a similar concern for the practice rather than the theory which may perhaps reflect the change in emphasis caused by the introduction of the new music syllabus for the GCSE.
Visual art education has had a long tradition of emphasizing the practical, so it was not surprising to find similar sentiments being expressed by the visual art teachers interviewed.
For example, the Head of Art at ‘Pope John Paul’ made the following comment:
Learning through doing, you actually have to do it to learn anything, take risks, experiment…
This process of practical exploration of the creative possibilities of their responses to visual and other types of experience through a medium is firmly rooted in the child-centred approach to education, a philosophy which is also evident in the comments made by the Head of Art at J. F. Kennedy:
I don't like those departments that solely reflect the tastes of the head of department or the individual member of staff.
There's bound to be some rub-off, but I like to maintain a balance so that at least in one subject area of the school the children feel they can contribute something of themselves, and the work therefore becomes meaningful for them, as opposed to working from a set format, like an art school; end-product, colour exercise and the rest of it.
It was significant that the art department at Redbrook Secondary School, which was the only one with a formal syllabus, was also the only one that pursued a deliberate policy of incorporating references to ‘works of art’ in its programme:
…
I mean most projects start with some introduction which is related to extant material, whether it's fine art or fabric design or  whatever, and then to  analysing the basic level, as it were, up to the appropriate level for the age group.
And then developing further understanding through actually doing or following through those notions or processes.
But even here the other member of the department interviewed explained that the syllabus was far less prescriptive than it appeared, and that most members of the department interpreted it fairly flexibly.
As mentioned earlier, Redbrook Secondary also operated a media studies course as its contribution to the Gulbenkian research project.
Consequently children in that school follow aspects of the arts throughout their time at the lower school.
While the art department operated a separate course in the lower school, drama, music and dance are organized on an integrated programme.
The Head of Drama described the organization as follows:
In the second and third years…drama, dance and music are taught together, but with three staff timetabled; so at any one time we split the groups up we've got group numbers of about 20 — three staff between two forms — and they'll say work in drama on a theme for six weeks, then move on and explore that theme in music, then move on and explore that in dance.
At the end of each six week period we have an assessment session whereby they have to do a ‘performance’ to everybody else in that year, so the music can see what the dance has done…etc.
As can be seen from this brief set of quotations there was a fair degree of agreement about the fundamental approach to arts education, irrespective of specialism.
There is noticeably less agreement when we move  on to the topic of why, how and when assessment in these areas should take place.
Some indication of how this operates can be seen in the last extract quoted, other answers to these questions are to a certain extent dictated by the nature of the activities involved in each specific arts subject, and the way they are examined.
For instance, drama/theatre studies has now come to be seen as a mixture of  improvisation , responding to a set text and the evaluation of both pupil's own work as well as performances they may have seen.
In addition, as with music, the  improvisation and performance side is mostly a group activity, and therefore this brings a different emphasis to the assessment of individual contributions, as well as posing its own particular problems.
In the music department of J.F. Kennedy School there was clear evidence of the efforts being made to disentangle the individual contribution from the group effort for the purpose of making diagnostic assessment:
…
I've found as a music teacher the best classroom situation…is where I'm completely an onlooker; having given them the stimulus, they've done all the build-up, they've done the preparation, they've got the task.
I can split them up, and then I'm not needed, and I can just wander round and have this panorama, and you see who's working and who isn't.
I've found that after a few years experience you can tell, you just can you know; which even if you've got a group with two very imaginative kids in, who can play instruments really well, and the others sit back and let them do it, then you might give the difference between two out of ten and nine out of ten for effort in the same group, but for the overall effect they would then get the same mark for the group thing.
I don't think it's absolutely ideal, I'm still trying to make it more ideal.
In contrast, in visual art the emphasis is more on the individual performance, so there can obviously be more dialogue with the particular child about his or her intentions in relation to the actual work being produced.
This is not without problems, such as when to intervene and make an evaluation.
One attitude to this is illustrated in the following remarks by the Head of Art at St. George's:
…you have got to make a verbal, visual contact with every child, even if it's in passing if they're busy with their work.
With the older boys there are times when leave them alone is the very best policy, you can intrude too much on a pupil who knows what he's doing; maybe not doing it 100 per cent successfully, but you've got to let him get to that point of destruct, as part of his learning process…
I think a failure, if it's carefully manipulated is as good as very formal didactic teaching.
What emerged most interestingly from these interviews was the extent to which some of these teachers had begun to incorporate various kinds of pupil self-evaluation into their assessment procedures.
Much of this had come about as a direct result of the introduction of the GCSE, as these comments from the Head of Art at ‘Pope John Paul’ reveal:
…at the same time they should be getting the children to ask themselves the same questions that the staff are asking about the work.
You know, ‘What are the strengths?’;
‘What are the weaknesses?’;
‘Why is this successful?’;
‘Why isn't this working?’;
‘Why am I bored?’;
‘Why am I enjoying it?’
So that when they come to assessment in the Upper School…they can actually  analyse and rationalize why things work and why they don't, why they should change direction, why they should give up and start again, and why they should logically follow the piece through.
This, in some departments, had become more formalized with the use of self-assessment questionnaires, as revealed in the continuation of the previous remarks:
…
And in the fourth year I tend to do them an evaluation sheet, where I write down lots of questions about the project they have just done, and maybe get them to sit for a double lesson and write about the things they experienced and found out…
Another member of this department whilst acknowledging that the introduction of self-assessment questionnaires was a direct result of the GCSE, clearly felt that they had a positive value in themselves:
I find this mode of evaluation very important because it allows me to see how the child is thinking, and to what extent they are thinking about problems they are being presented with, whether it's shallowly, or whether they are actually going into it in some depth.
So it gives me a very good guide as to what's going on in their minds when they are going through a process.
This teacher felt that self-assessment could only begin to happen when children had acquired a certain amount of knowledge of the type of judgments that can be made about their work:
…
I mean, they've got to be able to quantify their own work besides yourself.
And I see it as part of my job to help them to be able to judge their own work…
I think you must have some guidelines for them otherwise they're going to be in a quandary.
As we have seen previously, the art department at Redbrook Secondary School followed a fairly prescribed syllabus.
This was arranged so that most projects started with an introduction based upon ‘extant material, whether it's fine art, or fabric design or whatever’, then through analysis and exploration of the ideas and processes involved to some form of critical studies and evaluation, so that:
Rather than just saying ‘It's rubbish’ at the start, asking ‘Why do you think that it's rubbish?’
Can they be more articulate about why they feel the way they do?
The picture of pupil participation in the assessment process was less obvious in the other two art departments visited.
In St. George's there seemed to be a fair amount of disparity between the assessment  approaches of different members of the department.
The Head of Department and his second-in-department both appeared to adopt an informal, intuitive, approach.
This often relied upon their so-called ‘gut reaction’ to evaluate children's work, with the Head of Department freely admitting that he found it difficult to break down and assess different aspects of work.
However, subsequent remarks suggested that this type of analysis did take place, but not in any formalized fashion.
The other two members of the department, one of whom was in her probationary year, were more systematic.
One of them, in the words of the Head of Department:
…consumes vast amounts of paper in terms of assessing and marking.
He runs about four or five different marking and assessment books…he's assessing all the time.
Let's say an Upper School boy, doing what might turn out to be a six week long project, he will mark it at the end of every session, well not mark it but assess it — which is slightly different — and staple little bits of paper on it with comments and suggestions, and so on.
The other teacher had begun to experiment with self-assessment, especially in relation to homework assignments:
…they brought their homework in and made a list of…aspects like their use of materials, time, care, etc…so they knew what I was looking for, and then I spoke to each child individually and asked ‘What would you give this piece out of ten’ and so we obviously had to define our assessment objectives.
I think they found that quite rewarding.
This teacher obviously felt that self-assessment helped her children to have a clearer idea of what marks and grades referred to.
In addition, as we have seen from remarks made by the music and drama specialists, once children have acquired this type of understanding they tend to be very honest about their work, as shown in the following comments from the Head of Art at Redbrook Secondary:
…the pupils are remarkably honest about their reactions, if anything they tend to be rather hard on themselves in their criticism of their own work, but they very, very rarely pretend that it's better than, or more successful than they actually feel it is.
Some of their comments, it's like the untutored eye, they pick out things that surprise you because you've got so used to a particular manner of approaching images, that you forget that there are other ways of doing it.
In contrast, at ‘J.F. Kennedy’, the situation was clearly dictated by the general assessment policy of the school.
At this school all pupils are assessed and graded at the end of their first term, according to a normal curve of distribution, to enable pupils to be placed in high or mixed ability groupings for all subjects, as described by the Head of Art:
…we go through this whole process of grading every pupil, counting the grades up, totalling everything, adjusting things, fitting the curve, at the end of the first term for every subject department in the school.
So they move three or four from the mixed ability middle band up to the top band, and three or four down to the middle band.
At the end of the second year the exercise is done again, and at the end of the third year, when it has more significance…bearing in mind their choice of subjects for the fourth and fifth year.
What is disturbing, apart from the underlying assumptions that this kind of assessment for streaming are based upon, and the pressure for all departments to conform to a normative style of assessment, is that in the end the decisions over which pupils should be moved up or down is based upon a very limited range of subjects which do not include art or music.
An even more disturbing consequence of this process is revealed in remarks made by the other art teacher interviewed:
…when it comes to giving the third year grades I find it really difficult, with some kids you say ‘well they ought to have a ‘B’,’ but I can't give them a ‘B’because there aren't any ‘B's left…
It's not surprising, therefore, that with all this emphasis upon grading the members of this department have not got around to experimenting with self-assessment, although both felt they might try and introduce something along these lines for the next fourth year.
In the music and drama departments visited the approach to this kind of informal self-assessment tended to be more verbal and group-based.
This reflects the collaborative nature of work in these areas, and like the situation described earlier with regard to the group projects in Redbrook Secondary, this nearly always happens in response to some form of shared performance, as in the following description of the process in the music department at the Pope John Paul Comprehensive:
…and then we always have a time when the kids perform their pieces to one another, so first of all we as teachers can observe what is going on, and feed in comments to them if they need any  technical help in terms of how to play musical instruments, etc…
Maybe when they come to perform to each other that is for them a time for evaluation and assessment, and I consciously make it one, because it's important when they produce, when they perform their music they really bare their souls.
They're offering a gift, you know…the fact that each one is a piece of work, so much has gone into it that it's something very special, and I understand that it's very nerve-wracking for them to offer it, to perform it…
So I've got to be very careful.
I would ask the class to say, ‘What was our brief?’…so the whole class and also the performers focus onto what the brief is in the performance.
The audience then discuss, ‘Did you hear ABCD?’
‘Do you think they achieved it?’
‘What do the performers think?’
And then they'll come back, and they're totally honest and kinder as well, because they're very kind about assessment and  evaluation in this way, and very supportive of one another .
Similarly in the music department at ‘J.F. Kennedy’, after children have worked on a project, such as the exploration of a musical device like the development and use of a repeated accompaniment pattern or ostinato (through listening and then experimenting with using the device in their own compositions) the performance of their end result would be assessed to determine whether they had grasped and utilized the device effectively.
In other departments the approach to assessment was deliberately kept as informal and flexible as possible, as in the following extended quotation from the Head of Drama at ‘Pope John Paul’, which illustrates that this type of apparent informality can be just as thorough and searching, if not more so, than many supposedly more objective methods:
Yes, it's informal…it's not like the computing department here producing reports, as they recently did, which are multiple choice.
Can you believe it?
Tick the box: John Smith is —‘hardworking’; ‘lazy’; ‘an idiot’— Tick!
It's absolutely breathtaking.
Our assessment has always been, and continues to be, of a very…complex kind, because what is happening is that people are getting feedback from us all by working with us.
So that when you go into the Drama Studio with a group of students…and when you do decent work with them, everybody puts himself on the line, everybody.
The person who is out in the front teaching the class, or directing the piece of  work they're doing, they do, and everybody in it does…the kind of work we do is to do with a group of people…getting into a drama studio, and you know the set-up here; there's no uniform, there's no ‘Sir’ or ‘Miss’, it's all Christian names, and that means that the holds are broken down a lot, so what is done in the end is to produce work which we hope makes statements which come from the pre-occupations, the beliefs, the honestly held beliefs of the people involved, whether they're working from a text, an interpretation of a text, or whether they're working from  improvisation , doing their own work…so they get constant assessment from that.
I mean, when you're actually directing a piece of work, and it doesn't matter who you're working with…they know constantly how you feel about it, and that's sub-text as well as text, and it's osmosis; and a lot of it is very elliptical and oblique and subtle, and it goes on all of the time; and you know from them how they're taking it, how they're working and what they think of it by exactly similar sorts of processes you get those feedbacks, and you see the work.
And you don't, for instance, produce a piece of work with a group of students, say…to be performed in front of other people, thinking it's lousy, and then have people come and tell you that it's wonderful.
I mean, that just doesn't happen, because you know and they know when work is good, and when it's honest; when it works and when it doesn't…people know what they're doing.
So that there's a kind of assessment built in there…but that piece of work goes forward in the end and is more, slightly more, formally assessed in the sense that we give them direct feedback on performance, and that runs from technical notes, director's notes, to a very much more abstract formal assessment, which is essentially subjective, ‘How does one feel about this piece, the atmosphere it creates’,…and that's quite different from director's notes, which can be of a technical variety to do with voice, movement, audibility, characterization, anything; the things that are actually being described, analysed , looked at in the end…
So just looking at that process, the process of making a piece of practical drama, whether it comes from text or not…the processes of assessment are very complex and far-reaching, and I think it would be very unreal to say that anybody could get to the end of that process without knowing very clearly what…the task had been, how they had approached it, how it had gone at the end really.
And one is encouraging them all of the time to  be able to look at their own work as a group, as well as an individual, and make assessments of it themselves.
What is particularly significant about this passage is the strength of conviction the teacher demonstrates that this kind of informal assessment is right because it provides the maximum amount of feedback to all concerned, and furthermore is an integral part of the learning process, and not, as so often happens, an adjunct to it.
Even more significantly this teacher goes on to express the view that this approach is not incompatible with the examination system, where in the context of the GCSE, the personal and professional experience the tutor has of each student's progress and development is counterpoised with the more objective and detached assessment of the external moderator.
In the words of the previous speaker:
…when you put those two assessments together…they're getting a very fair look…they're getting a much fairer look than the Royal Shakespeare Company ever do.
I mean, everybody who goes to the RSC by and large only ever sees the piece once, don't they?
And then they go and tell their friends that it's either good or bad or whatever.
But, I think that if there's going to be any assessment at all I think that's quite a fair form of it.
Across the departments in all four schools visited the GCSE was clearly welcomed as an improvement upon some aspects of the previous system.
This view was most strongly expressed in respect of music and drama.
In the case of the former the change in emphasis from the more academic approach, characterized by previous ‘O’ level music syllabuses in particular, to the three components of listening, composing and performance was seen as a distinct improvement.
At ‘J.F. Kennedy’, for instance, where the department had formerly entered candidates for the Mode 1 ‘O’ Level syllabus, they had been severely restricted in the way composition could be taught:
I mean, for ‘O’ level composition, certainly for the Board we've been doing here, it was continuing a melody; set pattern eight bars; modulation; answering phrase;…harmonizing in four parts; set chords…so it was never free composition.
For this particular teacher then, the new syllabuses for GCSE have meant that:
…as a musician, you can make the course around the kids, providing that you're offering them listening experiences from a  wide range of music, and they can understand the difference between styles and approaches to composition.
At ‘Pope John Paul’ the music department had never taught the ‘O’level syllabus, because of these very same restrictions:
so we devised a Mode 3 CSE which was continuously assessed for four terms…
Now many, many students who, in terms of CSE Grade 1 produced work that was ‘O’ level, ‘A’level standard or more, but…we had problems with the status of the thing.
You had to tell them ‘You're not doing an ‘O’ level because this is the course you're doing, and it's a CSE'.
They got hung-up about status even though you explained it to them.
Not all of them, but some of them.
So it's continuous assessment; you must do composition, performance and listening…
They were used to that right from Year 1, so it was a continuation of the previous work, as is the GCSE.
So that now the GCSE comes along, and lo! what do we have but composition, performance and listening over four terms, and continuous assessment, etc.
So it's not too bad for us, we're quite used to working in that way.
However this teacher did comment that some of his colleagues in other schools were less happy with the change in emphasis, largely because they had always taught music as the development of a range of performance and theoretical skills, and were frightened by the stress the new syllabuses were putting upon  improvisation and composition:
…children find it easier to  improvise , and therefore liberate themselves in terms of discovering and finding valuable ways of expressing what they want to say through sound, but also learning new skills through  improvisation .
And I will go on stressing that because traditional musicians have this traditional training in university music departments and music colleges, and they become isolated; they only have contact with Western Art Music, you know.
All the best rock bands come out of art colleges, etc…and it's still the case they find they can only reproduce music from Beethoven, Mozart, etc.
I'm saying this because GCSE includes a section on  improvisation , and a lot of teachers can't do it; they say they can't do it…
They also say, ‘How do we assess composition…?’
I mean they'll go to a concert and make judgments about what they hear quite happily…they come back and moan, ‘We can't judge composition, how do we know what criteria to use?’
In the drama departments there was a general welcome for the move away from written papers, which had been seen by many drama specialists as a cause of confusion between drama and English literature, with students often finding it difficult to respond to the change in emphasis towards a set text that this involved.
As the Head of Drama and Theatre Studies at ‘Pope John Paul’ remarks:
…now with the GCSE things are very much more flexible, and the one thing we can get rid of immediately is the written paper, which is of course one of the bits of objective assessment in the examination, and which an awful lot of teachers clung onto.
But, in our case, it was the one that we were very keen to get rid of.
In the visual arts departments there were aspects of the GCSE which were certainly welcomed.
At ‘Pope John Paul’, for instance, the opportunity to choose between different types of external moderation was clearly seen as an advantage:
…with GCSE we're plumping for having an external examiner to come into school, because the school years ago did a Mode 3 CSE, where all the kids put up an exhibition.
Now the Board we're doing allows you to do that again…
Because the external examiners are coming into the child's environment, they might only just walk through the school, but you'd hope that they would pick up something of the ambience; plus the work can be presented how the child wants to present it.
It's not gone through the post and arrived battered, torn or creased; and it's not going to be just plumped down in piles on the floor.
So I would prefer them to be assessed in that way than to post them off, and I'm glad we've got that choice…
This contrast between former ‘O’ level practice of almost exclusively externally examined work, and the new emphasis upon internally assessed and externally moderated work in the GCSE is further highlighted in this same teacher's remarks about the ‘A’level examination in art:
…the restrictions that places on them is that it's quite an unreal course isn't it?
In the lower sixth we try to do lots of experimentation…so they have a year of doing really interesting work, and then you have to pull them into line; and you might say, ‘You've got to do composition, graphics, etc…and you've got to work to these criteria.’
And they might reply, ‘But I don't like working like this, I want to work like this.’
‘All right work like this, but you'll fail.’
And you've got to put them in that framework…
At Redbrook Secondary there was a feeling that the new exam was much more relevant to the processes involved in art education, and particularly the role critical studies should play:
…and it does mean that I think there is a pressure perhaps grows out of that to make you articulate clearly why you are putting the course together in the way you are…which previously you could have got away with.
Like we had to do — composition — imaginative painting and drawing — for ‘O’ level…you wouldn't think beyond that.
I think the GCSE is more open.
Well the potential is there to be more open about how you devise…how bits fit together, and how they relate.
So in terms of actually promoting a rigorous view of…what you think you're doing and why you're doing it, it's good.
This, in his view has resulted in a marked difference in the attitude with which his new fourth year pupils approach their work compared to previous years.
This teacher, therefore, was very pleased with the way the GCSE has broadened the scope of the subject to include critical studies as an integral part of the course, although he was critical of the failure of the examining groups to include an assessment objective to cover this aspect.
In addition he also found that the coursework requirements have encouraged pupils to see each project or course element as being more relevant, which has increased their output of work as well as their motivation.
Another aspect which is undoubtedly seen as a benefit by the majority of teachers, the elimination of the need to decide who should be doing ‘O’ level or CSE, was clearly identified by the Head of Art at Redbrook Secondary:
…
I never did like sorting out the sheep from the goats…at the end of the first term in the fifth year…didn't like that at all…there was always a sort of …he's doing ‘O’ level, the elite group.
Actually I think somebody who gets a CSE grade 1 has to be very good, far better than somebody who can only just scrape an ‘O’ level grade C…
You can get somebody with an average amount of ability, you pick and choose the right Board, and you can get them through ‘O’ level without any trouble at all.
I think this is the problem that is going to arise with a lot of teachers responsible  for art courses…who've been quite accustomed to sending their work off to be marked by somebody else, now they're suddenly going to be faced with mounting and displaying the work, making some judgments themselves and justifying their work.
Another problem, however, identified by the other teacher in this department, is the effect of the pressure of the coursework requirements on children with learning difficulties, as she says:
I arrange a special thing for them, and they tend to do things very quickly, and take only one or two lessons.
If it goes on any longer than that they get bored and spoil what they've done.
So you've got to create something quite simple and effective in which they can be successful, which isn't so demanding as you would for the other group.
It's a bit more difficult for me now, because they've got to do things like figure-work, which they're not going to be able to cope with.
It should be pointed out, however, that the particular approach to streaming that occurs at this school has not only had serious implications for the way in which groupings occurred, but that this by definition creates the sort of situation described above.
In contrast, the majority of schools operate with mixed-ability groupings in the arts, and this undoubtedly reduces the likelihood of this type of difficulty occurring.
Surprisingly, few art teachers were concerned that there was still an examination at the end of the course, or that the weighting of it in relation to the coursework was higher than in many previous CSEs.
Here is the Head of Art at Redbrook again:
…
I think there's sufficient weighting on the course in art for the child to make it work…if you kill the word ‘exam’ and just call it a ‘set piece’, and say ‘This is the final piece of work I'd like you to do’, and see if there's a climax of five  terms' work, as opposed to some sort of insurmountable hurdle that only 20 per cent of the pupils can get over…‘if you don't make a  particularly good job of it, it only carries 40 per cent of the marks and you've got 60 per cent for the coursework ‘.
In fact, what was particularly surprising was the extent of support for the principle of examining in some arts departments.
Some even expressed the view that, if examinations in the arts were removed, they would probably approach the subject in a similar fashion to that currently being used in the examination course.
However others take a very different view, as this comment from the head of music at ‘Pope John Paul’ illustrates:
You know, as much as all this GCSE business is a step in the right direction now, it all stems from this post-Renaissance business about compartmentalizing the arts and sciences, and how that's reflected in societal terms, and this rather pathetic need to grade and assess in this way.
I am personally sick of examinations.
If there's one thing I loathe about my job it's having to be involved in examinations, even the GCSE.
I mean…
I'm happy to profile for someone, it's important to feedback responses to people and get them back.
Yes, fine! you know there are very easy ways of recording that in terms of written down information…in my worst moments, particularly when I'm talking about ‘A’ level, I've had enough…it's such an incredibly inefficient and crude method, and also wastes a tremendous amount of potential.
Conclusion
In this final section I would like to attempt to answer some of the questions raised in the introduction, using the evidence of teachers' views expressed in the survey to support my argument.
The main purpose of my research was to compare different attitudes and approaches to the problem of assessing and examining children's performance and development in various arts subjects.
Although the survey was carried out in 1987, and events in education have moved on with amazing rapidity since then, many of the conclusions that can be drawn from the interviews seem to have retained their relevance, particularly in the context of the issue I have been exploring in this chapter.
At the outset I questioned whether, given the nature of what arts education claims to be about, it is possible or even desirable to assess or examine children's work in this area.
This dilemma was highlighted in the opening quotations, and later by Ross in his comparison of the shortfall between the aims and the assessment objectives for art and music GCSE.
This in his opinion, as well as in the opinion of many others in the literature, has led to the use of inappropriate methods of assessment which have not only distorted the character of what is taught, but also of the way it has been taught.
Furthermore, some writers, such as Stevenson, have argued that arts teachers are under  pressure to submit candidates for examinations in order to acquire status and recognition for otherwise vulnerable areas of the curriculum.
From my interviews with the arts teachers during the survey it was apparent that, even though there were criticisms of certain aspects of the philosophy underlying the issue of examinations in particular, there was clearly a widespread belief that children's work in the arts could and should be assessed and examined.
However, the majority favoured a formative and diagnostic approach that provides a regular supply of positive and constructive feedback to pupils about their progress, rather than the more summative styles characterized by examinations.
It was not surprising, therefore, to find evidence that many of these teachers had been making carefully thought out and constructive efforts to develop more structured and appropriate approaches to this kind of assessment; a process that has undoubtedly been accelerated by the introduction of the GCSE.
This was particularly noticeable in relation to the development and use of pupil self-assessment procedures in some of the art departments visited, as a method for encouraging children to have a clearer understanding of what they are attempting to do, to enable them to have a more informed approach to criticism, but also as a very beneficial diagnostic tool for teachers to evaluate the effectiveness of their own teaching programmes.
In this context it was interesting to observe that the school which imposed a more summative, norm-referenced, approach to assessment on its staff, was also the one in which the least amount of innovation appeared to be taking place in this area, whereas the school with the most formative approach to assessment and reporting appeared to be more open to new ideas and methods.
Again it was noticeable that the departments which incorporated both pupil and teacher assessments were the ones that seemed to have a much stronger philosophical basis for the work they asked children to do.
This was particularly apparent in all arts areas at ‘Pope John Paul’, where even though the music and drama departments did not have any formalized assessment pattern, the degree of interaction between staff and pupils produced a very high level of self-awareness and understanding among the children about their work.
Undoubtedly many of the pupil self-assessment schemes seen during the survey would prove very useful as a basis for gathering information for departmental profiles, and could therefore be extremely helpful in the development of records of personal achievement, which are due to be introduced in all schools in the early 1990s.
The Impact of the GCSE
On the question of the effect of the GCSE upon arts teaching, a more positive picture emerged than might have been expected.
Obviously many arts teachers are not entirely happy that the arts are examined at all, but in my interviews the majority of teachers were generally happier now that the new examination had replaced the old system — the most obvious benefit being the removal of the need to discriminate between the two former examinations.
It was also clearly evident, in the groups that I saw being taught, as well as from my own personal experience, that the GCSE has improved children's motivation.
In some departments, noticeably the music departments, there was evident relief that the restrictions caused by the previous ‘O’ level system had been eradicated, and that at long last an examination had been  introduced that corresponded more closely to the actual nature of their subject.
The fact that some believed that their teaching programme would not differ greatly even if such examinations were abolished seems to suggest that the GCSE syllabuses may be moving in the right direction, and present fewer conflicts with the way arts teachers normally operate.
There are still problems to iron out, and as we saw in the passage by Ross, there are still inconsistencies.
But at least the new examination seems to offer greater scope for teachers to develop programmes of work in which the internal and external assessments can be seen by the pupils to be interrelated in a more purposeful way.
The examination, therefore, can now be seen as the culmination of the course rather than viewed as an unwelcome intrusion as it was previously.
In this context it is interesting to compare the remarks of 100 teachers in 100 research studies with comments I have heard from other arts teachers since, because in most cases similar things are being said now, even after the first round of the GCSE.
There are criticisms, but in fact the majority of criticisms seem to have been directed at the faults in the administrative procedures, as opposed to problems with the syllabus or assessment procedures.
Future Developments
As I pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, education is on the threshold of a new era, which will have massive repercussions upon the issues of assessment and examination, with some of the proposed developments being viewed with considerably more apprehension than the GCSE was a couple of years ago.
I have already referred to the introduction of records of achievement, which by definition will require  a much more rounded picture of pupils' actual performance to be monitored.
This will entail all curriculum areas in schools to establish more coherent and thorough techniques of assessment, capable of being linked to schools' reporting procedures.
By far the most wide-ranging changes will undoubtedly occur as a result of the new Education Reform Act, and in particular those sections that refer to the establishment of the National Curriculum, together with its statutory requirements on assessment and testing.
We have already seen recently the first recommendations from the Task Group on Assessment and Testing (TGAT), which has proposed a developmental model for the core areas of English, mathematics and science, as well as a timescale for the introduction of the assessment programme.
The position of the other foundation subjects, however, is less clear at present.
Whereas the majority of these will eventually have to submit to similar assessment and testing procedures as the core, it seems likely that art and music will only need to establish attainment guidelines.
Undoubtedly many arts teachers will greet this news with relief, but for others there will be concern that here again the arts are being subjected to a form of discrimination, and that this could once more lead to their being marginalized.
Already in my own LEA there are plans for visual arts teachers to explore and establish assessment guidelines, and to capitalize on the considerable amount of curriculum development work that has occurred over recent years.
Clearly there is a belief that by demonstrating that they know what kinds of attainment targets can be identified in children's work at different ages, art teachers will bring much greater credibility to their subject.
The danger in this, as in the previously described case of the GCSE examinations, is that such targets can all too easily omit those qualities we most value in favour of the ones that can readily be measured, or lead to children being given a much narrower syllabus geared to achieving only those aspects that are going to be assessed.
Great care will therefore have to be taken that such guidelines are sufficiently flexible to allow for the type of open-ended approach that is so important in this area.
In addition, in many parts of the country the extensions to the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) have just begun.
These have been set up, with MSC funding, to make more widespread use of the developments in teaching styles and assessment procedures that occurred in the pilot projects, most of which pioneered the introduction of negotiated learning and pupil self-assessment.
However, as we have seen in my interview responses many of these so-called ‘new’ approaches have been common practice in good arts departments for many years before the introduction of TVEI.
One consequence of  these extension schemes that may have a serious effect upon arts education is the way that some authorities are pushing for arts subjects to be taught as part of modular courses, which could lead to a reduction of the number of two-year examination courses in separate arts subjects.
Such developments would necessarily affect both the structure of arts-based courses, but more significantly in the context of this article, would require the methods of assessment used to be tailored to the short term aims of each module.
This clearly raises issues that are beyond the scope of my present argument.
Perhaps the only genuine conclusion that can be made at this particular time of flux is that arts teachers are generally receptive to the introduction of new approaches to assessing children's work, but only if these developments can be seen to have a positive value in helping children to be more articulate about their strengths and weaknesses, and are therefore essentially formative in character.
Exploring Aesthetic Appraisal: Repertory Grid Technique
Ros Osbourn
The Nature of Aesthetic Perception
Changes of emphasis within art education, which have arisen out of a realization that the skills of response and appreciation do not necessarily result from the practice of art, have led to explorations into the nature of aesthetic experience, enquiries into its patterns of development and attempts to assess the skills and achievements possible within this area (APU, 1983).
As noted by Kelsall (1979), if the development of appreciative faculties is thought to be an important goal of art education then ‘…approaches to achieving this goal by means other than those based exclusively on the productive aspects of art need to be developed’.
Similarly, as pointed out by an exploratory group working on aesthetic assessment, there are no available procedures suitable for assessing artistic appraisals and these need to be developed (APU, 1983).
Although the research reviewed below indicates some of the approaches made to these problems many difficulties still remain, partly because of the rich and sometimes ambiguous nature of art itself but also because of the value that is placed upon the validity of individual response in these areas.
The moment that answers are sought to questions such as what particular properties of a painting lead to a specific kind of reaction, or what processes go on inside viewers' minds as they respond with delight or dislike, ‘…we enter a realm full of complexity and uncertainty’(Cupchik  and Heinrichs, 1981).
In an attempt to deal with this complex realm, selected aspects of the psychology of perception and aesthetic philosophy have been brought to bear upon the Personal Construct Theory of George Kelly (1955).
Commonalities across these different areas are identified and used to inform and direct an application of Grid Technique to the examination of individual responses to art.
While some may see the whole area of aesthetic response as one limited by hedonism or elitism, or may wish to view it as a superficial frill of little relevance to the real world of materialistic values, others are able to propose valid reasons why investigation into the nature of aesthetic experience should be pursued.
Ziff (1981) believes that capacities having an important functional value such as the ability to deal with complex information or achieve a state of heightened awareness are, during pauses in the struggle for existence, exercised in a non-functional manner which maintains and develops their effectiveness.
In such quiet periods capacities of a primarily functional nature come to operate in a peculiarly unified and simultaneous way.
Not only does this reduce thought load, it also evokes a sense of beauty and, at the same time, frees the  cognitive system for other activity in a way important to survival.
In addition Humphrey sees the aesthetic response as a ‘pay of’ for efficient and successful information processing; it is a reward for the kind of mental activity that is really in a person's own best interest.
As such, the experience of beauty is not only highly motivational, setting in train a search for more similar experiences, it also establishes a model for effective learning.
Structures of appreciation in art, music or mathematics, etc, present a paradigm for ‘…the way we should structure our experience wherever and whenever we need to acquire genuinely useful information’(ibid, p. 137).
For Humphrey, aesthetic structuring arises from the urge to group and classify information as well as from a capacity to pick up similarities and associations that generate a sense of rhythm and rhyme.
These latter are seen as central aspects in the perception of beauty.
They are traced within and between flowers, in mathematics and music, in the paintings of Vasarely and the mobiles of Calder.
By experiencing beauty in such things, the contrasts and rhymes they present to perception are clarified and balanced.
This in turn generates a need to go on making new perceptions and associations in a way that is recognized both in animals and in man (Humphrey and Keeble, 1976).
In the realm of philosophy, Lyotard (1984) echoes a similar view when he speaks of the jubilation, delight and intensification of a sense of being, that arises out of conceiving new categories.
Once fresh structures have been achieved, new modes of looking may also evolve, themselves evoking pleasure for the way in which awareness is enriched and extended.
For both Kung (1981) and Lyotard, art moves within the area between man's capacity to conceive an idea and his ability to create an artefact that evokes or articulates it so that one of art's more important roles is the symbolization of what does not yet exist.
Response to art at this level  demands both a willingness and a capacity to go beyond obvious and conventional ways of perceiving and a preparedness to accommodate and restructure existing concepts and patterns of relationships.
It is about the achievement of new perspectives or, as Ross (1980) has appropriately described it, it is about ‘…the cleansing of the doors of perception’.
The concept of similarity out of which the structurings of rhythm and rhyme emerge, is central to several accounts of perception and the aesthetic response.
These range from the matchings achieved amongst elemental stimuli, as in Gestalt theories of vision, to the perception of parallel aspects of recognizable images or ideas, as in metaphor.
The emergence of Gestalt ‘wholes’(Bruce and Green, 1985) or the application of Gestalt principles, as in David Marr's work on computer vision (Marr, 1982), illustrate the kinds of matchings of similar elements which, although operating at a level of pre-awareness, nevertheless result in a conscious recognition of an image's identity.
At the physiognomic level, both Gombrich (1963) and Arnheim (1954) identify the role played by a sense of similarity as, for example, between the ‘passive hanging’ of a willow tree's branches and deeper levels of consciousness.
It is argued that the perception of such similarities is responsible for evoking the response of ‘feeling’.
For Arnheim, the sense of ‘equivalence’ occurs because similar events are aroused in the brain.
In many ways this reflects Langer's (1957) concept of ‘congruence’ between the ‘…dynamic forms of our direct sensuous, mental and emotional life’and artistic forms.
Thus it is possible to speak of cheerful colours and melancholy sounds (Gombrich, 1963) or of the mood of an entire painting or piece of music.
Lind (1980) has looked at the microphenomenological level at which the unfolding identity of such perception occurs.
He suggests that the sense of the aesthetic arises out of the extremely rapid and continuous focal comparisons of data made during perception.
At the level of the intelligible image, say the painting of a Paul Klee ‘head’ for example, the notions of rapid scanning and directional focus are familiar from the work of Yarbus (1967).
At the micro level, described by Lind, a similar mixture of sometimes intentional, but more often automatic, focusing enables certain elements of the sensory mix to be selected and retained whilst others are excluded.
This results in a synthesis through analysis of the various inputs of information as these become prominent in the visual field.
In many ways this resembles Ehrenzweig's (1967) concept of ‘syncretistic’ vision within which apparently incompatible aspects are integrated into a unified percept.
Lind believes that as we become sensitized to a particular quality or  relationship so attentive focus comes to oscillate amongst all the similar proximate elements.
In this way similarities are enhanced and compared aspects become woven together.
Aesthetic objects are therefore not simply illuminated by attention but rather their very structure and texture is constituted and made intelligible by it.
Such looking becomes the process whereby an object of experience is formed out of indeterminate data, first into figure against ground and then into other elements of an image.
In this way, other micro aspects such as cross-hatching and brushwork also come to form a coherent body of pattern.
Thus the very  vibrancy of Impressionist or Pointillist paintings may well result from the discrimination of thousands of similar bits of colour data, all emerging as dots of similar hue, brightness, size or shape so that each momentarily stands out as a mini-figure against all the rest.
Lind suggests that small, homogeneous bits of data vibrate smoothly whereas larger patches ‘jangle wildly’ as the focus of attention is forced to make dramatic leaps.
Higher up the size scale, larger structural elements also present similarities so that likeness and analogy operate as a focal principle at all levels whether we are aware of it or not.
Such a model, in which present perceptions determine and fuse with future ones, ties in with Neisser's (1976) theory of a perceptual cycle in which the syntheses of incoming information themselves serve as anticipatory schemata which direct future attention.
Thus, the sequence of momentary and isolated percepts is determined by what has directly preceded it and results in a fusion of newly perceived aspects with those that are already held in memory.
For Lind, similarity is a key concept.
Focus itself has no fixed shape or set degree of sharpness or fuzziness but alternates according to the dictates of imagination, habit, or the limitations of the data.
As attention shifts and refocuses, so whole new sets of events become obliquely evident.
This is why the perception of a complex painting or piece of music can be elaborated in ever greater detail as more and more elements come to be discriminated.
It is also why the proper analysis of a work of art does not result in a sense of fragmentation but instead enriches the interweaving of its fabric.
Aesthetic attention, therefore, consists of engaging the focus of attention in a heightened sustained discrimination.
This occurs when the similarities are subtle or intricate, or when they require prolonged discrimination in order to make them intelligible.
Deliberate ambiguity, paradox and complexity are all techniques used by artists to prevent discrimination attaining complete clarity, thereby stimulating a prolonged and engrossing period of heightened activity.
Lind's theory points also to the monotony of the non-aesthetic, for when data is unambiguously the same its similarities are too easily apparent.
Quick  satisfaction may be achieved but the resulting clarity fails to raise any interest in the process itself so that there is no desire to repeat the experience, analyse it or find out what others have been saying.
Only when perceptual data is of sufficient variety to arouse or satisfy attention is the perceptual process it entails deemed interesting and hence aesthetic.
Thus, anti-monotony devises such as theme and variation or gradation of tone, colour, texture, etc, all introduce complexities that demand greater efforts of comparison, thereby making the process more interesting.
At the opposite extreme, chaotic material is irritating because it frustrates interest in the process for its own sake.
Lack of sufficient proportion, clarity or similarity means that clarifying and distinguishing the data is so fraught with excessive difficulty that interest is stultified.
Lind incorporates feeling into his theory by suggesting a direct link between the degree of focal activity required to make something intelligible and the intensity of the corresponding muscular and visceral sensations.
The greater the effort needed to resolve a puzzle or to see a thing ‘whole’, the greater is the experience of tension or pressure.
These sensations are, paradoxically, not felt inside the body but are projected outwards and attributed to the eliciting object.
Thus internal feelings are ‘tied’ to an object and are experienced as a quality of it.
Sensations such as pleasure or dislike therefore reflect the degree of control exerted by an object over the perceptual effort necessary to make it intelligible.
Although dealing primarily with architecture, Smith (1982 and 1983) also utilizes concepts such as similarity, orderliness and complexity in an attempt to understand the nature of aesthetic response.
The assimilation of moderate levels of complexity into higher levels of orderliness lies at the heart of Smith's aesthetic, in which excitement is generated by complexity whilst delight results from the apprehension of an overriding sense of order.
Architecture and art are areas in which disorder may be deliberately generated by creating forms and relationships that have no precedent for the express purpose of attaining a new, higher level of orderliness.
In so doing, they extend the frontiers of experience and so act as an ‘…antidote to complacency’.
Two kinds of response are involved: the ‘schema’ aesthetic and the ‘intrinsic’aesthetic.
The nature of the latter reflects much of what has already been discussed above.
It deals purely with the visual information out of which perceived similarities become evident as pattern whilst variations are sufficiently constrained to proclaim likeness rather than difference.
Pattern is created out of initial, seemingly random, information so reducing its complexity.
Aesthetic satisfaction arises out of the way in which this complexity ‘comes to order’, with subtle but pervasive patterns gradually asserting their presence until unity prevails over variety.
In the schema aesthetic there is a parallel search for similarities although here it is between the incoming data and existing information already stored in memory.
Perception is biased towards recognition and each successful achievement reduces uncertainty.
Again there is an underlying theme of likeness tempered with difference; of similarity spiced with variety.
In such associations, each partner is inevitably modified; colours may be intensified or assimilated; commonalities may be enhanced in ways that enable perceptual abstractions to be made without relinquishing any of the context from which the singled out entities draw life.
The making of these kinds of perceptual and schematic connections is illustrated by Neumann's (1959) response to a Henry Moore sculpture in which stone and landscape, holes and breasts merge to form a complex Mother Earth, a total fusion of the metaphorical, physical and spiritual.
A more recent and notorious example may be found in David Mach's ‘Polaris’, a sixty foot long ‘submarine’ built entirely from black tyres.
Januszczak's (1986) criticism of this work reveals some of the assonances and similarities it was able to generate.
It was described as being ‘…as black as a luger barrel’; as being able to bring ‘…polite conversation round to the subject of violence and warfare’; as accusing the Georgian terraces of Bath (where it was exhibited) of daydreaming, and of making reference to the military hardware stored in the ancient subterranean quarries beneath the city.
In experience of this kind, perceptions achieved through the schema aesthetic begin to affect the total context of a work and start to not only direct attention but also change the way in which the image is seen.
By accessing such areas of experience awareness is raised as the range of possible connections comes to be realized.
Discrimination, judgment and evaluation come to operate as key factors in determining which associations are valid and pertinent and which are irrelevant.
Through such matchings notions of blackness and depth, threat and secrecy emerge and become embedded in the sculpture that seems to articulate them.
It is clear that the making of such connections goes beyond the recognition of surface similarities to deal with the linkings of internal ideas.
Some are clear-cut, simple and obvious whilst others are intangible, elusive, fragmentary and difficult to communicate.
Bruner (1962, p. 18) has used the term ‘effective surprise’ to describe the feeling of pleasure that often accompanies such realizations.
He has also  pointed to the way in which metaphor joins dissimilar experiences by finding a symbol or image that unites them at a deeper level of meaning (ibid, p. 63).
In the process, vast amounts of information become condensed into more comprehensible wholes, thereby achieving the kind of cognitive efficiency that avoids overloading the system.
However, this requires effort as well as the energy and desire to go beyond habitual ways of looking and understanding.
It requires motivation towards making new connections as a way of resolving existing ambiguity.
Decorative art does not usually make such demands.
Its pleasingness rests purely within the intrinsic aesthetic since the similarities intended are of a purely visual nature.
As a result less effort is required for its enjoyment and the resulting pleasure, although being more immediately available is also more superficial and more quickly exhausted.
From the above brief outline of work attempting to get to grips with the character of aesthetic response it can be seen that it is both complex and ‘multi-layered’, a term used by Greger (1972) to describe how multiple meanings come to attain a feeling of significance by being grasped at the threshold of consciousness.
In the process of ‘coming to know’, present experience is condensed with similar sensations from the past through which they are relived, thought about and felt.
Partial meanings become more clearly comprehended and relationships are articulated in a way that allows a work to be ‘unpacked discursively’(ibid).
By this means the aesthetic unity of a work is revealed along with its various meanings and conflicts.
Although recognizing the dangers of verbalizing about art, Greger is adamant that ‘…without analysis, without thinking or talking about the many interrelated meanings of an art form, the process of coming-to-know, or of ‘growing up’ to a work is probably not possible' (ibid).
Having considered something of the nature of aesthetic perception, it remains necessary to link this with education and with techniques stemming from Personal Construct theory which might well be used both for learning and for investigation in the area of artistic appraisal.
The Structure of Aesthetic Development
Research into the structure of aesthetic development, as well as into ways by which skills might be enhanced, has resulted in a variety of approaches to education.
Marschalek (1983) has noted that children generally attend to only a portion of the information contained within a  stimulus whereas adults include more dimensions as well as a consideration of structural aspects.
However, young children, trained to deal with visual dimensions such as shape or texture, are able to  outperform the spontaneous levels of attention achieved by adults.
Lack of experience, along with the logical structures that contain it, are considered more responsible for failure in response than any lack of cognitive capacity, and the need to develop strategies designed to extend involvement is seen as a necessary way forward.
Mittler's (1983) approach to visual learning tackles this issue in the form of a three stage model that proposes:
(i)
increasing the number of perceptual categories.
Without this the same ones tend to be used repeatedly so that visual clues falling beyond their scope are either missed or ignored;
(ii)
specifying features within each category, such as the formal qualities of ‘line’, ‘colour’, ‘balance’, ‘rhythm’, etc;
(iii)
sharpening perceptual skills so that categorization follows rather than precedes the search for clues.
Description and decision are delayed until an extended visual search is completed.
Numerous similar enquiries into the structure of response and how it might be developed have been recorded elsewhere (Osbourn, 1988).
These range from an almost Piagetian pattern of stages of aesthetic development (Parsons, 1976; Parsons et al, 1978; Parsons and Johnston, 1986) to a more formal structuring of the process of criticism (Smith, 1968).
Much work is repetitive with similar categories and divisions emerging under different labels and alternative subdivisions.
This, however, only reflects the complexity of the area and the difficulties of bringing together and understanding the diverse responses of individuals.
Certain ideas, though, do stand out as being of particular use.
For example, Kaelin's (1968) notion of ‘surface’ and ‘depth’counters is particularly relevant for the way in which it separates aspects of a direct sensory, perceptual nature from those referring to imaginative content, based upon observations of a cognitive or conceptual kind.
In this it distinguishes between the ‘intrinsic’ and ‘schema’aesthetic except for an  insistence that depth counter responses be firmly based upon observations of the perceptual surface.
The idea of  ‘bracketing out’ all practical or theoretical concerns so that the immediate felt quality of a work is able to become the focus of attention is also of importance.
For Kaelin the initial resistance of a work to analysis, along with the way in which this gives way to a richer post-analytic experience, can also be  used as a means of assessing its value.
This, too, indicates the kind of sequence of experience to be expected in aesthetic appreciation.
Whilst most writers resort to some form of categorization of responses, there is a general emphasis, underlined by Kaelin, that, whilst such structuring may be useful for learning or communication, its value is transitory and it should be readily discarded in favour of the unity of the aesthetic experience itself.
The separation into sequential categories of response is merely a means to an end.
Feldman's (1971) approach encapsulates many of the notions considered above.
It begins with ‘description’, based upon factual statements of objective perception and analysis, and moves on to‘formal analysis’ in which there is a search that goes beyond the surface inventory in order to seek out relationships and qualities.
Evidence accumulated from these two sources then leads into the third, and final, stage of ‘interpretation and evaluation’.
A further elaboration (Ingarden, 1973) places the three stages under the more descriptive headings of ‘initial grasping’, ‘active constitution’ and ‘final fusion’.
Here the ‘intuitive grasping’ phase involves an immediate grasping of the pervasive quality of a work, a sensing of its qualitative essence in a way that establishes an aesthetic frame of mind.
Attention is thereby directed towards qualities and relationships rather than to external aspects such as monetary worth or historical background.
‘Active constitution’ involves a bringing together of this qualitative ensemble in such a way as to strengthen, modify or weaken the initial felt response.
If enriched or positively modified then the final phase of ‘fusion’ ensues.
If not, then the experience terminates with a sense of disappointment.
Either deficient or inappropriate perceptual data had been presented, or it has been inappropriately perceived, so that responses conflict rather than resolve.
The ‘final fusion’ in which all perceptions unite in an experience of enhanced quality culminates in quiet gazing or contemplation of the aesthetic object.
There is a sense of being pleased by the presence of this quality, ‘…a moment of intoxication’, almost similar to getting intoxicated with the smell of flowers (Ingarden, 1973, p. 186).
This is appreciative knowing.
It is an experience characterized by a peculiar ‘…searching disquietude, a changeability full of dynamism’ composed of aesthetic excitement, the active constitution of the aesthetic object, and a passive perception of the qualities revealed.
This in turn stimulates a return to the initial stage of ‘intuitive grasping’, and a summing of consequent perceptions in a way reflective of Neisser's ‘perceptual cycle’.
Ingarden is keen to emphasize that the delight evoked by such positive culminations is not the essential component of  aesthetic experience but a by-product of the activity of discovery, of experiencing an achieved harmony and valuing it in an emotional, contemplative way.
Out of the above ideas several factors emerge that are common both to accounts of perception and to strategies for enhancing appraisal.
In each area there is a concentration upon active effort.
The notion of passive involvement is well and truly demolished.
In addition, the notion of ongoing perceptual cycles in which observations feed and direct future attention is also evident.
Also present is the concept of aesthetic pleasure emerging as a by-product of the successful ordering of complex data.
Notions of similarity and the recognition of rhymes and rhythms present a possible way in which such orderings might be achieved.
Strategies of looking, in turn, break down this process and insist upon an adequate period of delay so that the offerings which emerge are firmly anchored within the work.
The theories and models considered, whilst by no means presenting clear answers, do go some of the way towards exploring that realm full of complexity and uncertainty with which this chapter began.
They encompass all kinds of visual material and account for both the aesthetic and non-aesthetic response.
In addition, many of them can be tied into Personal Construct Theory in a way that allows its associated Repertory Grid Technique to be used both as an investigatory tool and as a means whereby the perception of art might be enhanced.
In Repertory Grid the notion of similarity and contrast, indeed the whole idea of making connections, is paramount.
As a method it demands prolonged looking and a thorough examination of the surface counters of an image before response is made at the depth counter level.
In this it ensures that judgments are firmly tied to perceived aspects.
Such delay and concentration also stimulates new perceptions.
As a method of appraisal it is considered particularly appropriate to the area of art in that it places great emphasis upon the validity of individual response and interpretation.
In addition, it makes possible the recording, in the form of a ‘map’, of something of the nature of that response.
Through verbal mediation it is able to fix some of the criteria applied and something of the meaning extracted in the perception of art.
By capturing, albeit in a somewhat crude form, what has previously been transient and ephemeral it points the way to a means whereby artistic judgment itself might be judged.
Personal Construct Theory and Repertory Grid Technique
PCT (Personal Construct Theory), originated by Kelly (1955), is based  upon a concept of the individual as an active meaning-maker and participant in the world, able both to contemplate upon and extend his/her understanding of it.
This is achieved by combining past experience with the ongoing construal of the present for the purpose of discovering fresh possibilities.
PCT and its associated RGT (Repertory Grid Technique) are thoroughly discussed elsewhere (Bannister and Mair, 1968; Bannister and Fransella, 1974; Fransella and Bannister, 1977; Osbourn, 1980 and 1988; Gaines and Shaw, 1981; Shaw, 1980 and 1981; Thomas and Harri-Augstein, 1985) so that only a brief outline will be presented here.
In PCT the individual interacts not just with the world but with the world as he/she interprets it.
Each person structures his own world through the application of a repertoire of bi-polar constructs.
By this means events are conceptualized and interpreted, and judgments are made in the interest of better anticipating the future.
Construct theory is based upon the way in which these bi-polar bases of judgment are organized and interconnected, for it is through this network of interrelated concepts that experience is codified and given meaning.
The construct system does not just exist but is constantly tested and adapted with a view to perfecting its interaction with the world and improving its competence.
In this process successful constructs are strengthened and retained whilst weak or ineffective ones are either modified or discarded.
Construct systems that are inadequate to a particular experience generate doubt and uncertainty and in this way come to promote the reconstructions that will replace them.
Thus, past experience is combined with fresh information about an ongoing situation with a view to discovering new relationships amongst the constructs.
Only by entertaining many different alternatives are new and more productive combinations discovered.
Adams-Webber (1970) identifies cognitive development with this kind of occurrence, in which the progressive differentiation of a system's structure leads to an integration of previously independent sub-systems into new and more complex wholes.
In this there is also a parallel with the kinds of cognitive efficiency presented by Bruner and Humphrey.
There is also more than an echo of Piaget's notion of schematic development (Ginsburg and Opper, 1979).
Construct theory however presents a clear pattern of how unique, individual experience is brought to bear upon a situation, of how constructs are applied whether they are appropriate or not, and how the theoretical framework forming the basis of a personal construct system is constantly revised.
Kelly defined a construct as a way in which two things are seen as alike and yet are different to others.
Here the principle of similarity and  difference operates in a similar manner to its application in the intrinsic aesthetic.
A parallel principle serves to relate past experience and on-going events.
The present is construed by recognizing and  abstracting similarities and differences with the past.
Kelly (1955) notes that it is only by being attuned to repetitive aspects in the monotonous flow of life that sense can be made of the world.
In making the link between incoming information and existing schemas there is a parallel between PCT and the schema aesthetic.
Identifying contrasts and similarities constitutes one of the central aspects of the construal process.
It consists of constantly comparing things, people, occurrences and aspects, some of which are seen as good, beautiful or interesting whilst others are viewed in a more negative light as ugly or unpleasant.
Thus in appraising a particular visual image both similarity and familiarity will affect how aspects such as shape, pattern, colour or subject matter are organized and responded to.
Similarity to past experience will assist in the identification of a work's style, and this in turn will have a knock-on effect upon the application of appropriate constructs.
Confrontation with a novel or unexpected event, in which few replicative aspects are evident, may mean that inappropriate constructs come to be applied as when a viewer orientated towards figurative painting attempts to discover recognizable content with an abstract work.
In the absence of appropriate constructs with which to deal with a situation, such a viewer is left with a sense of the work being incomprehensible.
This rule applies in general.
Where there are no constructs, no adequate perception or understanding can be achieved.
As Oliver (1970) notes:
It is not just that there is no reality, but that man has no direct way of making contact with it.
He does not just open his eyes and look and there it is.
Whatever man perceives or conceives he ‘grasps’ by application of a construct system…
[He can]‘take in’ only what his construct system is capable of handling.
That is to say, what it cannot handle is…mere confusion, chaos.
Out of this theory it also follows that the uniqueness of each individual construct system necessarily means that there can be no straightforward response to a stimulus but only a multiplicity of interpretations.
In construct theory, constructs are identified by means of the labels applied to opposing poles.
Thus there may be ‘up’ and ‘down’, ‘black’and ‘white’, ‘in’and ‘out’to name but a few generally acceptable constructs holding a common public meaning.
Other more idiosyncratic constructs might include ‘ambitious’ and ‘not prepared to trample on colleagues’or, in the case of a response to a particular colour in a  painting, ‘warm’opposed not by the conventional ‘cold’but by the more idiosyncratic ‘clinical’.
Constructs are usually named by their emergent pole.
Sometimes the opposite remains unclear and unlabelled.
They do not need to be highly intellectualized and may sometimes even be tentative, blurred and confused.
Words cannot then specify the nature of the underlying dimension.
Some constructs may reflect pre-verbal bases of organization which cannot be accounted for by rational explanation.
Indeed the theory raises many problems, both in itself and in its application, not least of which is the verbally mediated nature of its operation.
These are widely considered in the literature already mentioned above.
Suffice here to accept the inevitable constraints imposed by language, as noted by Ryle (1975), and recognize its limitations especially in the area of aesthetic response.
Although experience is central to construct theory, in Kellian terms, this is measured less by actual experience undergone than by the level of investment made in the actual revision of a construct system.
Common belief suggests that learning occurs as the result of experience but construct theory turns this belief upon its head by proposing that learning itself is what constitutes an experience (Kelly, 1963, p. 173).
Experience does not consist of simply being faced with an event but is more a consequence of the construct system's revision towards greater validity.
Taking things for granted or failing to seek new understanding indicates a lost opportunity for adding to the store of experience.
According to Epting (1981) it is only through the continuous creation of new constructs that an individual can hope to deal with an ever-changing world.
It is therefore in a construct system's own best interest to transcend the obvious, explore new possibilities, entertain what might be, envision alternatives and experiment, and if necessary relinquish, present understanding.
By discriminating between experience in general and ‘AN experience’ Dewey (1934) may  well have identified this important difference.
The widening of awareness and gaining of new insight associated with the latter is clearly identified with the aesthetic domain.
In education teachers devise many kinds of experience for their pupils in terms of exposure yet it is problematical as to how many of these result in genuine experience, as defined above, and how many are ineffective, i.e. they leave construct systems unchallenged and unchanged.
As Shaw (1981) notes ‘…the quality of a person's models undoubtedly determines the level of competence and creativity he is able to achieve’.
Changes in awareness might, therefore be more successfully measured by the degree to which such models are revised than by the extent to which behavioural objectives are achieved.
Although originally presented as a theory of personality, PCT has  been applied to wider areas such as politics (Fransella and Bannister, 1967) architecture (Glanville, 1977), maps (Stringer, 1974), film (Carver, 1967), painting (O'Hare and Gordon, 1976; Mendoza and Thomas, 1972) and music (Ward, 1985).
This has been through the use of Repertory Grid Technique which, as a practical application of construct theory has been defined as, ‘Any form of sorting task which allows for the assessment of relationships…in matrix form’(Bannister and Mair, 1968, p. 136).
A grid represents a two-dimensional array of observations and judgments (elements and constructs) which interrelate in such a way that each is meaningful in terms of the other.
It is composed of elements (surface counters in visual art) and constructs (the bi-polar judgments evoked by the elements and often of a depth counter nature).
The matrix therefore represents the cross references between what is seen and the constructs that come to be applied in making sense of the experience and, by recording these, it is able to illuminate something of a person's way of thinking and responding.
In making a grid a portion of a construct system is expressed leaving traces of the ideas that have been brought to bear, perhaps even unknowingly.
Through various computer programs (G A B, Pegasus, Gridmap) data is statistically  analysed and the trace made evident.
By fixing, in the form of a grid map, that which was previously indefinite and ephemeral, grid technique provides the means whereby the conceptual structures underlying judgment and observation can be examined.
Through its use, comparisons can be made of successive judgments, or the construals of different individuals can be compared.
Although this is not easy, because comparisons are often made upon data emerging from different initial observations as well as different responses, it does seem to provide an approach whereby the effects of learning can be discerned and differences between the judgments of experts and the inexperienced identified.
In addition, the reflective characteristic of grid technique means that grids act as a kind of psychological mirror.
Because of this they have the potential for increasing self-awareness and deepening understanding both of the judgments made and the objects construed.
Gaines and Shaw (1981, p. 176) note that introspection is not a skill developed in most current educational systems.
Instead, ‘We promote the ‘received view’ of knowledge and act as teachers to bring the minds of students into conformity without consensual models of reality'.
In a climate where what is thought is less important than that it does not deviate from what it is ‘correct’ to think, the use of grids can  illuminate the unique aspects of individual insight.
Whilst constructs and elements may be supplied to a respondent, this is contrary to Kelly's original theory which emphasizes the individual elicitation of both.
In this process, observations and responses are drawn out of a viewer while observing, for example, a painting.
Surface counters are noted as elements whilst judgments, often of a bi-polar nature, are also listed.
When elicitation is complete, scores are allotted to each judgment as it correlates with each element.
For example, an observer construing Rousseau's ‘Dream’ might notice aspects such as the jungle, man, woman, snake, sofa, moon, etc.
Judgments about this aspect might elicit bi-polar constructs such as‘masculine-feminine’, savagery-civilization', ‘vertical-horizontal’, ‘light-dark’, ‘moving-still’.
If a crude dichotomous scale were used to depict perceived associations by the placing of a check, a grid such as is shown in table 12.1 might ensue.
By counting, positive neutral negative matchings across each row and column the construct and element matching tables in tables 12.2 and 12.3 are arrived at.
Even such a simple response and analysis begins to show just how the observer has seen the painting.
In the element table (table 12.3) the strong association between elements A and G (fruit and moon) is made evident with a score of five out of six possible matchings.
Both are perceived to have characteristics of femininity and lightness, as well as being felt as still and carrying associations of civilization.
Contrasts are revealed by those elements achieving no matchings.
A and B, fruit and man; B and C, man and woman; and B and G, man and moon, all reveal a score of zero.
In the construct table total matchings occur between 1 and 4 suggesting a strong affinity between perceived masculinity and the sense of activity.
The relationship between constructs 1 and 5 shows the extent to which the dimension ‘masculine-feminine’ is perceived along the same plane as ‘savage-civilized’with the positive (savage) pole deriving its assonances from aspects of the jungle, snake and moon.
The link between constructs 4 and 5 shows how an attribute such as the sense of stillness evokes an association with feelings of civilization in this particular picture.
Contrasts between 2 and 3 also illustrate the way in which (within the items elicited) there is a tendency for horizontal elements to be perceived as light in contrast to the darker verticals.
The above relationships may be represented in a more visually direct manner by plotting the matching scores of each grid along selected dimensions.
By summing the matching scores obtained on each construct in table 12.2 it is possible to establish the total number of perceived connections, as shown in table 12.4 
The above table shows that constructs 4 ‘active-still’ and 5 ‘savage-civilized’each achieve a total of eighteen matchings whereas construct 3 ‘light-dark’reaches only eight.
In plotting a ‘map’ it is usual to use the aspect achieving the highest score to represent the vertical axis.
Thus either construct 4 or 5 may be used.
A second dimension, to serve as the  horizontal axis, is selected from the next highest scoring constructs provided that this is not highly correlated with the first choice.
In the case of table 12.4, if construct 5 ‘savage-civilized’ is used to form the vertical axis, construct 2 ‘vertical-horizontal’must be used as the horizontal axis.
This is because the next highest scoring constructs (constructs 4 and 1) are all closely correlated with construct 5, as may be seen from table 12.2 where each of these constructs is matched six out of seven times with the others.
Use of a highly similar construct for the second axis means that the resulting map represents only one rather than two dimensions of judgment.
On the basis of these decisions, the ‘map’ shown in table 12.5 may be constructed.
The number of matchings achieved by each construct with constructs 5 and 2 are used as the co-ordinates (these are circled in table 12.4).
The top and right ends of each axis represents the positive pole of the construct and also the highest score (in this case 7).
The left and bottom ends of the axis similarly represent the negative poles and the lowest scores.
As plotted, the map clearly shows the close relationship between judgments based upon ‘masculinity’, ‘activity’ and the sense of the ‘savage’.
Because these constructs are highly correlated they may also be encircled as a way of indicating this clustering.
The ‘map’ also shows that the construct ‘light’tends to stand in opposition to this major  dimension of judgment and is instead more closely associated with the sense of ‘civilization’and aspects perceived as being ‘horizontal’.
A positive aspect of such a map is that careful scrutiny of the data provides a more direct indication of the nature of a response than does the sequential presentation of information in verbal description.
With computer analysis it can also reach a far higher level of sophistication than can be achieved by hand methods.
In its present form, grid method demands that vast amounts of information are condensed into simple verbal labels.
Therefore, in order to fully understand a grid it is important that analysis is carried out in conjunction with the respondent so that misinterpretations are avoided.
Respondents usually hold a very clear understanding of the judgments indicated by the verbal labels as, for example, in the ‘warm-clinical’ construct previously mentioned.
Here ‘clinical’ was defined in terms of a very exact shade of blue and the sense of icy coldness it evoked in contrast to almost furry browns and yellow ochres having strong earth associations.
Without pressing beyond the formal labels such rich evocations could be easily missed.
For this reason it is helpful to record details of the elicitation and judgment process as it proceeds so that the bare bones of a grid can later have the flesh replaced.
If this is not done then the method is in danger of becoming too abstract and distant.
The simple grid described above is used merely to exemplify the method which, with computer analysis of the data and a use of rank ordering or numerical scaling of the judgments, is able to reach a higher level of sophistication.
It also raises some of the problems endemic to grid technique: the limitations imposed by verbal labels and the difficulty posed by constructs that are not relevant to certain elements.
Even so, it demonstrates the way in which a response can be recorded and how with further probing and more extensive elicitation less obvious aspects might be investigated.
With computer analysis information of the kind presented here can be more rapidly and accurately mapped.
Instead of counted matchings, these can be properly correlated and noted in terms of their statistical significance and clustered.
If such a map is examined in conjunction with comments made by an observer during construal then a rich record of response becomes possible.
Grid Analysis of a Single Painting by Experienced and Inexperienced Observers
Below, two parallel construals of an original painting by Howard Hodgkin, ‘Interior at Oakwood Court’ are described.
The first is by a viewer inexperienced in looking at art; the second by an individual with a wide interest and education in the area.
Selected aspects of their comments are included along with the analysis, as well as statements by Hodgkin himself, critics of his work, and other respondents.
Both respondents were mature women.
Both grids were elicited in an art gallery setting and the results  analysed by means of the Grid Analysis for Beginners programme (Higginbottom and Bannister, 1983).
Hodgkin's painting is typical of his mature, highly abstract work having a strong, surrounding ‘frame’ of red paint and an ‘interior’formed out of bright colours applied in a highly direct manner.
McEwan and Sylvester (1984) describe the work as beginning at the point where words fail by creating ‘…evocations of mood and sensation more than visual records’(p. 10).
The expressive exuberance of marks is noted along with the predominance of red, with the paint ‘…rasped on at a stroke or teased into fuzzy blotches’.
The picture is described as having been formed out of a series of anxious revisions which incorporate all that has preceded them so that there are glimpses of ‘buried entities’ to enliven gaps and edges.
Here is ‘…a jumble of objects if ever there was one, difficult to pin down and eminently suited to a process of assiduous piecing together’(ibid, p. 19).
The ‘frame’‘…heightens the drama by theatrically ‘presenting’ the internal action of the composition, emphasizing its frozenness by isolating, and often  conspiratorially showing, a warmly-lit-scene directly encompassed with chambered and secret recesses' (ibid, p. 12).
Hodgkin himself speaks of ‘…wanting to get the evasiveness of reality’(Hyman, 1985) into his painting.
This requires a viewer to ‘unpack’ the image and reconstitute the real-life situation out of which it has been found.
The pleasure of ‘…watching it melt down and reform to become an object of its own, involves the viewer completely in the painting’.
The first (inexperienced) respondent was able to differentiate and name only two aspects of the work, the basic red ‘frame’ and the ‘centre area’inside it.
She was completely taken aback by the experience, and equated the work with ‘…what they have on television where the fellow's rolling in paint’.
It was made very clear that the work had no appeal whatsoever and it was classed in a derogatory manner as ‘modern art’.
‘What's he expressing?
What's he trying to tell me?’, she asked, and followed such questions with attempts to identify aspects in terms of specific features such as figures, a gravestone, a crucifix, etc before stating, ‘It's shocking — it's so unbelievable!’.
She concluded that ‘It looks like misery — there's no light in it at all— it's too dull.
Maybe that's just me, but that's how I feel…there's no warmth…just red paint around the outside and then a few splodges gone over with different coloured paint and [he]hoped for the best…
A 3-year-old child could do as good’.
The only judgments concerned a feeling of ‘warmth’ in which there was a clear discrimination between the ‘frame’and the ‘interior’; ‘bright-dull’, ‘makes use of colour’and ‘made by flicks of the brush’.
The resulting map (figure 12.1) plots the relationship between these dimensions although the overall discrimination was so weak that the judgment could be considered as undifferentiated.
Other respondents with little experience in looking at art reflected a similar, although less restricted, approach.
One spoke of the painting ‘…being to do with life…as life goes on’ but, although more actual surface aspects were noticed, the judgment could be taken no further.
Another doggedly persisted in identification along the lines of ‘…it looks a bit like an animal…four footed — the shape — the middle…
It's as if he painted an outline — there's a hollow here, and here — like a  tail…and a head round there, like a kind of head, striped just here…and you've got the blue — and — it looks something like a foot…
Yes, it actually looks like a dog — the shapes — the tail — the legs — it's a dog — that I can see.
That looks like a face or something — a beak — it's a face anyway’.
This respondent echoed the thoughts of the first by concluding that ‘…it looks as if he's played around in the paint, trying to create something — or he's got confused and mixed everything up and something just happened’.
By comparison, observers with confidence in their capacity to enjoy paintings approached the work from a completely different angle.
Not only were they able to pick out more surface counters and make more judgments but these were different in kind.
After a lengthy period of looking, one respondent ended up with the following list of constructs:
Another produced the following, quite different, list: To both, the Hodgkin style was instantly recognizable.
Comment centred upon being taken ‘through into the picture’, upon its structure and organization and especially upon the interaction of colours and paint qualities.
Where depth counters emerged these were linked to surface perceptions with the spots, for example, stimulating the following response: ‘There's spots on there, and I guess that's another reason why I want to go into that area.
But that's not to say that the picture is totally without threat — I think there's an element of threat in those blue spots — there's a sort of feeling of disease and consumption almost.
Things like evil sorts of mushrooms and things like that…
And the organization of the picture seems to me to be very much on verticals and horizontals.
But the spots joggle about on top of other colours.
Yes, I think the spots are more to do with growing things than a pock-marked face.
I do feel a sort of jungly-atmosphere about this picture — although it doesn't have a lot of green in it…the green bit…also has a mysterious quality.
The way the paint's put on in various places makes the painting take off, as it were, where the paint gets fuzzy’.
Another comment described the work as a ‘very, very luxurious  painting’, having ‘the life and energy that it's got because of the colour underneath giving it life and vitality’.
It was also tied into the whole range of English Romantic landscape painting, especially Turner, in terms of oozing love for the material and not being afraid to enjoy the application of paint.
‘Tension’ was associated with the red area, especially the ‘frame’which forced the eye into the ‘seductive’centre.
Focal areas were noted and the various methods of putting on and scraping off paint considered.
The map made by an experienced observer (figure 12.2) reflects many similar considerations.
Again, ‘The main attraction is the red…and there's an interplay with the colder colours…
I think that the way the paint's put on gives it vitality’.
Further comment relating to the method included the ‘…spotty, speckled effect — which in some ways I find not particularly satisfactory…a little difficult to enjoy’, and the paint which is sometimes ‘dragged on’ but also often ‘dragged and spread in such a way that there's some sort of movement’.
Flat brush strokes and dragged ones were compared and there was a realization that ‘…if you isolate any area of paint…you're looking at a much more complex thing than you at first thought you were’.
There was also a noting of a physical pattern ‘…a physically produced rhythm…the sorts of rhythm that your hand makes automatically’.
Within the map all of these judgments were not only recorded but also grouped and related, so that the broken and sequential account afforded by conversation was presented in an immediately available visible format.
In the map, the main dimension of judgment was shown to centre upon the work's ‘dabbed’, ‘speckled’ quality.
This was closely associated with its perceived ‘complexity’ and the superimposition of paint along with the conception of these areas in terms of a broken mass of colour.
Here, technique, perception and response were closely tied together.
This grouping was contrasted with those areas defined in terms of a ‘crude thickness of paint’, where the medium was both ‘shiny’ and applied without deliberate intention.
‘Clearly defined’ areas with clear ‘edges’were contrasted with those seen as ‘spotty’or ‘dabbed’.
In addition they were also opposed to those marks resulting from a ‘physically produced rhythm’.
A significant correlation (Spearman's Rho: 81) between this latter construct and ‘intensity’ revealed a strong link between technique and sensed depth counters.
Both of these constructs are closely associated with ‘spontaneity’ and ‘vitality’(themselves correlated at the highly significant level of Spearman's Rho: 90) to form the second, and more positive, dimension of this response.
These were the areas that were found to be predominantly ‘satisfactory’.
They also tied in with a felt ‘horizontal’ structure in the work.
In contrast to figure 12.1, the map resulting from this construal revealed not only a higher number of judgments but also a more effective structuring of their relationships.
The various facets of the judgment were differentiated yet also interlinked in a way that balanced opposed judgments.
Other element maps formed from the perceived surface counters of this work reflected similar levels of discrimination.
More experienced observers tended to note a greater number of aspects and produced related clusters and sub-groups indicative of sensed assonances.
In all instances clusterings and sub-groupings were plotted according to a component analysis of the data.
None are shown in figure 12.1 because the judgment did not, in fact, produce any.
A constant feature of most appraisals took the form of a circling sequence of perceptions and responses, returning again and again to aspects of the work that had already been considered.
With experienced   viewers this tended to lead to new visual discoveries and a concomitant extension of the construct system as it grappled with freshly perceived features.
Statements such as, ‘I didn't see it previously’; ‘I've just noticed something new’; I can see all sorts of things of interest which I hadn't seen before'; ‘I wasn't interested in that before…suddenly it has a very significant part to play’; ‘the painting is actually changing for me’; ‘I'm just discovering it’; ‘I've started now to appreciate…‘, abounded.
They reflected the emergence of aspects due to the prolonged looking demanded by the method and revealed that ‘growing up’ to a painting, mentioned earlier, in which the discovery of more and more forms part of the process of coming to know a work.
They also showed how the construct system, freed from the constraints of functional looking, could toy with alternatives and delight in the steady stream of arousal this created.
With experienced viewers there was not only a high degree of involvement in watching the work ‘…melt down and become an object with a life of its own’(Hyman, 1968) but also a strength and honesty of feeling that outweighed any more general sense of like or dislike.
This was also accompanied by a reflective quality of thought that seemed to correspond to Parson's higher categories of aesthetic appraisal, and to McCoy's (1977) notion of emotional satisfaction being related to a construct system's construal of its own adequacy.
In less experienced viewers the perceptual cycle centred much more upon attempts to confirm existing hypotheses than upon exploration.
If these were inappropriate then bewilderment and anxiety occurred and the interaction tended to be terminated after a few limited responses leaving a residual sense of uncertainty, displeasure and frustration.
Whilst some evidence suggested that repeated construal might break into this circle, a more effective way would be by making available the construals of others.
Maps of construals obtained from a peer group or from someone with greater expertise would serve to stimulate a wider perceptual search.
Although the above extracts, which are taken from a more detailed investigation (Osbourn, 1988), provide only a brief description they do demonstrate the potential offered by RGT for exploration and education within the area of aesthetic appraisal.
Not only can responses be fixed in a way that reveals something of the foundations which underlie them but the method itself can also act as a catalyst for the kinds of looking that lead to increased perceptual awareness.
The emphasis upon observations of similarity and difference incorporates notions important to aesthetic looking.
Elicitation procedures rely upon present perceptions and judgments as a starting point and encourage the kinds of reconsideration that lead to a wider realization  of experience.
They demand a bracketing out approach that concentrates attention upon surface counters, encourages a search for clues and a groping for ideational principles around which response comes to be structured.
In the kind of discriminating attention it demands, grid method becomes, and reveals, a part of that articulation process described by Lind in which the very structure and texture of aesthetic objects are made intelligible.
Indeed, by channelling the perceptual cycle and, in so doing also slowing down the looking process, grid technique extends the period of appraisal in a way that counters those rapid and dismissive habits associated with functional looking.
Several commentators have noted that appreciation, especially of art, demands a certain kind of attention and a slow pace.
There is a need to dally with experience and exhaust what it has to offer (Deighton and Lynton, 1985, introduction; Jenkins, 1958, p. 222).
Contemporary influences such as impatience, economy or even overfamiliarity, resist the aesthetic approach.
There is indeed much disquiet at any delay in immediate fulfilment.
All too often attention is directed away from the present encounter to the next so that response is reduced to a minimum.
Such economies of attention are achieved by dealing only with the most superficial aspects of an experience.
They lead to habits of attention that ‘…hurry us through encounters with works…eclipse the unique features of lived occasions and…reduce experience to the reaction of a limited number of stereotyped patterns’(Jenkins, 1958, p. 225).
In contrast, grid method encourages concentration, prolongs discrimination, extends the perceptual cycle, allows meaning to accrue over time and leads to closer visual intimacy with an image.
If response is enhanced by learning to look for more, then this approach seems to offer a way whereby such looking can be energized.
Recent developments in the computer program used for  analysing grids lends greater credibility to the wider application of Repertory Grid Techniques as a personalized learning system.
Content free interactive programs such as Pegasus (Shaw, 1981, pp. 34–5) and Circumgrids (Chambers and Grice, 1986) provide features that question judgments and allow revision to be incorporated as the elicitation and construal proceeds.
Further developments, which apply ‘fuzzy logic’(Gaines and Shaw, 1985) or ‘fuzzy truth’(Massaro, 1986) to the way in which judgments are rated, are particularly relevant in the appraisal of art where responses are not always as clear cut as present methods demand.
In addition, a weighting of constructs according to their importance or status within the construct system (as suggested by Shaw and Gaines, 1985) might lead to a finer and more accurate pattern of response compared to present methods in which all judgments carry equal  weight.
Perhaps also the time has come to abandon content free systems and move towards the development of a knowledge-based program, using grid method but specifically designed to enhance the perception and appreciation of art.
Such a system could incorporate images to be construed; hold relevant information to be drawn upon as required; include a capacity to enlarge or select from the image under consideration; provide cues aimed at stimulating a search for undiscovered features or ideas and be partially interactive in a non-verbal mode by means of direct pointing with a light pen.
Such a program could be designed not only with the aim of increasing visual acuity but could be related to the production of verbal constructs in a way that might enhance the ability to communicate about what was seen and felt.
Bruner (1986, p. 5) notes that in the realms of literature precious little is known about the ‘reader-in-the-text’ as a psychological process.
In the visual arts even less seems to be understood about the viewer-in-the-picture, especially about the nature of the ‘illuminating experience’(Taylor, 1986, p. 160), that may accompany the aesthetic response.
By integrating theories of perception with Personal Construct Theory and present understanding of aesthetic experience, and exploring their relevance to learning in art, greater insight into this area of human experience might be gained.
By creating a mode of Repertory Grid Technique specific to visual art and making it available through the personal computer, this area full of complexity and uncertainty might come to be both better understood and more widely valued.