

SIX
DECEMBER ENDED as it had begun, both bleak and cold.
On New Year's night the poor huddled in primeval groups under the flyovers.
You could see them squatting on their hams silhouetted around bonfires; sometimes one of the figures would throw a lump of dried buffalo-dung on to the flames.
Nearby, in Golf Links and Chanakyapuri, the rich were celebrating.
As midnight drew near, they burst balloons, popped champagne corks and tore around Delhi honking the horns of their new Marutis.
At the traffic lights, as outstretched palms were thrust through open car windows, the two worlds briefly met.
That night we went to a party given by a magazine editor.
Outside the house, alongside the usual melee of Marutis, stood a line of imported Mercedes — the ultimate mark of arrival for a nouveau-riche Punjabi businessman — and a few white ministerial Ambassadors distinguished by their little red roof beacons.
Inside we were greeted by the sight of a gaggle of top-heavy Sikhs energetically bopping around the hall to 1970s disco music; beautiful Hindu ladies lilted delicately from side to side trying to avoid stepping on each other 's saris.
Liveried bearers carried trays of kebabs around the room.
On the walls, spotlights illuminated sensuous Hindu sculptures torn from the brackets of ruined temples.
At the other Delhi parties we had been to — mostly boring official events — it had been a struggle to avoid getting cornered by some grey under-secretary from the Ministry of Fertilizer Distribution.
But the tone and guest list at this party was very different; here it seemed were the elusive Delhi jeunesse dorée.
Pearl chokers glittered on every female neck; huge diamonds flashed in the strobe lights.
The disc-jockey put on Earth, Wind and Fire and Olivia was whisked away by a young columnist from Amritsar; I was left talking to a rather bulbous Congress MP.
‘You are British?’ he asked.
I nodded.
‘Did you go to Eton?’
‘No.’
‘How sad,’ he replied, moving quickly away.
As I walked forlornly around on my own, I could hear fragments of different conversations wafting over the music:
‘She thought she was getting a millionaire.
What she did get was five children and two poodles…’
‘Actually I think they are saying she was an air hostess before she met her husband, ya?
It was case of trolley to lolly.’
‘…
The children are one thing.
But imagine having to take on those disgusting poodles…’
‘I really don't know where His Highness is.
Bapji swore he would be here before twelve.’
‘…at least her husband bought her a nice little boutique in Hauz Khas Village.
But you should see her new collection.
Oh!
So vulgar…’
‘…
Ya, Rohit is so talented.
Really he is Delhi's Yves St Laurent.’
Most of the guests seemed to be either journalists, politicians, or fashion designers, the three occupations most favoured by the nascent New Delhi chattering class.
The different cliques stood together in their separate groups, talking shop: the ethnic collection of the new Paris-trained designer; the likely winners in the next cabinet reshuffle; the latest chapter in the interminable Bofors corruption scandal.
Only the Sikh men seemed to have other things on their mind as, twirling their moustaches, they downed great tumblers of whisky and tried to lure the prettiest girls on to the dance floor.
Around the room the chatterers were still gossiping:
‘Acha.
It's true: his grandfather had one hundred vintage cars.
He drove whichever one happened to match his cuff-links.’
‘Rajiv looks really sexy in his shahtoosh, ya?
But Sonia — so  awkward.
Really she is just some common bricklayer's daughter.’
‘Bubbles is nothing but a little tart.
You should have seen her at Neemrana…clinging chiffon or some wet sari…straight out of the worst kind of masala movie…’
‘Did you see Bina at the horse show?
Even that Chanel suit she got in Paris can't disguise all the weight she's put on.
And she used to be so pretty…’
At midnight everyone joined hands and tried to sing ‘Auld Lang Syne’, but despite a spattering of British diplomats, only a pair of Indian army generals knew the words.
The Sikhs bounced off the dance floor, dripping with sweat, and joined in.
After the toasts and handshakes, the socialites opened their diaries and began to swap telephone numbers and lunch dates.
Then, en masse, they embraced and staggered off towards their waiting cars and frozen drivers.
‘It's the drivers that run this town,’ muttered one politician as he tripped off into the driveway.
‘I was at a party last week.
Half-way through one driver came in and said that the Minister for Human Resources had spent half an hour longer than he had agreed.’
‘No!’ replied his friend.
‘What happened?’
‘Imagine it.
The Minister actually apologized and left without an argument…’
‘Servants these days!
They are less reliable even than the telephones.’
‘Unless you give them paan, cigarettes and seven days’ notice, they won't do a thing.’
‘I ask you.
What is our India coming to?’
Mrs Puri did not see the New Year in, but the following day she celebrated the event in her own inimitable fashion.
Soon after we had finished our New Year's lunch, we heard the familiar sound of the Indian National Anthem chiming defiantly around the flat.
I opened the door to find Mrs Puri standing to attention outside.
As I let her in, she put on her best funeral face.
‘Mr William, Mrs William,’ she said.
‘Have you been reading our Hindustan Times?’
‘Yes,’ we replied, noncommittally.
‘In that case you will know that the rupee is in a parlous state.’
Mrs Puri went on to describe, at some length, the trials and  tribulations currently being faced by the Bombay Stock Exchange.
‘In short,’ she concluded, ‘our Indian economy is far from tip-top condition.’
‘But, Mrs Puri,’ we protested, having heard this all several times before.
‘Indian industry is going from strength to strength.’
‘Ah, you are kind, Mr William.
But sadly things are very dire in our India.’
She paused and shook her head: ‘I'm afraid I am forced to put up your rent.’
There followed protracted negotiations; and it was not until weeks later that we settled on a permanent arrangement that satisfied everyone.
Our rent, in pounds sterling, was to be sent monthly to Mrs Puri's bank account in deepest Ludhiana.
The amount was to be fixed for one year.
Fluctuations in the value of the pound were, however, to be made up in Marks and Spencer underwear which we would get our friends to mail out from Britain.
‘You must understand,’ explained Mrs Puri, ‘that we are not having your Marks and Spencer lingerie in India.’
‘No,’ we replied, embarrassed.
‘Of course not.’
‘Our Indian lingerie is most unsatisfactory.’
‘Why is that?’
Olivia asked.
‘In India we are having no good viscose.
Here we are having only cotton and silks.
For quality modern undergarments you are needing viscose.’
Mrs Puri tapped her stick triumphantly on the ground.
‘Actually, Mr William, I think you have no head for business,’ she said with unexpected frankness as we shook hands on the deal.
‘Really this arrangement is most satisfactory for me.’
Although the early mornings and evenings remained grey and foggy, the afternoons at the beginning of January became increasingly warm and bright.
In the gardens there appeared the first signs of spring: leaf-buds reappeared on the bougainvillaea and the poinsettias burst into flower.
One day, inspired by the balmy weather, I decided to go and see the great onion-domed tomb of Safdarjung, the last really great Mughal building to be built in India.
It was a landmark I had passed  a thousand times and yet had never properly explored.
From my reading, however, I knew a little about its occupant.
Safdarjung was a Persian nobleman from Nishapur in Iranian Khorasan.
In the late seventeenth century he came to India, gained a prominent post in the Imperial army and married into the Mughal aristocracy; a few years later he succeeded his father-in-law as Nawab (Governor) of Oudh.
Safdarjung interested me because his life seemed to encapsulate perfectly the intriguing but cataclysmic half-century that linked the Mughal high noon at the close of the seventeenth century with the decay and disintegration of the Twilight fifty years later.
When Safdarjung arrived from Persia, Aurangzeb was still Emperor and Delhi was still the richest, most magnificent and most populous city between Istanbul and Edo (Tokyo); with its two million inhabitants it was far larger than either London or Paris.
Its army was invincible; its palaces unparalleled; the domes of its many mosques quite literally glittered with gold.
By the time of Safdarjung's death, the Persian Nadir Shah had been and gone, carrying with him the accumulated riches of eight generations of Empire.
Three Emperors had been murdered (one was, in addition, first blinded with a hot needle); the mother of one ruler was strangled and the father of another forced off a precipice on his elephant.
Delhi, the great capital, was left a city of gutted ruins.
To be Emperor during this period was a highly dangerous undertaking.
The longest surviving sovereign of the age, the Emperor Muhammed Shah (called Rangila, or the Colourful), survived by the simple ruse of giving up any pretence of ruling: in the morning he watched partridge and elephant fights; in the afternoon he was entertained by jugglers, ventriloquists, mime artists and  conjurors .
Politics he wisely left to his scheming advisers.
While the empire was being gradually reduced to a fraction of its former size, the court gave itself over to pleasure and sensuality.
As the aristocracy gradually lost all interest in war and soldiering, they diverted their remaining funds into frequenting courtesans, patronizing poets, holding mehfils (literary evenings) and constructing pavilions and pleasure gardens.
Music, writing and nautch dancing all flourished; the old military aristocracy complained that it was now sitar and sarangi players, not generals and cavalrymen, who were rewarded with honours and estates.
Poets were so highly esteemed that it was said that a Delhi-wallah visiting a friend in another part of India would always take with him as a present not jewels or hookahs or fine weapons but a few of Mir Taqi Mir's new verses copied on to a single sheet of paper.
A new ghazal (love lyric) by one of the great Delhi poets was considered the most desirable gift that any civilized host could wish for.
While Muhammed Shah and his circle busied themselves with amusement, Safdarjung consolidated his position.
From his palace in Lucknow, the Nawab governed a province which stretched from Bengal through the rich plains of North India to the Doab.
It was the most fertile land in India; Delhi was far away and the hold of the Emperors was becoming ever weaker.
Safdarjung was the richest and most powerful man in India; in all but name he had become an independent ruler.
On the death of Muhammed Shah, Safdarjung moved in to take over.
He seized the post of Vizier (Prime Minister) and within weeks Muhammed Shah's ineffectual successor had been effectively excluded from all decisions; he remained a figurehead, left to console himself with drink, opium and his harem.
Eventually, however, Safdarjung overplayed his hand.
His arrogance and bullying alienated the Imperial family; and in their desperation they called in the armies of the Hindu Mahratta Confederacy from the Deccan to help rid them of their troublesome Vizier.
In the Civil War that followed, as rival armies from all over India converged on Delhi, Safdarjung was finally driven out of the capital.
He returned only in death when his son begged permission to build his father's tomb in the waste land to the southwest of Shahjehanabad.
The tomb stands today as a telling memorial to the period.
Most obviously, it demonstrates the strained circumstances of the age.
Compared to the purity of the Taj Mahal — the spotless white marble, the unfussy shapes, the perfectly balanced design — Safdarjung's tomb with its bulbous dome and stained sandstone walls seems somehow flawed and degenerate.
Every schoolchild the world over knows the profile of the Taj, and in so far as Safdarjung's tomb is different, it at first sight looks wrong: its lines look somehow faulty, naggingly incorrect.
Moreover, the tomb has an unmistakably threadbare quality to it.
As the traditional Delhi quarries near Agra were no longer controlled by the Mughals — the road between Delhi and Agra was usually blocked by wild and hostile Jat tribesmen — the builders were forced to strip other Delhi tombs in order to gather the material for Safdarjung's memorial.
Half-way through the construction, the marble appears to have run out.
Prominent strips of inlay were left unfinished; awkward patches of pink sandstone intrude into the glistening white of the dome.
The effect is like a courtier in a tatty second-hand livery: the intention grand, but the actual impression tawdry, almost ridiculous.
Nevertheless, the longer you look, the more the qualities and character of the tomb become apparent and the clearer it is that the architect was not simply trying to imitate the Taj and failing.
He had another, quite different aesthetic he was aiming to achieve — a sort of blowzy Mughal rococo.
His design was the product of another age with very different, more eccentric tastes.
The tomb shows how the aesthetes of the age of Safdarjung liked their gateways to be as ornately sculpted as their prose was purple; how they preferred their onion domes to be overextended and tapered; how they thought the interior of a tomb incomplete unless covered with a rococo riot of elaborate plasterwork.
For anyone used to the chaste purity of the Taj, it is here in the interior that the biggest surprises lie: inside, the capitals have turned almost into cabbages as they curve and curl in vegetable convulsions.
They throw up stamens and tendrils past the stalactite murqanas and squinches, gripping and voluting towards the floral boss of the low inner dome.
Even the pillars have taken root and become living things, blossoming into lotus filials at the base, cusping around the voussoirs of the arch, erupting out into little jharokha balconies at the top.
The spirit is fecund, Bacchanalian, almost orgiastic.
Like some elderly courtesan, the tomb tries to mask its imperfections beneath thick layers of make-up; its excesses of ornament are worn like over-applied rouge.
Even the little mosque to the side of the gatehouse has a whiff of degeneracy about it: its three domes are flirtatiously striped like the flared pyjama bottoms of a nautch  girl; there is something fundamentally voluptuous in its buxom curves and poise.
Despite its sad little economies, Safdarjung's tomb exudes the flavour of an age not so much decaying miserably into impoverished anonymity as one whoring and drinking itself into extinction.
The building tells a story of drunken laughter as the pillars of empire collapsed in a cloud of dust and masonry; and afterwards, of dancing in the ruins.
If poetry, music and elephant fights were the preferred amusements of the court, the humbler folk of the age of Safdarjung had their partridges.
Again and again in the letters and diaries of the period there are references to both partridge and elephant fights; they also feature prominently in the miniature illustrations of late Mughal manuscripts.
Both sports were clearly popular and well-established traditions; but when I asked my Indian friends about their survival in modern Delhi, they all shook their heads.
As far as any of them knew, the last elephant fights had taken place around the turn of the century in the princely states of Rajputana; and as for partridge fights, said my friends, those sorts of Mughal traditions had all died out at Partition.
I might find the odd partridge fight surviving in Lahore or somewhere in Pakistan, they thought, but not in Delhi.
It was Balvinder Singh who one day in late January suddenly announced, quite unprompted, that he would not be on duty on Sunday as he and his father Punjab Singh were going to watch what he called a ‘bird challenge’.
The fights apparently took place every Sunday morning in a Muslim cemetery in Old Delhi: ‘Bahot acha event hai,’ said Balvinder.
‘All very good birds fighting, very good money making, all very happy people enjoying.’
I asked whether I could come along too; and Balvinder agreed.
The following Sunday at six in the morning the three of us set off from International Backside into the thick early morning mist.
As we neared the cemetery, the streets began to fill with people, all heading in the same direction.
Some were carrying bulky packages  covered with thick quilted cloths.
Every so often one of the packages would let out a loud squawk.
The cemetery lay within a high walled enclosure at the back of the Old Delhi Idgah.
Despite the early hour, the arched gateway into the cemetery was already jammed with chai wallahs and snack sellers trying to push their barrows through the narrow entrance.
On the far side a crowd of two or three hundred people had already gathered: craggy old Muslims with long beards and mountainous turbans; small Hindu shopkeepers in blue striped lungis; Kashmiri pandits in long frock coats and Congress hats.
The crowd milled around chatting and exchanging tips, hawking and spitting, slurping tea and placing bets.
As the partridge enthusiasts pottered about, three elderly men tried to clear a space in the centre of the cemetery.
They strutted around, sombre and authoritative, clearly in charge of the proceedings.
These, explained Balvinder in his (characteristically loud) stage whisper, were the khalifas, the headmen of the partridge fights.
‘Very big men,’ said Balvinder approvingly.
‘How do you become a khalifa?’
I asked.
‘Experience and market value,’ said Punjab.
‘You must be very good fighter,’ added Balvinder, ‘and you must have too many titar (partridges).
This man here has one hundred fighting birds…’
The khalifa whom Balvinder had pointed out came up and introduced himself.
He was a very old man; he had blacked his eyelids with collyrium and his teeth and upper lip were heavily stained with paan.
His name was Azar Khalifa and he lived in Sarai Khalil in the Churi Wallan Gulli of the Old City.
‘We khalifas live for the bird challenge,’ he said.
‘We have no other occupation.’
Azar and Punjab Singh agreed that Delhi was the best place to see the partridge challenge in the whole of the subcontinent.
‘I have seen the partridge fights of Lucknow, Jaipur and Peshawar,’ said Azar.
‘But never have I seen anything like the fights in Delhi.
Khalifas come here from all over India and Pakistan to participate.’
Some of Azar Khalifa's partridges were fighting in the match that day, and the old man showed us his birds.
From behind the headstone of an old Muslim grave he produced an oblong parcel  trussed up in flowery chintz.
Unbuckling the fastenings, he removes the wraps and uncovered a wickerwork cage.
Inside, separated by a dividing trellis were two fine plump partridges.
‘This one lady.
This one gent,’ explained Balvinder.
The birds responded with a loud cry of ‘Ti-lo Ti-lo!’
Of the two birds, the male was the more beautiful.
It had superb black markings as precise and perfect as a Bewick wood engraving running down its spine; lighter, more downy plumage covered its chest.
Half-way along the back of the lower legs you could see the vicious spur with which the birds fought.
‘I feed my birds on milk, almonds and sugar cane,’ said Azar, sticking his finger through the cage and tickling the female under its neck.
‘The males I train every day so that they can jump and run without feeling too much tired.’
As we talked there was a shout from one of the other khalifas; the first fight was about to begin.
Azar called me over and with a flourish sat me down on a plastic deckchair at the front of the ring of spectators.
The open space in the middle had been carefully brushed and in its centre squatted two men about five feet apart; by their sides stood two cages, each containing a pair of birds.
The spectators — now arranged in two ranks, Lhose at the front squatting, those behind standing upright — hurriedly finished placing their bets.
A hush fell on the graveyard.
At a signal from Azar, the two contestants unhitched the front gate of the cage; the two cock partridges strutted out.
As they did so, their mates began to squawk in alarm and encouragement.
The males responded by puffing up their chests and circling slowly towards each other.
Again the hens shrieked ‘Ti-lo!
Ti-lo!’ and again the males drew closer to one another.
Then, quite suddenly, one of the two cocks lost his nerve.
He turned and rushed back towards the cage; but finding the gate barred, he skittered off towards the nearest group of spectators, hotly pursued by his enemy.
At the edge of the ring the cock took off, flying up amid a shower of feathers into the lower branches of a nearby tree.
There he remained, shrieking ‘Ti-lo!’, his chest heaving up and down in fright.
The rival male, meanwhile, strutted around the deserted lady partridge in ill-disguised triumph.
The hen averted her head.
This first short fight obviously disappointed the connoisseurs in the audience.
Balvinder shook his head at me across the ring: ‘This one very weakling bird,’ he shouted.
‘This one very weakling.’
Money was exchanged, the two contestants shook hands, and their place in the ring was taken by a second pair of fighters: a  Rajput with a handlebar moustache, and a small but fierce-looking Muslim who sported a bushy black beard.
To my eyes the new pair of partridges were indistinguishable from any of the other birds I had seen that day, but the rest of the audience clearly thought otherwise.
A murmur of approval passed through the crowd; Balvinder got out his wallet and handed two 100-rupee notes to his neighbour.
At another signal from Azar Khalifa the two gates were pulled back and again the cocks ran out.
This time there was no bluffing.
Encouraged by the raucous shrieks of their mates, the two birds rushed at each other.
Handlebar's bird, which was the lighter of the two, gave the Muslim's bird a vicious switch across its forehead; the darker bird responded by ripping at its rival's throat.
The two then fenced at each other with their beaks, each parrying the other's thrust.
A frisson went around the crowd: this was more like it.
Despite the violence, the blood and the cloud of feathers, I was surprised to find it strangely thrilling to watch: it was like a miniature gladiator contest.
The two birds had now broken loose from each other and withdrawn to the vicinity of their respective cages.
Then Handlebar's cock suddenly jumped into the air, flew the distance that separated it from its rival and came down on the darker bird with its neck arched and talons open.
The spurs ripped at the Muslim's bird and drew blood on its back, just above the wing.
The bird rolled over, but on righting itself managed to give its attacker a sharp peck on its wing tip as it tried to escape.
Then, scampering up behind Handlebar's bird it grabbed its rival by the neck, gripped, and forced it down on to its side.
The first bird lay pinioned there for four or five seconds before it managed to break free and fly off.
Handlebar's mate had meanwhile broken out in a kind of partridge death-wail.
The cry was taken up by the loser of the previous fight who was still watching the new contest from his tree.
Soon the whole graveyard was alive with the squawking of excited partridges.
The action had also electrified the crowd who were pressing in on the ring despite the best efforts of the khalifas to keep them all back.
Someone knocked over the tray of a chai wallah and there  were loud oaths from the squatting men over whom the tea had fallen.
But the incident was soon forgotten.
The Muslim's bird had gone back on to the offensive, swooping down with its spurs and ripping a great gash along its enemy's cheek.
It followed the attack up with a vicious peck just above the other bird's beak.
Handlebar's bird looked stunned for a second then withdrew backwards towards its mate.
The ring which had originally been twenty feet across was now little wider than seven or eight feet; the squatters were now standing and getting in everyone else's view.
In the middle, Handlebar was looking extremely agitated.
Although the rules laid down that he could not directly intervene he hissed at the hen who dutifully shrieked out a loud distress call.
This checked her mate's retreat and the bird turned around to face the Muslim's partridge with his back against her cage.
The proximity to his hen seemed to bring the cock new resolution.
For a few seconds the two birds stood facing each other, chests fully extended; then Handlebar's bird flew at its rival with a new and sudden violence.
He dealt the Muslim's bird a glancing blow with the hook of his beak, then rose up, wings arched, and fell heavily on the lighter bird's head.
As he hopped out of reach he again cut the darker bird with his spurs.
The reprisal never came.
The Muslim's bird slowly righted itself, got unsteadily to its feet, then limped off through the legs of the crowd.
There was a great cheer from the spectators.
Balvinder jumped up and down, punched the air, then promptly confronted the man with whom he had made the bet.
The latter grudgingly handed over a stash of notes.
All around the ring wallets were being slapped open and shut; fingers were being angrily pointed.
Everywhere arguments were breaking out between debtors and creditors, winners and losers.
The outsider had clearly won.
Suddenly there was a cry from the gateway; and the khalifas started ushering everyone to one side.
All the spectators frowned.
‘What's happening?’
I asked Punjab, who had come up beside me.
‘This khalifa is saying one dead body is coming.
We must leave the graveyard for an hour.’
‘Now?’
‘Yes, immediately.
Some people are wanting to bury some body here.’
As we were leaving, we passed the Muslim who had lost the fight.
He was cradling his partridge in his hands and kissing the bird.
He was close to tears, but the bird looked surprisingly perky.
‘Will the bird live?’
I asked Punjab.
‘Yes, yes,’ he replied.
‘This Mahommedan will bandage the wounds with herbs and feed the titar with special food.
In a few weeks the bird will be back in the fighting ring.’
Outside the cemetery we came across Azar Khalifa.
‘You liked?’ he asked.
‘Very much,’ I said.
‘Everyone likes,’ said Azar.
‘For the people of Delhi this partridge fighting has always been a happiness.’
‘It is true,’ said Punjab Singh.
‘People are coming here drunk, worried or tired of the chores of the world, but always they leave this place refreshed.’
I spent the rest of January visiting libraries to research the age of Safdarjung.
The trouble was that, unlike most other periods of Delhi's history, there seemed to be very few good primary sources.
There were the usual dubious court chronicles, but the accounts of the different palace intrigues — the competing factions, the endless round of murders, blindings, stranglings, stabbings and poisonings — seemed only to confuse, not in any way to illuminate the age.
It was Mozaffar Alam, the Mughal historian, who told me about a book which became one of my favourite Delhi texts: the Muraqqa'-e-Dehli.
The Muraqqa’ is a wonderfully gossipy account of Delhi taken from the diary of an impressionable young visitor named Dargah Quli Khan.
Khan was a Muslim nobleman from the Deccan who paid an extended visit to Delhi from 1737 to 1741 as part of the entourage of Safdarjung's great rival: Asaf Jah, the first Nizam of Hyderabad.
For all its humiliating decline, Khan still saw Delhi as a vibrant and sophisticated city, full of glamour and intrigue; the beauty  of its palaces and shrines, he thought, was rivalled only by the strangeness of the city's society and its dazzling complement of poets, dancers and mystics.
His account brings the whole city alive: the dry bones of the period are suddenly fleshed out and take on a recognizable human face.
Typical of his account is the picture he gives of the festival held at the great Sufi shrine of the Qadam Sharif, which sheltered the supposed Footprint of the Holy Prophet.
‘Every Thursday the courtyard of the Dargah is so full of visitors that it is difficult even to approach the Place and touch it,’ he writes.
‘Pilgrims and ascetics come from countries and cities far and near to seek the fulfilment of their desires.’
But when Khan goes on to describe the crowds a little more closely, this picture of prayerful pilgrimage undergoes something of a transformation: ‘On seeing beautiful women carrying in their hands porcelain bottles of perfume, the crowds become uncontrollable…the ecstatic people move around as though being swept into a whirlpool…
Gradually the singers gather and the mehfil (gathering) becomes gay.
Men and beautiful women also join in.
Pleasure-seekers retire to the corners and find the privacy to enjoy their desired company.’
If this sort of thing could take place at the most sacred shrine in Delhi, then the festivals at the lesser dargahs-such as that which grew up around the grave of the saintly Emperor Bahadur Shah I — could be even more lively.
Quli Khan is clearly not sure whether he should be disapproving or excited about the orgy busily going on all around him:
[At night]chandeliers of all kinds are hung so that the place dazzles like sunlight and overshadows the moon.
Hand in hand, the lovers roam the streets while Loutside]the drunken and the debauched revel in all kinds of perversities.
Groups of winsome lads violate the faith of the believers with acts which are sufficient to shake the very roots of piety.
There are beautiful faces as far as the eye can see.
All around prevails a world of impiety and immorality.
Both nobles and  plebeians quench the thirst of their lust here.
Having described the main shrines and Sufi festivals and mystics, Khan goes on to list the city's secular personalities: the nobles, the musicians and the great femmes fatales.
These figures range from Azam Khan, ‘one of the chief nobles of the Empire’ whose principal claim to fame is his vast harem and his insatiable appetites (‘a pederast, he is also fond of beautiful girls…whenever he is informed of the availability of a lad or a fine wench he endeavours to be the buyer’); through Taqi, ‘one of the famous eunuchs and the ringleader of the conjurors of Hindustan’(‘his house is the abode of delicate beauties, some as fair as the dawn while others are as dark as volatile passion’); to great musicians such as the blind drummer Shah Nawaz who played his own stomach as if it was a tabla drum; or the disgusting Surkhi, a glutton who ‘snored and expectorated loudly’but whose horrible habits were overlooked by his hosts because of the unique beauty of his voice (‘as melodious as a nightingale’), his brilliant mimicry and his ready wit.
Best of all were the dancers and courtesans — beautiful women like Ad Begum whose speciality was to appear naked at parties, but so cleverly painted that no one noticed: ‘she decorates her legs with beautiful drawings in the style of pyjamas instead of actually wearing them; in place of the cuffs she draws flowers and petals in ink exactly as found in the finest cloth of Rum.’
The most famous of the courtesans was Nur Bai, whose popularity was such that every night the elephants of the great amirs completely blocked the narrow lanes outside her house.
Even the greatest nobles could only gain admittance by sending in presents of large sums of money: ‘whosoever gets enamoured of her gets sucked into the whirlpool of her demands,’ writes Dargah Quli Khan, ‘and brings ruin upon himself and his house.
Many people have become paupers after their association with her but the pleasure of her company can only be had as long as one is in possession of riches to bestow on her.’
Meeting Nur Bai was clearly one of the highlights of Khan's visit to Delhi and at the end of his description he quietly drops in the fact that he ‘had the good fortune of spending some time in her company…’
But if it was the courtesans that captured Dargah Quli Khan's imagination, his real admiration was reserved for the Delhi poets.
One of the most interesting descriptions in the Muraqqa’ is of the  famous mehfils, the literary or musical evenings for which the city was then renowned.
‘Although Hazeen [a Persian Sufi]leads a life of purity and charm, there is always a large crowd gathered in his house,’ wrote Khan.
‘In the evening, the courtyard of his house is swept and sprinkled with rosewater and colourful carpets are spread out on a raised platform.
The great poets then start the recitation of their work.
Hazeen's verses make the audience ecstatic and inspire them to polish their own skills.’
Other mehfils, however, attracted crowds for non-literary reasons:
[The poet Miran]is humble, well-mannered and hospitable.
[But]he is also a connoisseur in the art of attracting charming new faces…
As a result Miran's mehfils always attract the beautiful and their lovers.
Dancers begin to assemble from morning onwards…
A large number of pretty young lads are lured to the show including both Hindu and Muslim catamites.
Good looking women gather in such large numbers that the mere sight of them appeases the appetite, although [of course]for the lecherous this does not suffice.
Khan was in Delhi in 1739, during the Persian invasion, and he witnessed the bloody massacre when Nadir Shah's soldiers went berserk and massacred 150,000 Delhi-wallahs.
In most histories the massacre is said to mark the end of Mughal Delhi's greatness, yet Khan clearly sees the invasion as only a temporary setback for the city.
Certainly it dimmed the brightness of some of the mehfils — one noble was forced to ‘lay his capital at the feet of the Emperor’ during the invasion and afterwards his mehfils are described as ‘subdued’— but there is no indication that Khan regarded the invasion as the end of an era; only with hindsight would that become clear.
Instead, despite writing soon after Nadir Shah had returned to Persia, the overwhelming impression that Khan tries to convey is still of a bawdy city of joy, a place remarkable for its wild parties, its lively celebrations and orgiastic festivals.
It is, of course, an image of the city very far removed from the way most Delhi people conceive of their home today.
Modern Delhi is thought of either as a city of grey bureaucracy, or as the metropolis of hard-working, nouveau-riche Punjabis.
It is rarely spoken of as a lively city, and never as a promiscuous one.
Yet, as I discovered  that December, the bawdiness of Safdar Jung's Delhi does survive, kept alive by one particular group of Delhi-wallahs.
You can still find them in the dark gullies of the Old City — if you know where to look.
Turkman Gate lies on the southern edge of Old Delhi.
Most of the ancient city walls were pulled down twenty years ago and the gate now stands alone on a traffic island like a great beached whale washed up on the edge of the city.
One morning in mid-January I jumped over the railings and climbed up to the parapet of the gate.
It was a little before dawn; the Old City was just getting up.
Sweepers raked the dirt and dung away from the front of stalls; a muezzin called from the minaret of a nearby mosque; chai wallahs pulled their blankets closer around them and lit their burners to boil the first tea saucepan of the day.
It was still very cold.
I waited for a full hour before I caught a glimpse of the sight that I had come to see.
Just as the sun was rising, a solitary bicycle rickshaw jolted out of the labyrinth of the Old City and trundled underneath the gate.
Inside were three figures.
They were clad in brightly coloured silks and muslins, flowing saris edged in glittering gold brocade.
They were heavily made up, with painted cheeks and scarlet lipstick; each of their noses was pierced with a single diamond stud.
They were dressed for the nautch, dressed as women, yet they were not women.
Even at a distance of twenty yards I could see that their physiognomy was very different from the delicate features of Indian girls.
Their faces were too strong, their arms were too thick, their shoulders were wrong.
They smoked.
Physically, they resembled painted men, yet they were not men.
Like Dargah Quli Khan's friend Taqi, the figures in the rickshaw were all eunuchs.
Eunuchs were once common over the width of Eurasia.
They are fleetingly referred to in ancient Assyrian and Babylonian stelae and became popular as servants — and as passive sexual playthings — in the degenerate days of the later Roman Empire.
In the Muslim world their impotence made them perfect harem guards and they  rose to power as chamberlains, governors and even generals.
They were slaves in Anglo-Saxon England and survived in Italy well into the nineteenth century, singing castrato roles in opera as well as in the Vatican Sistine choir.
Yet today eunuchs have apparently died out everywhere except in the subcontinent.
Here they are still not uncommon figures in the poorer parts of the larger cities.
In all there are thought to be some three-quarters of a million of them surviving.
Modern Indian eunuchs dress as women and arrive uninvited at weddings and birth celebrations.
They dance and sing and make bawdy jokes.
From the poor they extract money in payment for the good luck and fecundity that their blessings are supposed to impart.
From the rich they take larger sums by threatening to strip naked unless paid to leave; terrified middle-class party-givers will give them anything as long as they go quickly.
They are volatile, vulgar and can sometimes be violent.
Yet despite their frequent appearances in public, very little is actually known about the Indian eunuchs.
They are fiercely secretive and of their own choice inhabit a dim world of ambiguity and half-truths.
They trust no one, and hate being questioned about their lives; if they are pressed, at best they will slam their doors in your face.
Only occasionally does a scandal — a stabbing during a territorial dispute or rumours of a forcible castration — throw them into the headlines and into the clear light of day.
For ten days after that first sighting from the top of the Turkman Gate, I trawled the teeming alleys of Old Delhi, trying to identify the houses of the eunuchs and attempting to persuade one of them to talk to me.
Sometimes I would receive a monosyllabic answer to a question, but generally my enquiries were met with either blank silences or, more often, with graphic expletives.
One fruitless morning, after an unusually rude dismissal from a eunuch's house, I retired dispirited to a nearby dhaba for a cup of chai.
There I finally decided to throw in my efforts at making contact with the Delhi eunuchs; it was taking up a lot of time and there was still no hint of a breakthrough: after ten days I still knew as little about them as I had when I had begun.
While I was sitting there, sipping my glass of hot, sweet Indian tea, I was approached by a shifty-looking man who asked me whether I could help him; he had seen me with my camera; could I help him mend his?
I had nothing better to do, so I agreed to try.
He led me to his house and in a few minutes I had diagnosed the trouble — a flat battery.
Zakir thanked me and then quietly revealed that he had been watching me for several days.
He knew what I was looking for; and he indicated that he might be able to help.
He was, he said, a jeweller.
His family had always been Delhi jewellers — his ancestors had served the Mughal emperors and before them the Delhi Sultans.
At the court they had made the jewellery for the Imperial eunuchs.
When the British evicted the Mughals from the Red Fort in 1857, some of the court eunuchs had come to live nearby, a few minutes' walk from the Turkman Gate.
There his family had continued to serve them.
He said that he had known all the local eunuchs since his childhood, and that he still made all their jewellery.
I had helped him, he said, now it was his obligation to help me.
He instructed me to meet him the next day at the Turkman Gate, soon after dawn.
He would see what he could do.
I was there on time, and Zakir was true to his word.
He led me through the narrow alleys of the Old City until we came to a lane barely two feet wide.
At the end of the lane, round a chicken-leg turn lay a large haveli of the late Mughal period.
He knocked three times, and the door swung open.
Like most things in Delhi, the curious position of the eunuchs in Indian society can be explained by the head-on collision of two very different traditions, one Muslim, one Hindu.
Hijras (eunuchs) are referred to in the very earliest of Hindu texts, the Vedas, written in the second millennium B C. Here castration was seen as a degrading punishment meted out only to the very lowest in society.
An Untouchable who was caught urinating near a Brahmin could be castrated, as could any lower-caste Hindu who had sex with a Brahmin woman.
The act of castration brought the criminal to a level even lower than the Untouchables.
By the time of the Mahabharata, one thousand years later, the position of eunuchs had improved very little.
To be a eunuch was a curse; even the sight of them was defiling to a Brahmin.
No one was allowed to accept alms from them, no one was allowed to consume food prepared by them, they were excluded from all sacrifices.
As a solitary concession, non-Brahmins were permitted to watch them dance.
The position of eunuchs in Islam was always very different.
Although the Prophet Muhammad forbade castration, eunuchs were always common in Muslim society and because of their sterility were considered free of the taint of sexuality.
They were thus especially suitable to guard sacred relics and great sanctuaries.
The shirt of Muhammad in Cairo was guarded by eunuchs, as was the Great Mosque in Mecca.
Pilgrims — hajjis — would kiss the eunuchs' hands on their way to the see the Ka'ba, the most holy shrine in all Islam.
Dedicated courtiers, undistracted by families, they soon rose to powerful positions, first in Mameluk Egypt, then in Ottoman Turkey, but most prominently of all in Mughal India.
‘The kings, princes, queens and princesses place great confidence in these people,’ wrote the Italian traveller Niccolao Manucchi.
‘All people of quality have eunuchs in their service and all the other officials, servants and slaves are bound to account to the eunuchs for all they do.’
As officials and as singers, dancers and conjurors they were still prominent figures in Safdar Jung's Delhi; according to Dargah Quli Khan, Taqi was a favourite of the Emperor and had ‘access to His Majesty's private apartments’.
When the Mughal court was disbanded, Muslim hijras were exposed for the first time to the other, Hindu, tradition of eunuchry.
In typical Delhi fashion the two traditions merged, and the hijras became subject to a very Indian compromise.
To give birth to a hermaphrodite is still considered by simple Indians to be one of the most terrible curses that can befall a woman.
At the same time the blessing of a hijra is considered to be unusually potent.
It can make a barren woman fertile.
It can scare off malevolent djinns.
It can nullify the evil eye.
In the streets hijras are jeered at, sometimes even pelted with rubbish.
Yet at a poor family's most crucial and most public celebrations, at a marriage or at the birth of a male child, the absence of a hijra would almost invalidate the whole ceremony.
The eunuchs themselves  have aided the merging of the two traditions.
They no longer guard harems; instead, as in the Mahabharata, they dance for a living.
They no longer dress like men as they did in the Mughal court; instead they deck themselves in jewellery and cosmetics and wear saris.
Nevertheless, they retain many of the characteristics of their courtly forebears.
Manucchi gives a rather patronizing description of characteristics and temperaments of the eunuchs of Mughal times.
‘Among the qualities of this sort of animal is their extreme covetousness in collecting gold, silver, diamonds and pearls,’ he writes.
‘They are afraid to spend money even when it is necessary, fond of receiving, niggardly in giving.
Nevertheless they are anxious to appear well dressed.
They are foul in speech and fond of silly stories.
Yet among Mohammedans they are the strictest observers of the faith.’
Manucchi obviously disliked the Delhi eunuchs: ‘They are baboons,’ he wrote, ‘insolent, licentious baboons.’
Anyone who comes across them casually today can easily see why he was so rude.
Yet you do not have to spend very long with them to appreciate how India, then as now, has turned them into what they are, how it has brutalized them and forced them to anaesthetize their own sensibilities.
Thrown out of their homes, rejected by their families, they come together for protection.
In the streets they affect the manners of a pantomime dame to gain attention: they pinch men's buttocks, purposely make buffoons of themselves, but are quick to take offence.
With little possibility of much fulfilment in this world, they look to the next; they are for ever visiting temples and mosques (for this they are required to revert to their male clothes) and going on pilgrimage to Hindu and Muslim shrines over the subcontinent.
In this strange mix of piety and bawdiness, they directly recall the world of Dargah Quli Khan and the Muraqqa'-e-Dehli.
The house was a late Mughal haveli off Gulli Mr Shiv Prasad.
A pretty young eunuch in a canary-yellow silk sari led Zakir and me through a vaulted passageway and out into a small courtyard.
Under a wooden veranda lay a spread of carpets and divans.
Sprawled over them were two more eunuchs; one was staring at herself in a mirror, applying lipstick, the other was combing her hair.
Nearby sat two effeminate-looking men; there was also a baby in a cradle.
Despite the early hour, the eunuchs were all dressed and painted as if they were about to go out to a late-night nautch.
They greeted Zakir warmly, but frowned at me.
‘Who's the gora [white]?’ asked one.
‘This is my friend Mr William,’ said Zakir.
‘He's a writer.’
‘Why have you brought him here?’
‘He would like to meet you all.’
‘You know we can't talk to any outsiders,’ replied the hijra, ‘unless Chaman Guruji gives us permission.’
‘And she won't,’ said the other hijra, pouting defiantly at me.
‘She doesn't like goras.’
‘Where is Chaman?’ asked Zakir.
‘Upstairs.
She's sick.’
We climbed the rickety wooden stairs that led up to a balcony; as we did so, one of the eunuchs blew a kiss at me and the others burst out laughing.
At the top of the stairs, Zakir knocked at the door.
A gruff voice commanded us to enter.
As we stepped through the portal, we left the late Mughal haveli behind and entered a very different world: inside we were confronted by a gleaming pink boudoir that could have been the dressing-room of a 1950s Hollywood film star.
Mirror-glass tiles covered the end walls and the ceiling; pink plastic carnations peeped out of brass vases; cut-out pictures of actors and actresses were pasted into a frieze over a glass bookcase filled with Hindi videos.
The pink chintz curtains matched the pink chintz bedspread; underneath it, prostrate yet fully dressed in a woman's blouse and man's dhoti, sprawled the figure of Chaman, the guru of the household.
Chaman's fingernails were brightly painted and her hair was long and straggly; she had huge sagging breasts.
Yet her face with its heavy jowls, hangover eyes and early-morning stubble was entirely that of a man.
As we entered the bloated face nodded us a silent greeting.
‘Chamanji,’ said Zakir.
‘You are unwell?’
‘I'm dying,’ said Chaman.
Then, groaning: ‘Oh!
The pain!’
‘What is wrong with you Chamanji?’ asked Zakir.
‘Nothing works any more.
This body…’
‘Is it your knees again?’
‘My knees.
And my teeth.
And my breathing.’
‘Have you seen a doctor?’
‘I had an injection yesterday.
For the asthma.
It's like trying to breathe through a thick chador.’
Chaman held up the pink bedspread against her mouth to demonstrate what she meant.
‘I'm in pain, I'm probably dying, and all my little chelas [disciples]are leaving me.
I had seven, now only three are left to look after their old mother.
Remember Maya?
She went off last month and married a boy from Pakistan.
Promised she would come and see me, but you know what these little chelas are like…
’ Chaman suddenly began to look rather sad.
‘I can't even see properly any more.
And as for my teeth…’
‘What's happened to your teeth?’ asked Zakir.
‘I had them all out last month.
Got new ones put in.
Look.’
Chaman pulled out her dentures and flourished them at us.
As she did so she seemed to notice me for the first time.
‘Who's your gora, Zakir?’
‘This is my friend, Mr William.’
I smiled.
Chaman frowned.
‘Is he your boyfriend?’
‘No,’ said Zakir.
‘He's married.
To a girl.’
Chaman wrinkled up her nose in disgust.
‘He has brought you a present, Chamanji,’ continued Zakir.
From the bottom of my pocket I produced a silver ta'wiz, the Sufi charm Zakir had suggested I purchase as a gift for Chaman.
I handed it to the guru.
A fat hand shot out from the covers and snatched it from me.
‘Who gave you this?’ asked Chaman.
‘Pir Hassan Naqshbandi,’ I said.
‘Naqshbandi, eh?’
Chaman bit the corner of the ta'wiz.
This seemed to satisfy her as to its authenticity.
‘It will make you well again,’ I said hopefully.
‘Nothing will make me well again.’
The old eunuch fixed me with a sharp eye.
‘Are you American?
From the land of Hollywood?’
‘No.
I'm British.’
‘From London?’
‘From Scotland.’
‘You know Sean Connery?
I read in a magazine that he was from Scotland.’
‘You're right.
He is.’
‘In the old times we hijras used to be like your zero zero seven.
We were called khwaja saras, not hijras.
We used to live in the king's house.
In those days we never danced.
Our job was to listen and tell things to the king.
We were just like your Sean Connery.’
Somehow I couldn't imagine Chaman and her household taking on Goldfinger or seducing Ursula Andress, but I let this pass.
‘I love the movies,’ continued Chaman.
‘When I was a girl I wanted to be an actress.
Look!’
From the bedside table Chaman produced a black and white photograph.
It showed a beautiful, heavy-boned girl in a European dress.
She had heavily rouged lips and painted eyebrows.
A velvet  choker was tied around her neck; massive gold earrings hung from her lobes.
The tone was sub-Garbo; only the tikka mark between the eyebrows gave away that the image was Indian.
‘That was me when I was twenty-five,’ said Chaman.
‘I was beautiful, no?’
‘Unique,’ I said.
Chaman blushed with pleasure: ‘You mean it?’
After the breakthrough with Chaman it still took two months of regular visits with Zakir before I got to know the other eunuchs properly.
I used to arrive early in the morning before the household had left on their rounds.
They would always be busy putting on their make-up and brushing their hair.
Often there would be some drama: Razia, the loudest and most ebullient of Chaman's chelas would be wringing her hands and weeping because her new boyfriend had gone off to Ajmer or because Chaman had called her a tart or because her pet goat had gone missing; she always suspected her neighbours were planning to slaughter it.
Another source of worry was the baby girl that Panna, another of Chaman's chelas, had adopted; if ever it wheezed or coughed or refused its food, Panna would work herself up into an opera of agitation.
The only hijra who always kept her calm was Vimla, the prettiest and quietest of Chaman's chelas.
She was in charge of the kitchen and by seven in the morning would be busy chopping up chillies and onions ready for lunch.
Razia, Panna and Vimla were all very different — in their backgrounds, their characters, and their looks.
Razia was the most unlikely of the three.
A Kashmiri Muslim, she claimed to have been to the Doon School (the Indian Eton) and to have completed a Master's degree in English at Bombay University.
I was never able to establish whether she was telling the truth — virtually all the hijras I talked to shrouded the facts of their lives in a thick wrap of fantasies — but she was certainly from a middle-class background and spoke fluent English.
‘I became a hijra very late — in my mid-twenties — after my  mother died,’ she once said.
‘I was born with a body that was masculine but my heart was always feminine.
I never fitted in anywhere, but now I feel good with these people.’
‘Was it very difficult when you first joined the hijras?’
I asked.
‘When I arrived it was very strange.
Everyone lived together; there was no privacy.
The six other chelas were all illiterate and came from villages.
Before I used to be a real reader; but here there was not one book in the house.
None of them even read a newspaper.
But Chaman was very protective and supportive; it was as if I was still living with my mother.’
She added: ‘Sometimes I wanted desperately to go home, to see my sisters.
Once I went all the way home — but I never went in.
I just looked in the window then went away.’
‘Did the other eunuchs accept you?’
I asked.
‘Didn't they mind your posh background?’
‘Not at all.
Thanks to Chaman they were kind to me.
Besides I was useful to them.
I was able to talk English and to read and write.
We are all happy together.
Sometimes when I see Panna with her baby I wish I was a woman and had a husband and a child.
But Chaman doesn't like us to have partners.
She doesn't like men in the house — at least not corrupt men.
She's very jealous of her daughters.’
Panna, Razia's friend, was a very different creature.
She was a very large hijra: nearly six feet tall.
Her face was covered with the scars of smallpox and she had a huge protruding belly; a shadow of light stubble flecked her chin.
She would never have won a beauty contest.
But she was one of the shyest of all the hijras I met, and one of the most gentle; her life revolved entirely around the baby she had just adopted.
Her story emerged only after I had got to know her very well.
It seems that Panna was born asexual — with no visible sexual characteristics — into a poor family who lived in a village near Varanasi.
When Panna was just twenty days old, the village midwife disclosed that she was neither male nor female, that she was a hijra.
The news spread like wildfire.
Panna's mother, fearing the consequences, left the village with the baby and went to stay with a cousin fifty kilometres away.
‘In the village, my deformity had become the sole topic of conversation,’ Panna told me.
‘The rest of my family were ostracized.
It was said that we were cursed.
The following day a relative came to the village and said that my mother had died of shock soon after reaching her cousin's house.
‘I was brought back along with the body of my mother.
The death did not move the village.
Instead they sent a message to Chaman, who used to visit the village every so often.
The curse on the village had to be removed.
Chaman came with two chelas and took me away.
I grew up to be the chela of Chaman, and Chaman became my guru.
‘Being a hijra was the only possibility for me; there was no other career I could have pursued with the body that was given to me at birth.
Sometimes I used to be lonely and unhappy, but now with the baby my life is complete.
Now I don't care what people say: at times I look at the child and I am so happy I can't sleep at night.
When she is older I will send the child to a good girls’ school and see that she is taught English.
Maybe one day she will be beautiful and become a model or film star.’
Panna is unusual in that she was born asexual.
The vast majority of eunuchs, and almost all those I met, were born physically male.
In Europe they would probably describe themselves as transsexuals and have a full sex change.
But in India the technology for this does not exist.
The only choice is between a brutal — and extremely dangerous — village castration, or, for those who can afford it, a course in hormone pills followed by an anaesthetized operation.
The operation is illegal in India, but there are several doctors who, for a fee, are willing to take the risk.
Vimla, the most feminine-looking of the eunuchs, did not have the money for an operation and voluntarily underwent a village castration.
The son of a Jat farmer outside Delhi, by the age of thirteen she was already refusing to work in the fields, saying that she felt more like a woman than a man.
‘I was sure that I did not have a place in either male or female worlds,’ she told me.
‘My body was that of a man but deep down I had the heart of a woman.
At puberty I started thinking of myself as a hijra.
‘One day a hijra named Benazir came to my village.
She was very beautiful and I fell in love with her.
When I was on my own I would feel sad and would not eat properly.
Only when Benazir  its strict rules within its walls, so each household also has a well defined ‘parish’ where its members are allowed to operate.
Violations — poaching in another household's area — is referred to a special council of eunuchs from all over India and Pakistan which meets once a year.
There is even a Central School of Dance for the hijras.
It occupies a shady campus dotted with bushes of purple bougainvillaea in Panipat, fifty kilometres to the north of Delhi.
Here Prem Hijra, a bad-tempered old eunuch with a bun and beady black eyes, offers courses in dancing (folk, Bharat Natyam, Arab belly dancing or disco) and singing (traditional, ghazals or modern film songs) to new recruits.
She also runs refresher courses for those who want to perfect a particular style of dancing or learn the latest film songs.
‘She's very strict,’ Vimla once told me, ‘But they say that in her youth she was the best dancer in North India.’
I pressed Vimla to show me her dancing and eventually, after first consulting with Chaman, she invited me to join the household on their rounds, or ‘going on tolly’ as they call it.
Every household of eunuchs has a network of informers — sweepers, dhobis, midwives — who report back the imminent births and marriages in their district.
Every day, before setting out on tolly, the guru of the household prepares a detailed itinerary of addresses to be visited, and the eunuchs adhere strictly to this list.
We set off at seven in the morning after a particularly frantic bout of making-up: all three hijras cleaned their teeth with neem twigs, smudged on great quantities of lipstick and dusted their faces with blusher.
Then we all took a convoy of rickshaws to Lajpath Nagar, in south Delhi.
(Balvinder Singh, in a fit of unusual prudishness, had long since refused to come on my trips to see the eunuchs in Old Delhi: ‘Mr William.
These hijras are very bad and very dirty ladies,’ he had said the first time I tried to give Razia a lift in his car.
‘Too much bad and too much dirty.’
Since then he had declared himself busy whenever I rang and asked for a taxi to take me to the Turkman Gate.)
At Lajpath Nagar we met up with two musicians, a pair of elderly men, one of whom played a harmonium, the other a pair of tabla drums.
After a quick breakfast we set off to the first address on the list.
As they walked along the streets, the eunuchs clapped their  hands and made bawdy jokes, behaving quite differently from the way they did inside their Turkman Gate haveli.
Vimla in particular underwent a radical character change.
Sweet, shy and doe-eyed at home, she would rush up to complete strangers in the street, grapple with her skirts and shout: ‘Sardarji!
You with the beard!
Give me money or else I'll flash!’
The first house on the list was a small ground-floor flat belonging to a carpenter.
The eunuchs piled into the entrance hall, the musicians started up the music and Vimla led the dancing by stamping her foot and ringing her little anklet bells.
Things were just getting going when a neighbour appeared.
Yes, she said, there had just been a birth in the house, but the family had gone to stay with cousins in Haryana; there was now no one at home.
Disconsolately, we got back into the rickshaws and set off to the next address.
This was a far larger, middle-class house a few blocks away.
Here there had been a marriage three days before, and the bride had just been brought to her new house that morning.
The old men started up the music and the eunuchs began to dance.
A crowd of beggar children gathered to watch beyond the garden wall, but from the house itself there was no response.
After a while a toothless old woman peered nervously round the door and smiled.
Then she went back inside again.
Meanwhile Panna, despite her bulk, was putting on a fine display.
She wobbled her head one way, wobbled her bottom the other, all the while singing an Urdu verse which Zakir translated as follows:
God bless you,
You are very sweet,
You are very lovely,
God will give you long life.
This classy poetry appeared to do the trick.
People began piling out of the house: two daughters-in-law, several small children, some unmarried daughters, two old grandfathers and the new bridegroom.
The new bride, required by Hindu etiquette to be blushingly coy for several weeks after her marriage, cowered beyond the open window, twitching the lace curtain.
Vimla now took centre-stage, while Panna grabbed an unwilling daughter-in-law and whirled her around in a waltz for a few steps.
As Vimla pirouetted, pulling her sari over her head in a parody of the Dance of the Seven Veils, Chaman Guru put down the cymbals and got down to the serious business of collecting money.
The grandfathers both put fifty-rupee notes in the plate, while one of the daughters-in-law presented Chaman with the traditional gift of a plate of flour.
But this clearly was not enough as far as Chaman was concerned.
She signalled to Panna to carry on singing.
A few more fifty-rupee notes were offered, but again Chaman shook her head.
Eventually, as the song wound on to its thirtieth verse, the bridegroom presented Chaman with 1000 rupees (about £25).
Bowing and scraping, the eunuchs withdrew.
It was a strangely farcical routine, and must be extremely tedious to enact day after day.
But when society closes off all other opportunities there are only two choices for the eunuchs: dancing and prostitution.
Of these, going on tolly is probably preferable — and possibly more lucrative.
I was always struck by the eunuchs' lack of bitterness.
Through no fault of their own, through deformity or genetic accident, they found themselves marginalized by Indian society, turned into something half-way between a talisman and an object of ridicule.
Yet in their own terms they seem fairly content with their lives, and they do not rail against the fate that has left them with this role.
In the rickshaw on the way back from that morning's tolly I asked Vimla whether she would like to be reborn as a hijra in her next life.
She considered for a while before answering.
‘Do you have any choice how God makes you?’ she answered eventually.
‘I pray for our welfare in this life.
But the next?
It is in the gods’ hands.
SEVEN
THE WINTER RAINS arrived promptly at the end of January.
During the last week of the month Olivia and I had gone to stay outside Delhi, in a fort just over the Rajasthani border.
The day before our return, as we looked out over the battlements, we saw a succession of thick black clouds driving slowly in over the sand flats and camel grass.
By the end of the afternoon the clouds had thickened into solid curtain walls of charcoal cumulus.
They blotted out the sun and cast a dark shadow over the land.
The next day we returned to Delhi to find that the storm had broken.
The clouds were scudding low over the rooftops; it was pouring with rain and the streets were flooded.
In the Old City, Muslim women were dragging their chadors like wet black crows.
Gusts of rain lashed down the narrow alleys; rickshaws sluiced through the water, more like boats than bicycles.
It was no day to be out, but I had an appointment to keep.
I had arranged to see Dr Yunus Jaffery, a historian and an archetypal Old Delhi-wallah.
His ancestors had been Persian tutors at the Red Fort; today, Dr Jaffery pursued exactly the same career in Zakir Hussain College on the margins of Old Delhi.
His rooms were in the original college, the Ghazi-ud-Din Medresse, a seventeenth-century Mughal building just outside the Ajmeri Gate.
Balvinder Singh dropped me outside during a brief pause in the rain.
A low Mughal gateway led on into a wet and glistening flagstone courtyard; it was deserted but for a solitary pupil running  late towards his class.
The flagstones were slippery and so hollowed out by three centuries of passing feet that along some of the walkways the puddles had coalesced into shallow canals.
The courtyard was bounded by a range of cloisters two storeys high.
Classrooms filled the ground-floor rooms.
On the first floor, leading off a covered balcony, were the chambers of the fellows and scholars.
The arcades were broken on three sides by vaulted gateways, and on the fourth, the principal axis, by a red sandstone mosque.
Before the mosque, filling both sides of the cloister garth, was a garden of healing herbs and shrubs.
I climbed a narrow staircase leading to the first floor balcony.
Outside the scholars' rooms sat a line of bearded old men busily correcting specimens of Arabic calligraphy.
Dr Jaffery's room was the last on the corridor.
The door opened to reveal a gaunt, clean-shaven man.
He wore white Mughal pyjamas whose trouser-bottoms, wide and slightly flared, were cut in the style once favoured by eighteenth-century Delhi gallants.
On his head he sported a thin white mosque-cap.
Heavy black glasses perched on the bridge of his nose, but the effect was not severe.
Something in Dr Jaffery's big bare feet and the awkward way he held himself gave the impression of a slightly shambolic, absent-minded individual: ‘Asalam alekum,’ he said.
‘Welcome.’
Then, looking behind me, he added: ‘Ah!
The rains…
Spring has arrived.’
Dr Jaffery's domed room was small and square and dark.
Lightning from the storm had cut off the electricity and the cell was illuminated by a bronze dish filled with flickering candles.
The shadows from the candlelight darted back and forth across the shallow whitewashed dome.
Persian books were stacked in disordered piles; in the corner glistened a big brass samovar incised with Islamic decoration.
The scene of the Sufi scholar in his room was straight out of a detail from the Anvar-i Suhayli — or indeed any of the illuminated Mughal manuscript books — and I said this to Dr Jaffery.
‘My nieces also tell me I live in the Mughal age,’ he replied.
‘But they — I think — mean it as a criticism.
You would like tea?’
Dr Jaffery blew on the coals at the bottom of his samovar, then placed two cupfuls of buffalo milk in the top of the urn.
Soon  the milk was bubbling above the flame.
While he fiddled with his samovar, Dr Jaffery told me about his work.
For the previous three years he had been busy transcribing the forgotten and unpublished portions of the Shah Jehan Nama, the court chronicle of Shah Jehan.
He had converted the often illegible manuscript into clear Persian typescript; this had then been translated into English by a team of Persian scholars in America.
The manuscript, originally compiled by Shah Jehan's fawning court historian Inayat Khan, told the story of the apex of Mughal power, the golden age when most of India, all of Pakistan and great chunks of Afghanistan were ruled from the Red Fort in Delhi.
It was an age of unparalleled prosperity: the empire was at peace and trade was flourishing.
The reconquest of the Mughals' original homeland — trans-Oxianan Central Asia — seemed imminent.
In the ateliers of the palace the artists Govardhan, Bichitr and Abul Hasan were illuminating the finest of the great Mughal manuscript books; in Agra, the gleaming white dome of the Taj Mahal was being raised on its plinth above the River Jumna.
The book which contained the fruits of Dr Jaffery's labours was about to be published.
Now Dr Jaffery was beginning to transcribe a forgotten text about Shah Jehan's childhood.
The manuscript had just been discovered in the uncatalogued recesses of the British Museum; it was exciting work, said the doctor, but difficult: the manuscript was badly damaged and as he had not the money to go to London he was having to work from a smudged xerox copy.
The new transcription absorbed his waking hours; but, despite the difficulties, he said he was making slow progress.
‘As the great Sa'di once put it: ‘The Arab horse speeds fast, but although the camel plods slowly, it goes both by day and night.’’
As we chatted about Shah Jehan, Dr Jaffery brought out a plate of rich Iranian sweets from an arched recess; he handed them to me and asked: ‘Would you not like to learn classical Persian?’
‘I would love to,’ I answered.
‘But at the moment I'm having enough difficulty trying to master Hindustani.’
‘You are sure?’ asked Dr Jaffery, breaking one of the sweets in two.
‘Learning Persian would give you access to some great treasures.
I would not charge you for lessons.
I am half a dervish: money means nothing to me.
All I ask is that you work hard.’
Dr Jaffery said that very few people in Delhi now wanted to study classical Persian, the language which, like French in Imperial Russia, had for centuries been the first tongue of every educated Delhi-wallah.
‘No one has any interest in the classics today,’ he said.
‘If they read at all, they read trash from America.
They have no idea what they are missing.
The jackal thinks he has feasted on the buffalo when in fact he has just eaten the eyes, entrails and testicles rejected by the lion.’
I said: ‘That must upset you.’
‘It makes no difference,’ replied Dr Jaffery.
‘This generation does not have the soul to appreciate the wisdom of Ferdowsi or Jalaludin Rumi.
As Sa'di said: ‘If a diamond falls in the dirt it is still a diamond, yet even if dust ascends all the way to heaven it remains without value.’’
I loved the way Dr Jaffery spoke in parables; for all his eccentricities, like some ancient sage his conversation was dotted with pearls of real wisdom.
After the banalities of life with Balvinder Singh and Mrs Puri, Dr Jaffery's words were profound and reassuring.
As he told little aphorisms from Rumi or the anecdotes of Ferdowsi's Shah Nama — the Mughal Emperors' favourite storybook-his gentle voice soothed away the irritations of modern Delhi.
But overlaying the gentle wisdom there always lay a thin patina of bitterness.
‘Today Old Delhi is nothing but a dustbin,’ he said, sipping at his tea.
‘Those who can, have houses outside the walled city.
Only the poor man who has no shelter comes to live here.
Today there are no longer any educated men in the old city.
I am a stranger in my own home.’
He shook his head.
‘All the learning, all the manners have gone.
Everything is so crude now.
I have told you I am half a dervish.
My own ways are not polished.
But compared to most people in this city…/’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Here everyone has forgotten the old courtesies.
For example…/in the old days a man of my standing would never have gone to the shops; everything would be sent to his house: grain, chillies, cotton, cloth.
Once every six months the shopkeeper would come and pay his regards.
He would not dare ask for money; instead it  would be up to the gentleman to raise the matter and to give payment when he deemed suitable.
If ever he did go to the bazaar he would expect the shopkeepers to stand up when he entered…
‘All these things have gone now.
People see the educated man living in poverty and realize that learning is useless; they decide it is better to remain ignorant.
To the sick man sweet water tastes bitter in the mouth.’
‘But don't your pupils get good jobs?
And doesn't their success encourage others?’
‘No.
They are all Muslims.
There is no future for them in modern India.
Most become gundas or smugglers.’
‘Is learning Persian a good training for smuggling?’
‘No, although some of them become very successful at this business.
One of my pupils was Nazir.
Now he is a big gambler, the Chief of the Prostitutes.
But before he was one of my best pupils…’
At that moment, the cry of the muezzin outside broke the evening calm.
Dr Jaffery rustled around the room, picking up books and looking behind cushions for his mosque cap before remembering that he was already wearing it.
Muttering apologies he slipped on his sandals and stumbled out.
‘Can you wait for five minutes?’ he asked.
‘I must go and say my evening prayers.’
From the balcony I watched the stream of figures in white pyjamas rushing through the pelting rain to the shelter of the mosque.
Through the cloudburst I could see the old men laying out their prayer carpets under the arches, then, on a signal from the mullah, a line of bottoms rose and fell in time to the distant cries of ‘Allah hu-Akbar!’
Five minutes later, when Dr Jaffery returned, he again put a cupful of milk on the samovar and we talked a little about his home life.
‘The death of my eldest brother in 1978 was the most important event in my life,’ he said.
‘From my boyhood, I always wanted to live in a secluded place, to live like a Sufi.
But since my brother's death it has been my duty to care for my two nieces.
I cannot now become a full dervish; or at least not until my nieces are educated and married.
Until then their well-being must be my first concern.’
‘And after that?’
‘Afterwards I want to go on haj, to visit Mecca.
Then I will retire to some ruined mosque, repair it, and busy myself with my studies.’
‘But if you wish to retire can't you find some other member of your family to look after your nieces for you?’
‘My elder brothers were killed at Partition,’ said Jaffery.
‘My elder sister is also a victim of those times.
To this day she still hears the voices of guns.
You may be sitting with her one evening, quite peacefully, when suddenly she will stand up and say: ‘Listen!
Guns!
They are coming from that side!’
‘In fact it was only by a miracle that my sister and I survived at all: we took shelter with our youngest brother in the Jama Masjid area.
Had we been at the house of my parents we would have shared the fate of the rest of the family…
’ Dr Jaffery broke off.
‘Go on,’ I said.
‘My parents lived in an area that had always been traditionally Hindu.
During Partition they went into hiding, and for a fortnight their good Hindu friends brought them food and water.
But one day they were betrayed; a mob came in the night and burned the house down.
We learned later that the traitor was a neighbour of my father's.
My father had helped him financially.
This was how the man repaid him…’
Dr Jaffery shook his head.
‘In this city,’ he said, ‘culture and civilization have always been very thin dresses.
It does not take much for that dress to be torn off and for what lies beneath to be revealed.’
In all of Delhi's history, at no period was that thin dress of civilization more beautiful — or more deceptively woven — than during the first half of the seventeenth century, during the Golden Age of Shah Jehan.
In public the actions of the Emperor and his court were governed by a rigid code of courtliness, as subtle and elaborate as the interlaced borders the Mughal artists painted around their miniatures.
But for all this fine façade, in private the ambitions of the Mughal Emperors knew no moral limitations: without scruple they would murder their brothers, poison their sisters or starve their fathers.
The courtly ceremonial acted as a veil around the naked reality of Mughal politics; it was a mask which deliberately disguised the brutality and coarseness that lay hidden beneath.
Despite the great volume of material that existed on the Mughals, I had always found them difficult to visualize.
Their architecture, their courtliness, their ceremony were famous — but, like a profile miniature portrait, the result was one-dimensional: the jewels, the fineness of the turbans, the swirling details of the drapery — all were more lovingly and clearly drawn than the man inside; the sitter's thoughts and feelings, his character and emotions remain relatively opaque: unfathomed and incomprehensible.
It was Dr Jaffery who told me about two contemporary travel books which rescued the Mughals from being suffocated beneath landslides of silk, diamonds and lapis lazuli — Bernier's Travels in the Mogul Empire and Manucci's Mogul India.
Unlike the sycophantic official court chronicles — the Shah Jehan Nama that Dr Jaffery had spent so long transcribing — the accounts of the two European travellers were packed with reams of malicious bazaar gossip.
The two books may thus have been peppered with little fictions, but no sharper or livelier pictures of Mughal Delhi, with all its scandals, dramas and intrigues, have come down to us.
In the mornings I used to sit out in the warm sun of our terrace and read the travellers' descriptions of the Delhi they knew from their visits at the very apex of the Mughal Empire.
The two authors were very different men.
François Bernier was an aristocratic and highly educated French doctor who came to Delhi in 1658; he soon became sought-after as a physician by the Imperial family and the Mughal nobility.
In his writings he comes across as wonderfully French — proud and arrogant, a gourmand and an aesthete, an admirer of female beauty; he was also a terrific scandalmonger.
Bernier constantly contrasts Mughal India and seventeenth-century France: the Jumna compares favourably with the Loire, he thinks; adultery is easier in Paris than it is in Delhi: ‘in France it only excites merriment, but in this part of the world there are few instances where it is not followed by some dreadful and tragical catastrophe.’
But Indian naan, he regrets, can never ever be compared to a good Parisian baguette:
Bakers are numerous, but their ovens are unlike our own and very defective.
The bread, therefore, is neither well made nor properly baked,[although]that sold in the Fort  is tolerably good.
In its composition the bakers are not sparing of fresh butter, milk and eggs; but though it be raised it has a burned taste, and is too much like cake.
It is never to be compared to the Pain de Gonesse, and other delicious varieties to be met with in Paris.
For all his fopperies, Bernier was very much the educated European of the early Enlightenment: he knew his classics, was a firm believer in Reason, and had no patience with ‘ridiculous errors and strange superstitions’.
In particular, like Macaulay two centuries later, he had little time for the Brahmins and their Sanskrit learning:
They believe that the world is flat and triangular; that it is composed of seven distinct habitations…and that each is surrounded by its own peculiar sea; that one sea is of milk; another of sugar; a third of butter; a fourth of wine; and so on…[also that]the whole of this world is supported on the heads of a number of elephants whose occasional motion is the cause of earthquakes.
If the renowned sciences of the ancient Indian sages consisted of all these extravagant follies, mankind has indeed been deceived in the exalted opinion it has long entertained of their wisdom.
Nevertheless Bernier was cautiously appreciative of most aspects of India and was one of the very first apologists for Mughal culture against the growing arrogance of its European visitors.
‘I have sometimes been astonished to hear the contemptuous manner in which Europeans in the Indies speak of [Mughal architecture],’ he writes, adding of the Delhi Jama Masjid: ‘I grant that this building is not constructed according to those rules of architecture which we seem to think ought to be implicitly followed; yet I can see no fault that offends taste.
I am satisfied that even in Paris a church erected after the model of this temple would be admired, were it only for its singular style of architecture, and its extraordinary appearance.’
What most terrified Bernier was the notion that his long stay in India would rob him of his cultivated Parisian sensibilities.
This fear reached its climax when he saw the Taj Mahal: ‘The last time I saw Tage Mehale's mausoleum I was in the company of a French merchant who, like myself, thought that this extraordinary fabric could not be sufficiently admired.
I did not venture to express my   opinion, fearing that my taste might have become corrupted by my long residence in the Indies; but since my companion had recently come from France, it was quite a relief to hear him say that he had seen nothing in Europe quite so bold and majestic.’
Niccolao Manucci, Bernier's slightly younger Italian contemporary, had no such aesthetic qualms.
Manucci was the son of a Venetian trader who, aged fourteen, had run away from home as a stowaway on a merchant ship.
After crossing the Middle East, he came to India to seek employment as an artilleryman in the Mughal army.
A self-confessed con-artist and charlatan, he used his ‘nimbleness of wit’ to set himself up as a quack doctor and an exorcist.
In his memoirs he revels in the audacity of the fraud he pulled off:
Not only was I famed as a doctor, but it was rumoured I had the power of expelling demons from the bodies of the possessed.
Once some Mahommedans were at my house, consulting me about their complaints when night came on…
In the middle of our talk I began to speak as if to some demon, telling him to hold his tongue and not interrupt my talk, and let me serve these gentlemen for it was already late.
Then I resumed my conversation with the Mahommedans.
But they now had only half their souls left in their bodies, and spoke in trembling tones.
I made use of their terror for my own amusement, and raising my voice still more, I shouted at him whom I assumed to be present, lying invisible in some corner…
They were unable to speak a word out of fright…
Being credulous in matters of sorcery, they began to put it about that the Frank doctor not only had the power of expelling demons but had dominion over them.
This was enough to make many come, and among them they brought before me many women who pretended to be possessed (as is their habit when they want to leave their houses to meet with their lovers) and it was hoped that I could deal with them.
The usual treatment was bullying, tricks, emetics and evil-smelling fumigation with filthy things.
Nor did I desist until the patients were worn out, and said that now the devil had fled.
In this manner I restored many to their senses, with great increase in reputation, and still greater diversion for myself.
Manucci's account of Mughal India is as full of gossip as Bernier's, but the precarious manner in which he chose to live his life meant that his book has rather more action in it: rather than fussing about the relative merits of Parisian and Mughal architecture, he fights as an artilleryman in the Mughal civil war, has his caravan ambushed by bandits, battles with a pressgang and is finally besieged in a fort on an island in the Indus.
With their two very different viewpoints — one the angst-struck French intellectual, the other the ex-con and hard-nosed Venetian man of action — Bernier and Manucci colour in the gilded outlines  provided by the Mughals' own court chronicles and their miniature paintings.
The picture that thus emerges of the tensions and jealousies in the Imperial family has a grand, almost Shakespearean feel to it: the Emperor Shah Jehan governs the Mughal Empire through its period of greatest magnificence.
He moves the court from Agra to Delhi and builds the Red Fort in the centre of the new Shahjehanabad.
But then, despite the gloss given by the court flatterers, the unspoken tensions in the palace eventually build up into a civil war which topples the old order.
The characters in the drama — some good, but flawed and naive, others utterly evil and ruthless — are classic Renaissance types.
Like King Lear, Shah Jehan in his old age misplays his hand and is defeated by his ungrateful children.
Yet his collapse is partly his own fault: it is the flaws in Shah Jehan's own character — his pride, his sexual gluttony and the unjust way in which he handles his children — that lead to his downfall.
‘After the death of his beloved Queen Taj Mahal,’ wrote Manucci, ‘Shah Jehan selected in Hindustan the city of Dihli in order to build there a new city as his capital.
He gave it the name Shahjehanabad — that is to say, ‘Built by Shah Jehan’.
He expended large sums in the construction of this city, and in the foundations he ordered several decapitated criminals to be placed as a sign of sacrifice.’
Shah Jehan was forty-seven when he decided to move his court from Agra to Delhi.
He had just lost his wife; his children were now grown up.
The building of a new city was the middle-aged Emperor's bid for immortality.
Shah Jehan had himself come to power twelve years earlier after a bloody civil war.
He had been the able but ruthless third son; to seize the throne he had had to rebel against his father and murder his two elder brothers, their two children, and two male cousins.
Yet while Shah Jehan was capable of bouts of cold-blooded brutality, he was still the most aesthetically sensitive of all the Mughals.
As a boy of fifteen he had impressed his father, the Emperor Jehangir, with the taste he demonstrated in redesigning the Imperial apartments in Kabul.
As the young Emperor he had rebuilt the Red Fort  in Agra in a new architectural style that he had himself helped to develop.
Then, on his wife's death, he had built the Taj Mahal, arguably the most perfect building in all Islam.
Before her death Mumtaz Mahal had borne Shah Jehan fourteen children; of these, four sons and three daughters survived to adulthood.
The eldest was Dara Shukoh — the Glory of Darius.
Contemporary miniatures show that Dara bore a striking resemblance to his father; he had the same deep-set almond eyes, the same straight, narrow nose and long, full beard, although in some pictures he appears to have been slightly darker and more petite than Shah Jehan.
Like the Emperor he was luxurious in his tastes and refined in his sensibilities.
He preferred life at court to the hardships of campaigning; he liked to deck himself in strings of precious stones and belts studded with priceless gems; he wore clothes of the finest silk and from each ear lobe he hung a single pearl of remarkable size.
Nevertheless Dara was no indolent voluptuary: he had an enquiring mind and enjoyed the company of sages, Sufis and sannyasin (wandering ascetics).
He had the Hindu Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Yoga-Vashishta translated into Persian and himself composed religious and mystical treatises.
The most remarkable was the Majmua-ul-Baharain (‘The Mingling of the Two Oceans’), a comparative study of Hinduism and Islam which emphasized the compatibility of the two faiths and the common source of their divine revelations.
In an age when even the most liberal of Mughal Emperors used to demolish Hindu temples, this was both a brave and novel work; but some considered Dara's views not just unusual but actually heretical.
In private, many of the more orthodox Muslim nobles furrowed their brows and wondered how the crown prince could possibly declare, as one noble put it, infidelity and Islam to be twin brothers'.
Manucci, who was employed in Dara Shukoh's artillery, portrays his patron as a flawed hero, brave and generous but constantly in danger of being outwitted by his wily opponents:
Prince Dara was a man of dignified manners, of a comely countenance, polite in conversation, ready and gracious of speech, of extraordinary liberality, kindly and compassion  ate, but over-confident in his opinion of himself, considering himself competent in all things and having no need of advisers.
Indeed, he despised those who gave him counsel.
Prince Aurangzeb, Shah Jehan's third son, was a very different character from his elder brother.
As tough and warlike as Dara was civilized and courtly, he cloaked his ambition in a robe of holy simplicity, affecting the ways of a Muslim dervish.
A master of deceit, he learned how to sow distrust and dissent within the ranks of his enemies.
He controlled an efficient network of spies: nothing could be said in Delhi without Aurangzeb coming to hear of it.
Moreover, he knew the art of poisoning with subtle toxins.
Manucci was wary of him, fearing and disliking him in equal proportions:
Although Aurangzeb was held to be bold and valiant, he was capable of great dissimulation and hypocrisy.
Pretending to be an ascetic, he slept while in the field on a mat of straw that he had himself woven…
He ate food that cost little and let it be known that he underwent severe penances and fasting.
All the same, under cover of these pretences he led in secret a jolly life of it.
His intercourse was with certain holy men addicted to sorcery, who instructed him how to bring over to his side as many friends as he could with witchcraft and soft speeches.
He was so subtle as to deceive even the quickest witted people.
One person whom Aurangzeb never deceived was his father.
From an early age, Shah Jehan made it clear that he did not care for his third son, and instead increasingly lavished attention on the more amiable Dara Shukoh.
Dara he kept at court, showered with favours and titles, while Aurangzeb was sent to the empire's southernmost border, the unruly Deccan.
All the cards seemed to be stacked against Aurangzeb, but he had one key advantage: the support of his sister Roshanara.
Just as Aurangzeb was angered by Shah Jehan's obvious preference for Dara, so Roshanara was alienated by the affection lavished on her more attractive sister Jahanara Begum.
After the death of Mumtaz Mahal, Jahanara had been given charge of the Imperial harem.
Bazaar rumour had it that her closeness to Shah Jehan went beyond merely normal filial affection; after all, as Bernier put it: ‘it would  have been unjust to deny the King the privilege of gathering fruit from the tree he himself had planted.’
As Jahanara's influence increased, so did the jealousy and resentment of her younger sister.
Like Aurangzeb, Roshanara grew bitter and vengeful, a Regan or a Goneril to Jahanara's Cordelia.
She became a tireless champion of Aurangzeb's interests, making little secret of her hatred for Dara and Jahanara.
Like Aurangzeb, she controlled a network of spies which she used to keep her brother well in touch with developments in the court.
Like Aurangzeb she grew bitter and heartless.
It was rumoured that she was also a poisoner and a witch.
Yet she remains for the modern reader perhaps the most intriguing member of the entire family.
When Shah Jehan moved the court from Agra to the new city of Shahjehanabad in 1648, it was Jahanara Begum who built the Chandni Chowk, the principal avenue of the Old City.
Half-way down the boulevard she built a vast caravanserai which, before it was destroyed in 1857, was regularly described by visitors to Delhi as the most magnificent building outside the fort.
Manucci, not normally responsive to architecture, dwells at length on its paintings, gardens and lakes, while Bernier pays it his ultimate tribute of recommending the construction of something similar in France.
Roshanara Begum, with her less magnificent resources, was unable to contribute anything quite so ambitious.
Nevertheless, she did put up the money for the construction of Roshanara Bagh, a pleasure garden on the far outskirts of Shahjehanabad.
Today the garden is still there, although it has long since been absorbed into the sprawling outskirts of the town.
It lies a little beyond Sabzi Mandi (the Old Delhi vegetable market), immediately beside a huge lorry park.
It is not a beautiful part of the town, and the lush green of the tropical gardens — long lawns, flower beds and eucalyptus and casuarina avenues — comes as a welcome surprise in the midst of all the dirt and poverty.
The lawns are filled with the usual odd-ball cast of characters who like to congregate in Indian parks: little boys playing cricket in the dry water channels; a lost-looking village goatherd with his flock; picnicking Punjabi families with their tiffin-tins; loving couples reclining against trees; a saffron-robed Hindu ascetic sitting cross-legged on the grass; a pair of elderly bent-backed colonels  with identical walking sticks.
In the middle of all these people stands a single Mughal pavilion, low and rectangular and finely proportioned, of similar design to those in the Red Fort.
The pavilion stands three arches broad; four domed chattris punctuate the corners.
Inside, a rectangle of delicately latticed jali screens gives on to the brick-built central chamber.
It was once a beautiful building, but in decay now looks both tatty and sad.
It is often the way with Mughal ruins: while the more primitive forts which preceded them still have an aura of power as they rise solid and impregnable from the burning plains, the silky refinement expressed in Mughal architecture turns, in decay, to something approaching seediness.
It is difficult to visualize now, but it must have been within this pavilion that the young Roshanara consulted her spies as she reclined on carpets beside the gently bubbling irrigation runnels.
Sadly there is no description of the Princess at this period; the only proper account of Roshanara to survive dates from very late on in her life; it was written by Bernier, who saw the Princess's marvellous train on its way from Delhi — perhaps from this garden — to Kashmir to escape the summer heat:
Stretch imagination to its utmost limits and you can conceive no exhibition more grand and imposing than Roshanara Begum, mounted on a stupendous Pegu elephant and seated in a large latticed howdah covered with a silken tent, blazing with gold and azure, followed by other elephants with howdahs nearly as resplendent as her own, all filled with ladies attached to her household…
In front of Roshanara's litter, which was open, sat a young, well-dressed female slave, with a peacock's tail in her hand, brushing away the dust and keeping off the flies from the Princess…
Close to the Princess's elephant are the chief eunuchs, richly adorned and finely mounted, each with a wand of office in his hand.
Besides these are several [more]eunuchs on horseback, accompanied by a multitude of lackeys on foot, who advance a great way before the Princess, for the purpose of clearing the road before them…
There is something very impressive of state and royalty in the march of these sixty or more elephants; and if I had not regarded this display of magnificence with a sort of philosophical indifference, I should have been apt to be carried away by such flights of imagination as inspire most Indian poets.
Once the winter rains have passed, Delhi experiences two months of weather so perfect and blissful that they almost compensate for the climatic extremes of the other ten months of the year.
The skies are blue, the days are warm, and all is right with the world.
That February, Delhi seemed like a paradise.
Olivia and I filled the garden on our roof terraces with palms and lilies and hollyhocks and we wove bougainvillaea through the trellising.
The plants which seemed to have died during the winter's cold — the snapdragon, the hibiscus and the frangipani — miraculously sprang back to life and back into bloom.
The smells began to change: the woodsmoke and the sweet smell of the dung fires gave way to the heady scent of Indian champa and the first bittersweet whiffs of China orange blossom.
From the old Mughal bird market in front of the Jama Masjid, Shah Jehan's great Friday Mosque, we bought three pairs of small lorikeets and two large white cockateels.
We got a bamboo-wallah to build them two cages and hung them from hooks on the veranda.
We fixed red clay pots to the sides to encourage the birds to breed.
Certainly, the other birds in Delhi seemed to be thinking of little else.
In the top of a drainpipe next to our sitting-room, two sparrows were frantically building a nest.
More springtime activity took place on the tin top of the defunct air conditioning unit that Mrs Puri had left attached to our bedroom wall.
There, every morning soon after dawn, two pigeons performed an elaborate and very noisy mating dance.
Though the unit had long since given up any pretence of cooling the room, it did turn out to have a curious talent for magnifying the pigeons' footfalls so that their tap dance rang out like a drum-roll at six every morning.
Olivia, who likes her  sleep, soon developed a great loathing for our morning visitors, but all her efforts to drive them away and apart had little success, and spectacularly failed to calm the passions of the energetically copulating birds.
Mrs Puri celebrated the coming of spring in an uncharacteristically spendthrift manner: she threw a small thanksgiving party.
Her eldest son had caught pneumonia on a business trip to America and had been extremely ill.
His recovery, Mrs Puri believed, was due to the personal intervention of Guru Nanak, the sixteenth-century founder of the Sikhs.
To thank her guru for this kind gesture, she invited a group of four Sikh priests from her gurdwara to come and say some prayers in her garden.
A tent of dyed homespun was erected out in front, while some caterers got busy preparing Punjabi specialities over a clay oven at the back of the house.
At nine o'clock four thickly-bearded priests appeared holding an enormous bound copy of the Sikh scriptures, the Guru Granth Sahib.
They reverently built a small shrine for the book in one of Mrs Puri's flowerbeds.
Soon the garden was filled with the sound of sacred hymns and odes in praise of Guru Nanak.
Guests — all Sikhs — began to appear from around the nearby houses and, after greeting Mrs Puri, quietly took their place cross-legged in ranks on the ground.
Mr Puri was wheeled out and trussed up on a chair near the shrine.
On condition that we both covered our heads, Olivia and I were invited to watch the proceedings from the rear of the crowd.
For an hour the guests sat patiently listening; then everybody got up and, with the air of people who have been thinking of little else for some time, demolished the langoor (free food) which was waiting for them at the rear of the house.
That evening Mrs Puri remarked to me that none of the considerable expense of the party would have been necessary if members of her family did not insist on leaving the Punjab and pursuing business ventures Abroad.
Mrs Puri has always made it clear that she does not like Abroad.
Once you leave the bosom of Mother India, she points out, you always find a disturbing ignorance as to the proper preparation of dal and rice as well as an infuriating lack of gurdwaras in which to say your morning prayers.
She makes a point of reading out loud items from her newspaper, the Hindustan Times, which demonstrate to her satisfaction the old Indian view  that Wogs begin at Kabul and that civilization stops on the banks of the Indus.
This is very inconvenient for Mrs Puri, as a great number of her close relations have emigrated.
She seems resigned to her brother, Teg Bahadur, becoming a Mountie in Canada, but is very worried by her daughter Rupinder, who emigrated to America while still unmarried.
‘Rupinder may be working in America,’ Mrs Puri would tell her friends at their monthly kitty parties, ‘but she is loving only our Punjab.
When she comes back, we will find her a wealthy Sikh husband from a good family.’
‘I'm sure there are lots of nice Sikh boys out there,’ I once remarked.
This went down very badly.
‘These American Sikhs we do not want,’ said Mrs Puri emphatically.
‘Like the Sikhs in your Southall, they are jungli Sikhs.
They are not educated peoples.’
‘Some of them must be educated.’
‘Maybe,’ said Mrs Puri, coming to the point, ‘but they are not from good families.
They are villagers.’
‘Not any more.
The Southall Sikhs are often very successful businessmen.’
‘Mr William,’ said Mrs Puri drawing a deep breath.
‘We are Puris.
Outside India there are not Sikhs of our caste.’
With Rupinder's modesty threatened by hordes of lower-caste villagers, Mrs Puri had eventually realized where her duty lay.
Painful though it was, she declared that the time would soon come when she would feel it necessary to inspect America for herself.
She would hire a Buick and a Sikh driver from a good family, and see the States in the style to which she was accustomed.
But she was not looking forward to the trip.
‘America is not a traditional country like India,’ she said.
‘There is no morality there.
But I have heard it said that parts of the Rocky Mountains are quite like our Simla.
Then, just as we had begun to enjoy the blissful peace and calm of spring, the wedding season reached its climax.
Overnight, everything changed.
India remains, even in the cities, one of the most superstitious countries in the world.
The educated Indian businessman will consult an astrologer as readily as the illiterate villager; and no occasion, except perhaps the birth of a child, necessitates the consulting of astrologers quite so urgently as a marriage.
Not only do horoscopes determine the suitability of a partner for an arranged marriage, even the date that the couple should be joined is left to the astrologer's discretion.
There is no tradition of marrying on a Saturday in India; a marriage takes place only when the heavens revolve into the most auspicious configuration.
In Delhi, marriages take place over the entire length of the cold season.
Nevertheless, since many astrologers seem to agree that a single phase of the spring moon is the most auspicious of the year, it is quite a normal occurrence for half the year's weddings to take place within the space of a single fortnight around Holi, the spring festival.
In the fight for tents and caterers that follows, the bride's family is often forced to resort to blackmail and bribery; sometimes even to violence.
Yet the inconvenience of this system is felt far beyond the immediate families involved.
All Delhi is thrown out of gear by the chaos.
One night the black spring sky may be quiet and peaceful, empty but for the cicadas.
The next, the heavens are lit up with flashing neon lights, while from all sides come the bashings and screechings of Indian brass bands.
The noise of heavily amplified Hindi movie music can be heard until well after two or three in the morning.
After you have finally dropped off, sometime after three a.m., you can generally snatch a couple of hours’ sleep before the next round of jollities begins soon after dawn.
Around eight o'clock the sound of distant brass bands can again be heard wafting in through the bedroom windows.
Slowly but inexorably the band draws nearer.
Half an hour later, blowing as loudly as they can, the band halts three doors from your own.
The groom has come to collect his bride.
Why this ceremony has to take place so early in the morning has never been explained to me, but it appears to be as essential a part of the nuptials as the Hindi movie music the night before.
The days are little better.
One morning, reeling from lack of sleep,
I set off to Khan Market to buy something for my headache, only to find the roads were clogged with white Ambassadors dressed up as Christmas trees.
Above one windscreen — although almost totally obscured beneath creepers of gold and silver tinsel — was blazoned the legend: SUNIL AND NALINI CONJOINED 20 FEBRUARY.
Ahead, jamming the traffic into long impatient queues, was a procession consisting of the groom sitting on a white stallion, and clutching in front of him a small boy, an empty marriage rath (chariot), a brass band, twenty rogues carrying portable striplights and, bringing up the rear, a scattering of eunuchs, dancing around, soliciting money and flashing at passers-by.
Trying to get out of the traffic jam, I took a short cut down a back lane but found that it was blocked by a large wedding tent helpfully erected across the full width of the road.
At this stage I gave up, went back home and retired to a half-darkened room to read the paper.
Even here, however, the marriage season intruded.
It was a Sunday, and half the paper was packed with marriage advertisements.
For most Indian families a marriage is as much a business proposition as a romantic affair of the heart, and perhaps for this reason many of the  advertisements sound as if they are marketing objects rather than advertising potential spouses:
WANTED: Kayastha match for employed ordinance factory beautiful, slim, wheatish Ghari double, convented, well versed in household affairs, adaptable.
Some of the adverts, like western lonely hearts columns, are slightly sad:
WANTED: Handicapped girl, caste no bar, for handicapped blind Bengali boy.
Lost parents at a young age; lame in one leg.
Able to move around with limp.
Some are embarrassing:
WANTED: Life companion for 28 year old, good-looking boy, well settled in decent job, suffering from sexual disorder, i.e acute premature ejaculation.
Girl should either be suffering from same disease or is not interested in sex otherwise.
A few defy credibility:
Alliance invited for innocent, beautiful, charming, compassionate, sober, soft-spoken and good natured divorcee.
But my favourites are definitely the ambitious Punjabi boys out for what they can get:
WANTED: very beautiful, fair, slim, charming, educated, well-connected Green Card holder for very handsome, athletic, energetic and elegant Jat Sikh boy of high ideology.
BA and yoga practitioner.
Working hard in excellent position in Gurgaon factory.
Send photograph and horoscope.
The Indian marriage advertisements are in fact a British invention, a hangover from the period when highly educated and thoroughly eligible ICS officers would spend their youths in remote postings in the jungles of Central India.
There they had little hope of meeting, wooing or wedding even the most hideous and unsuitable Englishwomen.
For these people the marriage adverts acted as a kind of mail-order lifeline: from deepest Nagpur or Ujjain, a young man's credentials could be easily brought before the eyes of an anxious Mama in Chelsea or Kensington.
Yet, like so many other Raj survivals, the marriage adverts have been mutated out of all recognition from their understated British originals.
Today the tone of so many of these adverts is so unashamedly boastful — full of triumphs in beauty competitions, prizes won and degrees achieved — that I often wondered whether these perfect matches are all they claim to be.
For this reason my eye was caught one day by a small box-ad at the bottom of the column:
BHARAT DETECTIVE AGENCY
MARRIAGE FRAUD A SPECIALITY.
A telephone call confirmed my suspicions.
Mr Pavan Aggarwal, an ex-paratrooper, specializes in investigating the truth behind the adverts — usually by the simple expedient of sending one of his agents to the groom or bride's home village.
‘I was trained to see behind enemy lines,’ Mr Aggarwal told me, ‘and I am knowing how to observe properly.’
‘What sort of thing do you look for?’
I asked.
‘I will check anything — see if boy is knowing too many girls or girl is watching too many Hindi films and not pursuing her studies,’ replied Mr Aggarwal.
He added: ‘I am even checking-out mothers-in-law.
One of the most evocative passages in Dr Jaffery's transcription of the Shah Jehan Nama is the part which describes Dara Shukoh's wedding.
The marriage of Dara to his distant cousin Nadira Begum took place on 11 February 1633, a year after the death of Dara's mother, Mumtaz Mahal.
On the day before the marriage, the preliminary ceremony of hina-bandi was held: ‘Numerous fireworks were ignited along the banks of the Jumna…and the vast number of candles, lamps, torches and lanterns [that were lit made]the surface of the earth rival the starry expanses of heaven.’
Precious robes were distributed to guests, and paan and sweetmeats offered to the attendant nobility.
Finally Dara's hands were placed behind the covering curtain of the harem where they were dyed red with henna by the ladies within.
The next day at noon, Aurangzeb and the other young princes escorted Dara through the palace to the Forty Pillared Hall of Public Audience.
In the copy of the Shah Jehan Nama now in Windsor Castle there is a fine miniature painting by Murar illustrating the scene: all the princes are dripping with gems and strings of pearls; the youthful Dara, a downy moustache now covering his upper lip, leads his brothers into the great audience hall sitting on a black stallion.
He fills the centre of the picture; Aurangzeb and his other brothers, on white horses, are relegated to the picture's margin.
After Shah Jehan had loaded his son with precious wedding gifts —‘a superb robe of honour, a jewelled dagger with incised floral ornament, a sword and a belt studded with gems, a rosary of pearls’, two fine horses and a pair of war elephants — and the gifts had been displayed and admired, the festivities began:
By His Majesty's command, the gardens beneath the Royal Chambers and boats floating upon the Jumna were illuminated  with lamps and fireworks; music and singing were kept with spirit [from noon until nine o'clock at night]…when the propitious moment for the nuptials finally arrived.
Qazi Muhammed Aslam was summoned and he read the marriage service in the sublime presence, fixing the bride's mihr [jointure fee in case the marriage were later dissolved]at five lakhs of rupees.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, shouts of congratulation rose from earth to heaven and the sound of kettle drums of joy rent the skies.
Having read (and heard) so much about Delhi marriages, I was pleased at the very end of February actually to receive an invitation to one under the door.
The card read as follows:
Mr and Mrs Shahiduddin Postman request the pleasure of your company on the auspicious occasion of the marriage of their daughter Saheena with Mr B. Khan (son of Mr M. Khan) At their residence: No. 11 Village Shahpur Jat (Near DDA Water Tank.)
Mr Shahiduddin Postman was a familiar figure at the house: every morning after delivering our mail he would squat outside the front gate, smoking a bidi with the mali, a man to whom he bore a certain resemblance.
Both gentlemen were lean, sharp-eyed characters with a highly developed taste for baksheesh; and both liked to dress up, whatever the heat, in their thick serge uniforms: the mali in his blue gardener's donkey-jacket with its shining brass buttons, Mr Shahiduddin Postman in his official Indian Postal Service khaki.
We had only really talked to Mr Postman on the regular occasions — Dusshera, Diwali, Christmas, New Year — that he came looking for tips, but were flattered by the invitation and out of curiosity decided to take it up.
On the morning of the ceremony, Olivia, the mali, Balvinder  Singh and myself all set off to Village Shahpur Jat in Mr Singh's taxi.
It was a bright February morning, and the mali's newly polished buttons glittered in the sunlight.
‘This Mr Postman very good man,’ said Mr Singh, who had not been invited to the ceremony, but was clearly looking forward to attending none the less.
‘Very rich man,’ agreed the mali.
‘For five years he saving shah-al-arhee for daughter's wedding.’
(The mali had a unique way of turning simple English words into Hindi or Urdu equivalents: the clay tubs in which he planted his flowers became fellah-i-puts, seedlings were Sid-ud-Dins, while my favourite flower — the hollyhock — became a holi-ul-haq.
After you got used to the conventions of his speech, he became readily comprehensible: shah-al-arhee was the mali's rendering of salary.)
The mali proved quite correct about Mr Shahiduddin Postman's resources.
Shahpur Jat was Mr Postman's ancestral village.
It was originally a farming settlement in Haryana but had recently been absorbed into the Delhi suburbs.
The small government flat I had been expecting turned out instead to be a large if simple village haveli, occupied by Mr Postman's extended family — his three brothers, their children and Mr Postman's old mother.
The marriage was being held in the wide courtyard of the house.
Striped awnings had been stretched across the courtyard and ranks of chairs arranged in rows around the walls.
Fairy lights and streamers of tinsel hung from the tent posts; spicy smells wafted through the air.
In the middle stood a huge tin trunk the size of a Roman sarcophagus, packed full of the wedding presents Mr Postman was giving to his daughter: twenty new salwar kameez, piles of crockery, huge copper pots, a sewing machine, an iron and so on.
Our host greeted us at the entrance gate, shaking me by the hand, bowing to Olivia, embracing the mali and frowning at Balvinder Singh.
Then, like Shah Jehan with the guests at Dara's wedding, Mr Postman took us over to the trunk to admire the presents.
Getting the gentle hint, we produced our contribution to his daughter's dowry: a small electric blow-heater.
‘For winter,’ I said.
‘Not only winter,’ replied Mr Shahiduddin Postman.
‘On this  most beautiful radio we will now be listening to Mr Mark Tully Sahib of BBC every day of year.’
Before we had time to correct his mistake, Mr Postman had sat us in a row at the top of the courtyard.
He presented the mali and myself with a hookah and while we took a preliminary suck, we were introduced to the other guests.
Again I was surprised by the smartness of the gathering.
On my right was Dr Adbul Haidar, a rather gloomy assistant lecturer from the Hamdard University in New Delhi; beyond him sat Mr Swaroop Singh, a clerk at the Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Both were from the same village as Mr Shahiduddin Postman; both had managed to get educated and to break out of the village on to the lower rungs of academia.
Dr Haidar proudly explained that the bride, Mr Postman's daughter, was a rare creature — a Muslim girl who had been educated up to the tenth class.
‘Most of our children in willage Shahpur Jat are being literate,’ said Dr Haidar.
‘We are a very forward-looking willage.
But,’ and here he lowered his voice, ‘the groom's family are Jats.
They are very backward farmer-people.’
As we were talking, out of the corner of my eye I could see Balvinder Singh stumbling back from the cooking-corner of the tent, holding a plate piled high with hot pakoras.
As he walked he was stuffing them into his mouth.
‘This man is a friend of Mr Postman?’ asked Dr Haidar.
‘Up to a point,’ I said.
‘This is animal-man,’ replied Dr Haidar rather harshly.
Dr Haidar went off to talk to Mr Postman and I got into conversation with Mr Bhajan Lal, the Pradhan (headman) of the village.
Mr Lal's English was even less fluent than my Hindi, so we chatted, ungrammatically, in his tongue.
Thanks to our twice weekly lessons, Olivia and I had now become confident enough in Hindi for the practice of it to become enjoyable rather than tiresome — if only because people were so surprised to hear any non-Indian speak even the most stumbling version of it.
Mr Lal was no exception.
LAL Sahib!
You are speaking Hindi!
WD A little.
LAL Oh, sahib!
Truly this is day among days!
What is your good name, sahib?’
WD (confident now; a phrase I knew) My name is William.
LAL Oh  thank you Mr Will-Yums Sahib.
Where are you learning this beautiful Hindi?
WD In Delhi.
A munshi comes to our house…
LAL In Delhi!
Heaven be praised…
As we chattered, other villagers crowded around and asked the usual round of Indian questions: where were we from?
How did we know Mr Shahiduddin Postman?
What was our mother tongue?
Were we Muslims?
How many Muslims were there in Scotland?
One particularly persistent gentleman was clearly using us as a punchbag for his English.
His conversation had a curiously circular quality: ‘I am Hindu, sahib.’
‘Really?’
‘But I am not looking like Hindu.’
‘No.
I am looking like Sikh gentleman.’
‘Yes.’
‘But I am Hindu.’
‘Good.’
‘Although I am not looking like…’
We had been at the wedding a full hour before I began to be curious about the whereabouts of the bride and groom.
‘Would you like to see the bride?’ asked Dr Haidar.
‘She is already here?’
‘Yes, yes,’ replied Dr Haidar.
‘Of course.
She is in ladies’ department.’
I was led into a shuttered room off the courtyard.
It was nearly dark, but in the half-light you could just make out four or five women fussing around a surprisingly elderly-looking girl trussed up in a red Rajasthani costume.
‘This is Muslim wedding in Hindu ambulance,’ explained Dr Haidar.
‘What is a Hindu ambulance?’
I asked.
‘This is the feeling of Hinduism,’ replied Dr Haidar.
‘I don't understand,’ I said.
‘You see our bride is wearing a red Hindu dress,’ said Dr Haidar, ‘and also her hands painted with swirls of henna, like a Hindu  bride.
Also there is a large ring in her nose.
This is what we call Hindu ambulance.’
I looked at the bride.
Her face was cast downwards but even in the half-light you could see that the poor girl looked terrified.
‘She has fair complexion,’ said Dr Haidar.
‘But she is little shy.’
‘Isn't she rather old?’
I whispered.
‘Mr Shahiduddin is well off by village standards, but still he is not a very rich man,’ replied Dr Haidar.
‘For this wedding he would have to save for many years.
During this time his daughter is not growing any younger.’
‘But she must be nearly forty,’ I said.
‘The salary of our government servants,’ explained Dr Haidar quietly, ‘is parlous in the extreme.’
There came the sound of shouting outside.
‘Hurry!’ said Dr Haidar.
‘The groom is here.’
Wishing the bride good luck, we pushed our way through the milling crowds of guests and out under the entrance arch of the haveli.
We arrived just in time to see the first members of the brass band — a trombone and a tuba — come round the corner of the lane.
Making no concessions to the concept of melody, the band members blasted away at their instruments as loud as they could.
‘Very beautiful music,’ said Balvinder Singh, who had appeared by my side, and was now wobbling his head from side to side in rapt appreciation.
‘Tip-top beautiful.’
The band formed two lines around the entrance of the house.
On the nearby rooftops street urchins were dancing frantically to the music.
The noise got louder and louder, faster and faster, and less and less tuneful.
The groom's party — green-turbanned farmers from Haryana — appeared around the corner of the lane and formed a circle outside the entrance of the house.
A few stumbled as they walked, indicating the cause of the delay.
‘I am thinking that maybe these gentlemen have been to one English Wine Shop,’ said Dr Haidar, speaking in that slightly sanctimonious tone that Muslims sometimes adopt when discussing alcohol.
As Dr Haidar spoke a party of sweepers appeared in the lane, coming from the opposite direction to the marriage party.
They  illus; were a dirty-looking crew of dark-skinned rag-pickers; each carried a sack-load of rubbish on his back.
Mr Shahiduddin Postman darted out from the crowd and with a set of violent curses sent the unfortunate untouchables scurrying off the way they had come.
At that moment, with a final fanfare from the brass band, the groom appeared: a sallow-looking youth on a mangy white stallion supporting a young boy in front of him.
The groom was wearing white pyjamas and a pill-box hat.
Around his neck hung a garland of silver tinsel.
Like his bride-to-be, he looked absolutely miserable.
‘This is our custom,’ said Dr Haidar.
‘We think that a groom must look little bit shy.’
‘He certainly doesn't look as if he is enjoying himself much.’
‘Maybe he is thinking that today he will loose his freedom.
After this day he will be having to obey his wife.’
‘I thought Muslim men were always the unchallenged heads of their households.’
‘This thing is not true,’ said Dr Haidar.
‘In all countries, irrespective of religion, behind the scenes the women are ruling the men.
How long have you been married?’
‘One year.’
‘After a while you will understand,’ said Dr Haidar, shaking his head gloomily.
The band stopped, and a group of the groom's more drunken friends broke into song.
Their chosen melody was a paean of praise to a local politician, Mr Devi Lal, then the Chief Minister of Haryana.
The song, which had become popular at the last election, went something like this:
Devi Lal, leader of the farmers,
Will make blossoms bloom in Fall.
Before such a leader,
all enemies will cower,
While Devi Lal stands tall.
Devi Lal, leader of the farmers,
Will make buffaloes rich in milk,
He'll give everyone a tractor,
A record cotton-crop,
There's no doubt about it:
Devi Lal's tip-top.
There then followed a curious little pantomime, apparently also dictated by tradition.
The bride's younger sister, herself no babe-in-arms, confronted the terrified groom and demanded an offering before he and his party would be admitted to the house.
Though the groom looked as if he longed to get the whole thing over and done with, he obeyed the dictates of tradition and refused.
‘Before you come in, first you must pay,’ repeated the bride's sister.
One of the groom's party produced a fifty-rupee note.
The sister folded her arms and shook her head.
Another flutter of notes was produced: two hundred rupees more.
‘We cannot accept less than seven hundred rupees,’ said the sister.
Slowly, a few more notes appeared: 300, 400, 550, 650 — finally  700 rupees had been collected.
The sister stood back, and the groom, followed by his drunken friends and hangers-on, pushed on into the courtyard.
I thought a religious ceremony must now follow, but I was mistaken.
The bargaining had not finished.
The groom and his close family took their places, cross-legged, on the matting beside the trunk of wedding gifts.
Facing them sat Mr Shahiduddin Postman and his brothers.
In between the two families sat the village qazi and two other bearded maulvis.
‘What are they doing?’
I asked Dr Haidar.
‘This moment we call the mihr,’ he replied.
‘The groom's family must settle how much money they will pay the bride if the marriage is a failure and ends in divorce.’
This slightly depressing bout of bargaining — which had been brushed over so quickly in the Shah Jehan Nama — took at least a quarter of an hour.
The marriage which followed it took a fraction of the time — about three minutes.
There was a short reading from the Quran and the solemn recitation of the Offer and Acceptance.
Then the groom signed a piece of paper which was passed to Mr Shahiduddin Postman and four witnesses for countersignature.
It was only when everyone rose to their feet, shook hands and made a beeline for the cooking tent — where, it emerged, Balvinder Singh had been for the last half-hour — that I realized that the ceremony was over.
During the entire marriage the bride had remained in her darkened room.
‘What about the bride?’
I asked Dr Haidar.
‘She is still in the ladies’ department.’
‘And when will she come out?’
‘Later.
She cannot come into gents’ department until the marriage is over.’
As Dr Haidar spoke I remembered the miniature of Dara Shukoh's wedding from the Windsor Castle Shah Jehan Nama.
Now I realized what had been so odd about it: amid all the festivities and celebrations there had been no sign whatsoever of the bride around whom the whole affair was revolving.
‘So the bride does not play any part in the marriage?’
I asked.
‘No.
At least not an active part.’
‘And still she will not have met her husband?’
‘No.
But she will meet him soon enough,’ said Dr Haidar.
He  shook his head gloomily.
‘Now they are husband and wife they must spend the rest of their life together.’
One day in the middle of February I made an appointment to meet Dr Jaffery at the Red Fort.
Dr Jaffery knew the building as well as anyone and I much looked forward to going around it with someone who had studied it for so many years.
With the note confirming our appointment, Dr Jaffery sent me a photocopy of the Mirza Nama —‘The Book of the Perfect Gentleman’.
This short manuscript, which was only rediscovered in a private library at the turn of the century, spells out the sort of behaviour that was expected of a young Mughal gentleman in Delhi about 1650.
I would not properly be able to understand the Mughals' palace, said Dr Jaffery, unless I first read through their book of etiquette.
The Mirza Nama was an extraordinary document.
It revealed an unrepentantly superficial world where life revolved around the minutiae of outward appearances and public display.
What was vital in a young mirza (or gentleman) were the clothes and manners which covered him; the wholeness or corruption of the man within was of no interest or relevance.
The most important thing — of course— was being seen with the right people, and the Mirza Nama opens with a salutary warning: ‘He [the mirza]must not speak to every unworthy person, and should regard men of his own class as the only [fit]companions [for him].’
He should not ‘joke with every good-for-nothing fellow’.
The key was to draw as firm a distinction as possible between the mirza and ordinary folk.
Thus the young gallant should never ever be seen walking on foot, and should at all times carry funds enough ‘for the expenses of a palanquin' which he should regard as ‘the best of all conveyances’.
If, while on his litter, the mirza should pass through a bazaar and see something which appeals to him ‘he should not make any difficulty about the price, and ought not to buy like a common trader.’
This distaste for the subject of money should also guide his behaviour if another gentleman was impudent enough to enquire about his income: ‘[In such a situation the mirza]should try to get  the topic changed; if not he should leave the house to its owner and run away as fast as his feet can carry him.
He should not look back.’
Nor should a gentlemen ever discuss that most unfashionable subject religion, lest some fanatic ‘cause him bodily injury’(still good advice in Delhi today).
It was also important for any aspiring young gallant to give good parties.
Towards this end the mirza should make a point of smoking scented tobacco blended with hashish; precious gems — emeralds and pearls — should be ostentatiously crushed into his wine.
As far as conversation was concerned, there was one golden rule: a gentleman should avoid telling shaggy-dog stories.
Moreover if any of his guests ‘begins a long story, the mirza should not attend it, because [such stories]are styled ‘the prison house of conversation’.’
Literary accomplishment was to be valued: all aspiring gentlemen were expected to know by heart the Gulistan (The Rose Garden) and Bustan (The Orchard) of Sa'di; but more important still was grammatical correctness: ‘In society the mirza should [always]try to guard against the shame of committing any mistake in conversation, for such incorrectness in speech is considered a great fault in a gentleman.’
It was even acceptable to chant or recite a verse or two in public if the young mirza had ‘beauty and a good voice’; but he should not do so too often or at length for fear — heaven forbid — that he be mistaken for a professional poet or singer.
(The mirza, moreover, ‘should never trust any well-clothed person who pretends to be an author…’)
Having your own original opinions was clearly a major flaw in a mirza and, just to be on the safe side, the Mirza Nama offers a few acceptable opinions for the young gentleman to learn by heart and adopt as his own.
Among flowers and trees he should admire the narcissus, the violet and the orange.
He should eat his fill of watermelon (‘the best of all fruits’) and ‘rice boiled with spices should be preferred by him to all other eatables.’
A gentleman ‘should not make too much use of tobacco’ but ‘should recognize the Fort in Agra as unequalled in the whole world [and]…must think of Isfahan as the best town in Persia’; if he insists on travelling he should visit ‘Egypt because it is worth seeing’.
Finally, the Mirza Nama advises the young gallant on the tricky  matter of dress.
Brightly coloured coats, shirts and trousers should be tailored to a tight fit; an elaborately decorated scarf should encircle his waist and hold a dagger: ‘With a monthly salary of one hundred rupees let him allot ten rupees for the belt and the embroidered badge if he spends fifty rupees on a fur it will not be prodigality.’
But things could be taken to excess.
While it was vital to be well turned out, the young gallant should beware of imitating those fops who spent their time building huge and elaborate turbans: men like Mirza Abu Said, a great amir under Shah Jehan, who was so fastidious in the construction of his head-wraps that the Imperial Durbar had usually finished by the time he had finished tying it all together.
‘In India,’ concludes the Mirza Nama, a gentleman ‘should not expect intelligence and good behaviour from those who put big turbans on their heads.’
The Red Fort is to Delhi what the Colosseum is to Rome or the Acropolis to Athens: it is the single most famous monument in the city.
It represents the climax of more than six hundred years of experimentation in palace building by Indo-Islamic architects, and is by far the most substantial monument — and in its day was also by far the most magnificent — that the Mughals left behind them in Delhi.
Viewed from the end of Chandni Chowk, the sight is superb: a great rhubarb-red curtain wall pierced by a pair of magnificent gates and fortified by a ripple of projecting bastions, each one topped with a helmet-shaped chattri.
Dr Jaffery had with him a proof of the new translation of Inayat Khan's Shah Jehan Nama while I had brought a leather-bound copy of Bernier's Travels.
Both contained good accounts of the founding of the New City.
Before we looked at the Fort, we sat in a chai shop, sipping hot tea and reading out loud from Inayat Khan's chronicle.
Like the Mirza Nama, the Shah Jehan Nama worships superficial, shiny things — gifts, uniforms, jewels — and deliberately ignores the darkness and corruption which lay at the heart of the court.
Where it differs from the Mirza Nama is in the richness of the fawning which curdles every sentence: reading Inayat Khan's  chronicle you experience a sensation like drowning under a sea of the sweetest, stickiest honey.
Several years before the thought came to His Majesty's omniscient mind that he should select some pleasant sight on the banks of the River Jumna…where he might found a splendid and delightful edifice.
In accordance with the promptings of his noble nature, he envisioned that streams of water should be made to flow through the proposed fort and that its terraces should overlook the river.
For all its oily sycophancy, the Shah Jehan Nama probably gives the authentic flavour of the enterprise: Shah Jehan's town, like Shah Jehan's court chronicle, was there to glorify the ruler.
The Emperor wanted to raise a city as a memorial to his rule; for, as the contemporary historian Qandhari observed: ‘A good name for Kings is achieved by means of lofty buildings…that is to say, the standard of the measure of men is assessed by the worth of their buildings.’
In their different ways, both book and buildings were part of a great Imperial Mughal ego-trip.
Making our way through the crowds — great busloads of excited if baffled-looking Rajasthani villagers — Dr Jaffery and I passed over the moat and through the outer gate, part of the indecorous additional defences erected outside Shah Jehan's fort by Aurangzeb.
Without adding much to the defensive capabilities of the palace, these outworks succeeded in masking the original work of Shah Jehan ‘like a veil over a beautiful bride,’ as Dr Jaffery put it.
Leaving the legacy of Aurangzeb behind us, we took in the original façade.
Ahead of us towered the great octagonal bastions of Shah Jehan's Lahore Gate, an impregnable wall of solid sandstone overlaid by some restrained detailing: blind arcades of cusped arches, a delicate jharokha, and a pair of carved lotus flowers floating on the sandstone spandrels of the great horseshoe arch.
From the gate we passed into the covered bazaar, and after running a gauntlet of salesmen (all offering the same smudged postcards printed on blotting paper) emerged into the open in front of the Naqqar Khana, the House of the Drums.
On passing under the building a cacophony of kettle drums and trumpets would once have announced the arrival of any important visitor.
According to Bernier, who regularly visited the fort over the six years that he spent in and around Delhi:
To the ears of a European newly arrived, this music sounds very strangely, for there are ten to twelve hautboy, and as many cymbals, which [all]play together.
On my first arrival it stunned me so as to be insupportable: but such is the power of habit that the same noise is now heard by me with pleasure; in the night particularly, when in bed and afar, on my terrace, this music sounds in my ears as solemn, grand and melodious.
Before the British destroyed the surrounding buildings in 1857, the Naqqar Khana gave on to an enclosed courtyard leading up to the Diwan-i-am, the forty-pillared Hall of Public Audience, the site of the Imperial Durbars.
Today the original effect is entirely lost.
Both Diwan-i-am and Naqqar Khana stand as isolated buildings, marooned in wide seas of green grass.
Dr Jaffery could still point out the faded murals which filled niches of the Drum House — pictures of Central Asian plants, he thought, put there to remind the Mughals of their TransOxianan homelands — but the painted and gilt ceiling of the audience hall has entirely disappeared, along with the awnings, the Kashmiri carpets, the solid silver railings and the magnificent Peacock Throne which, with its twelve pillars of emerald supporting a golden roof topped with two gilt peacocks ablaze with precious stones, was arguably the most dazzling seat ever constructed.
To flesh out the red sandstone skeleton — to recreate within the cusped ribs of the cadaver the durbars of Shah Jehan — I again opened Dr Jaffery's copy of Bernier.
Standing in front of the Audience Hall, I read the Frenchman's description of the scenes which had taken place within, then a Delhi commonplace, a tiresome chore for the nobles:
Every day about noon [the monarch]sits upon his throne, with some of his sons at his right and left, while the eunuchs who stand about the royal person flap away the flies with peacock tails or agitate the air with large fans…
Immediately under the throne is an enclosure, surrounded by silver rails, in which are assembled the whole body of Omrahs, the Rajahs and the Ambassadors, all standing with their  eyes bent downwards, and their hands crossed.
At a greater distance from the throne are the inferior nobles, also standing in the same posture of profound reverence.
The remainder of the entire courtyard is filled with persons of all ranks, high and low, rich and poor
Whenever a word escapes the lips of the King…however trifling its import, it is immediately caught by the surrounding throng; and the Chief Omrahs, extending their arms towards heaven, as if to receive benediction, exclaim Wonderful!
Wonderful!
He has spoken wonders!
Indeed there is no Mughal who does not know and does not glory in repeating the Persian proverb:
If the monarch says the day is night,
Reply —‘of course: the moon and stars shine bright.’
These Imperial durbars were Inayat Khan's favourite material, giving him ample occasion to tug his forelock and fill the pages of the Shah Jehan Nama with paeans to the generosity of his Imperial paymaster.
Day after day, like some fatuous television game-show host, Inayat Khan lists the presents given and received:
On Sunday the 17th of Rabi'I [20 March 1650]the festival of Nauroz [New Year]was celebrated in the most splendid and sumptuous style as the ocean of royal bounty and munificence broke into surging billows…
At this auspicious assembly, from the foaming waves of kindness and munificence, Prince Buland Iqbal received a gorgeous robe of honour with a vest; a dagger studded with precious diamonds and sapphires and incised ornament and a girdle studded with diamonds…
And so on and on and on.
The Diwan-i-am was as far into the Imperial Palace as most nobles would ever go.
Only the most privileged would hope to cross from here into the inner enclosure, where amid streams, paradise gardens and pavilions, lay the zenanas of the women and the private apartments of the Great Mogul.
Bernier, in his role as imperial  surgeon, did make it into the zenana complex, but was not much the wiser afterwards:
Who is the traveller who can describe from ocular observation the interior of that building?
I have sometimes gone into it when the King was absent from Delhi and once pretty far I thought, for the purpose of giving my advice in the case of a great lady so ill that she could not be moved to the outward gate; but a Kachemire shawl covered my head, hanging like a large scarfe down to my feet, and a eunuch led me by the hand, as if I had been a blind man.
You must be content, therefore, with such a general description as I have received from some of the eunuchs.
They have informed me that the seraglio contains beautiful apartments, more or less spacious and splendid according to the rank and income of the females.
Nearly every chamber has its reservoir of running water at the door; on every side are gardens, delightful alleys, shady retreats, streams, fountains and grottoes.
Miniatures still survive showing this part of the palace decked in all its splendour with shady silk awnings of brilliant scarlet, gilded cupolas shining atop the chaffris and, lying open to pavilions, the Hayat Baksh or Life-Bestowing Paradise Garden, planted with cypress, mangoes, apricots and sweet-smelling nargis, kuzah and gulal.
Through everything runs the bubbling runnel of the canal, the Nahr-i-Bihisht or River of Paradise, punctuated by pools, carefully carved water-chutes and groups of free-flowing fountains.
Today the inner enclosure should still be the climax of the fort, but the sight of it produces only a sensation of severe anticlimax.
As Dr Jaffery pointed out, the British of the last century must take much of the blame for this.
At the back of the fort they diverted the Jumna and laid in its place a main road so that the delicate Mughal pavilions look out, not on to the source of the Waters of Paradise, but on to Mahatma Gandhi Marg, the most noisy and polluted stretch of the Delhi Ring Road.
Inside the walls, in a similarly enlightened spirit, the conquerors destroyed most of the courtyards of the palace, leaving — and that grudgingly — little in the inner enclosure except the Pearl Mosque  and a single string of pavilions spaced out also on the Jumna battlements.
Even the Mughal gardens were uprooted and replaced with sterile English lawns.
In the place of the marble fantasies they tore down, the British erected some of the most crushingly ugly buildings ever thrown up by the British Empire — a set of barracks that look as if they have been modelled on Wormwood Scrubs.
The barracks should have been torn down years ago, but the fort's current proprietors, the Archaeological Survey of India, have lovingly continued the work of decay initiated by the British: white marble pavilions have been allowed to discolour; plasterwork has been left to collapse; the water channels have cracked and grassed over; the fountains are dry.
Only the barracks look well maintained.
The Mughal buildings which remain — a line of single-storey pavilions, the Emperor's private apartments and the zenana buildings — stand still in their marble simplicity; but without their carpets, awnings and gorgeous trappings they look strangely uncomfortable: cold and hard and white, difficult to imagine back into life.
Today, as the pavilions lie empty and neglected, they look like ossified tents — silk turned to stone.
The Emperor is dead; the courtiers have dispersed.
The whole structure has crumbled.
The gorgeous canopies have rotted, the bamboo supports have snapped.
The dazzling inlay of precious stones was long ago picked out with daggers.
Most infuriating of all is the Mumtaz Mahal, the Palace of Jahanara Begum.
Once the most magnificent of the zenana buildings, it was the only one to be the exclusive residence of a single woman.
The privacy made it perfect for the reception of forbidden lovers which made Roshanara Begum all the more jealous that such facilities should be given to her sister Jahanara while being refused to her.
Nevertheless, with all the spies at work in the palace, even here secrecy was impossible.
Shah Jehan soon came to hear of Jahanara's orgies, and according to Bernier, resolved to surprise his daughter in flagrante with one of her secret paramours:
The intimation of Shah Jehan's approach was too sudden to allow her [Jahanara Begum]the choice of more than one place of concealment, so the affrighted gallant sought refuge in the capacious cauldron used for the baths.
The King's countenance denoted neither surprise or displeasure; he discoursed with his daughter on ordinary topics, but finished the conversation by observing that her skin indicated a neglect of her customary ablutions, and that it was proper she should bathe.
He then commanded the eunuchs to light a fire under the cauldron, and did not retire until they gave him to understand that his wretched victim was no more.
This, of all the Fort's pavilions, should be haunted by ghosts, yet today it is converted into a grubby little museum lacking any atmosphere or mystique.
The ruins of so many Indian palaces — Mandu, for example, or the great Hindu capital of Hampi — still retain an aura of great dignity about them in their wreckage, but in the Red Fort that aura is notable by its absence.
Instead, what remains, despite the completeness of the walls and the outer gates, is a peculiar emptiness, a hollowness at the very heart of the complex.
For all the marble, for all the inlay, for all the grand memories glimpsed through finely perforated jali screens, the final impression is sad, almost tawdry.
The sycophants have drifted away to find new lords to flatter; what they left behind them now looks merely empty and vainglorious.
That week Olivia and I visited Dr Jaffery's family haveli in the walled city for the first time.
He had been very nervous about inviting us.
‘You should not make friends with an elephant keeper,’ he had said, ‘unless you first have room to entertain an elephant.’
‘Doctor, I wish you would explain your aphorisms sometimes.’
‘My friend: I am referring to you.
You are a European.
You come from a rich country.
I am a poor scholar.
It is unwise for us to become close because I cannot afford to entertain you in the style to which you are accustomed.’
Dr Jaffery frowned: ‘I am a simple man.
I live in a simple house.
You will be disgusted by my simple ways.’
‘Don't be silly, doctor.
Of course I won't.’
‘So if I invited you to my house you would not be upset by the simple food I would serve?’
‘Nothing would give me greater pleasure.’
‘In that case you and your wife must come and eat some simple dervish dishes with me and my family.’
It was now early March and Ramadan had just begun.
With its overwhelmingly Hindu population, New Delhi was quite unchanged by the onset of the Muslim month of fasting, but the Old City had been transformed since our last visit.
There were now far fewer people about: many streets were deserted but for groups of tethered goats fattening for their slaughter on Idul-Zuha.
Those Muslims who were out on the streets looked bad-tempered: they had not eaten or drunk since before dawn, and were in no mood for smiles or pleasantries.
Even the endlessly patient bicycle rickshaw drivers muttered curses under their breath as they drove us uphill through the narrowing funnel of tightly-packed houses.
Dr Jaffery's house lay a short distance from the Turkman Gate, off the narrow Ganj Mir Khan.
A steep flight of steps off the street led to a first-floor courtyard dotted with pots of bougainvillaea.
Here we were met by Fardine, Dr Jaffery's nephew.
Fardine was a tall, good-looking boy, about sixteen years old; like his uncle he was dressed in white kurta pyjamas.
Dr Jaffery was still giving lectures at the college, Fardine said.
Would we like to come upstairs and help him fly his pigeons until Dr Jaffery arrived for iftar, the meal eaten at sunset each day during Ramadan?
He led us up four flights of dark, narrow stairs, before disappearing up a rickety ladder out on to the roof.
We followed and emerged on to a flat terrace with a magnificent view over Old Delhi.
To the right rose the three swelling domes of the great Jama Masjid; to the left you could see the ripple of small semi-domes atop the ancient Kalan Masjid.
In between the two mosques, in the great arc of roofs and terraces which surmounted the houses of Shahjehanabad, I saw for the first time that secret Delhi which lies hidden from those who only know the city from ground level.
From Dr Jaffery's rooftop you could look out, past the anonymous walls which face on to the Old Delhi lanes, and see into the shady courtyards and the gardens which form the real heart of the Old City.
In the last hour before the breaking of the Ramadan fast, the courtyards and rooftops were filling with people.
Some were lying on charpoys, snoozing away the last minutes before their first meal for thirteen hours.
Others sat out on carpets beneath the shady trees enjoying the cool of the evening.
Nearby, little boys were playing with brightly coloured diamond-shaped kites which they flew up into the warm evening breeze.
They pulled sharply at the strings, then released the kites so that they flew in a succession of angular jerks, higher and higher into the pink evening sky.
While most of the fliers were quietly attempting to raise their kites as high as possible into the heavens, some of the boys were engaged in battles with their neighbours.
They locked strings with the kites of their enemies and attempted, by means of the ground glass glued on their strings, to cut their opponents' kites free.
Yet, on the rooftops, the kite fliers were easily outnumbered by the pigeon fanciers — the kabooter baz-who stood on almost every terrace, hands extended into the air calling to their pigeons: Aao!
Aao!
Aao!
(Come!
Come!
Come!)
Above them, the sky was full of the soft rush of beating wings, clouds of pigeons dipping and diving in and out of the domes and through the minarets.
The flocks whirled and wheeled, higher and higher, before nose-diving suddenly down towards their home terrace on the command of their   flier.
Some came to rest on the bamboo pigeon frames — horizontal slats of trellising raised on a pole — that several of the fliers had raised above their roofs.
In England the mention of pigeon fanciers brings to mind Geordies and flat caps and Newcastle Brown Ale.
In Delhi the sport has very different associations.
It is remembered as the civilized old pastime of the Mughal court.
Its laws were codified by Abu'l Fazl in the A'in-i-Akbari and its delights and dangers were illustrated by the Mughal miniaturists.
Its arts were mastered by, among others, the last of the Great Moguls, the Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar.
It is still one of the great passions of the Old Delhi-wallahs, and one of the many habits which distinguishes them from their Punjabi neighbours in the New City.
Fardine took us to the edge of his terrace, where his own pigeons were kept in a large coop.
He opened the wire-mesh door and scattered some grain on the floor.
Immediately the pigeons began to strut and flutter out, billing and cooing with pleasure.
As they emerged from their coop, Fardine pointed out the different varieties in his collection.
‘These are the Shiraji,’ he said pointing to two birds with reddish wings and black chests.
‘They are the fighter pigeons.
This is a very good pair: they have won many battles.
And you see these?’
He was now pointing at some large pigeons, coloured very light blue-grey.
‘These are the Kabuli Kabooter.
They are the strongest pigeons in Delhi.
They are not very fast but they can fly very high for two to four hours — sometimes more.
And these red ones: they are Lal Khal, along with the Avadi Golay they are the fastest of all kabooter.’
With a swift movement he picked up one of the Lal Khals and kissed it on its head.
Then, turning it over, he pointed at the miniature bracelets he had fixed to its ankles.
‘Look!’ he said.
‘They wear ghungroos like a dancer!’
Fardine took out a tin can from a cupboard beside the coop.
In it was grain mixed with ghee (clarified butter).
This was obviously the pigeons' favourite delicacy: at the sight of the tin can, the pigeons leapt in the air and fluttered above us waiting to dive down on the first grains; others landed flirtatiously on Fardine's arms and shoulders.
The boy threw the sticky grain up into the air and the pigeons swooped down after it.
The birds on Fardine's shoulders manoeuvred their way down to the edge of the can where they sat on its rim, greedily pecking at the grains.
Others sat on Fardine's open palm eating from his hand.
When the birds had eaten their fill, Fardine stood back and shouted: ‘Ay-ee!’
Immediately with a great flutter of wings the pigeons rose into the air and circled above the terrace.
When Fardine whistled the birds shot off in the direction of the Jama Masjid; another whistle and they returned.
Fardine waved his arms and the birds rose high into the air; at the cry of ‘Aao!
Aao!
Aao!’ they obediently returned.
With another flutter of wings, the birds came in to land on their coop.
‘These tricks are easy to learn,’ said Fardine shrugging his shoulders.
‘But to become a master-a Khalifa — can take twenty years of training.
A master can teach his pigeons to capture another man's flock and drive it home like a herd of sheep.
He can make his birds fly like an arrow — in a straight line, in single file — or can direct them to any place he likes, in any formation.
There are perhaps five thousand kabooter baz in Delhi, but there are only fifty Khalifa.’
As Fardine spoke, there was a sudden report, like a loud explosion.
Seconds later the muezzin of a hundred Delhi mosques called the Faithful to prayer with a loud cry of ‘Allaaaaah hu-Akbar!’
The sun had set.
The fast was over.
It was time for the iftar.
Dr Jaffery was prostrated on a prayer carpet, finishing his evening namaaz.
Fardine went to join him.
Uncle and nephew knelt shoulder to shoulder, hands cupped, heads bowed in the simple position of submission.
When he had finished, Dr Jaffery rose to his feet, brushed the dust off his pyjamas and came over to Olivia and me.
He welcomed us, then added: ‘You looked at us strangely while we were praying.
Do you never pray?’
‘I used to,’ I said, embarrassed.
‘Now…
I am not sure what I believe in, whether I'm an agnostic or…’
‘You make God sound so complicated,’ said Dr Jaffery, cutting in.
‘God is simple.
To follow him is not so difficult.
Just remember the advice of Rumi: ‘Follow the camel of love.’’
‘But follow it where?’
I said.
‘To wherever it leads,’ replied Dr Jaffery.
‘God is everywhere.
He  is in the buildings, in the light, in the air.
He is in you, closer to you than the veins of your neck.’
‘But…’
‘If you honour him and believe God is one you will be all right,’ said Dr Jaffery.
‘Come.
The iftar is ready.’
He led us into the house and introduced us to his two nieces, Nosheen and Simeen.
They were pretty girls, about sixteen and seventeen, dressed in flowery salwar kameez.
A sheet had been spread out on the ground, and around it had been placed a square of long hard bolsters.
The iftar meal was laid in its centre.
We sat down and Dr Jaffery handed us a plate of dates: traditionally the delicacy with which Muslims break the Ramadan fast.
There followed a succession of delicious Delhi kebabs rounded off with fruit chaat: a kind of spicy fruit salad.
While we ate, Dr Jaffery talked of the (then) impending break-up of the Soviet Union:
‘The Iranians are already broadcasting to Central Asia in Turkish,’ he said.
‘There will be a revival of Timurid Empire.
Just you see.
Before long there will be an embassy of Samarkand in Delhi.’
After we had finished everyone lay back on the bolsters.
Dr Jaffery's nieces begged him to tell us one of his Mullah Nasir-ud-Din stories and eventually he obliged.
He told how, on one of his visits to Delhi, the legendary Mullah Nasir-ud-Din arrived in the city in the middle of Ramadan.
The mullah was very hungry and when he heard that the Emperor was providing a free iftar to anyone who came to the Red Fort he immediately tied up his donkey and went along.
However he was so dirty from his ride that the Master of Ceremonies placed him in a distant corner, far from the Emperor, and at the end of the queue for food.
Seeing he would not be served for several hours, the mullah went off back to the caravanserai in which he was staying.
He washed and dressed in a magnificent embroidered robe topped with a great gilt turban, then returned to the feast.
This time he was announced by a roll of kettle drums and a fanfare of trumpets bellowing from the Naqqar Khana.
The Master of Ceremonies placed him near the Great Mogul and a plate of freshly grilled lamb was  put before him.
But Mullah Nasir-ud-Din did not eat.
Instead he began to rub the lamb all over his robe and turban.
The Mogul said: ‘Eminent Mullah.
You must be a foreigner from a distant and barbarous land!
I have never seen such manners in my life before!’
But Mullah Nasir-ud-Din was unrepentant.
He replied: ‘Your Highness.
This gown got me fed.
I think it deserves its portion too, don't you?’
After the story was finished, Nosheen and Simeen said goodnight and disappeared upstairs to bed.
But Fardine, Olivia and I sat up with Dr Jaffery sipping tea and chatting until well after midnight.
At first Dr Jaffery told more Mullah Nasir-ud-Din stories, but after a while the conversation became more serious.
I asked the doctor about Dara Shukoh and Aurangzeb, and soon the doctor was telling us about the civil war and the accounts given of it by Bernier and Manucci.
Throughout the 1650s the power and influence of Dara Shukoh continued to rise.
In the Mughal court great importance was always given to small details of protocol and privilege: the colour of a turban, the number of jewels in a noble's dagger, the place he was assigned in the Red Fort: all these things had significance as subtle indicators to an omrah's place in the ranking of the empire.
It was with a succession of such hints that Shah Jehan let it be known that his eldest son bathed in an ever-brighter glow of Imperial approval.
Nobles attending the court were ordered to go first to the apartments of Dara Shukoh and there make their morning obeisance before going on to the Diwan-i-khas to greet Shah Jehan.
Elephant fights were staged whenever Dara wished; his retainers were allowed to hold gold and silver maces in the durbar hall; Dara himself was assigned a small throne immediately beside that of his father.
On two occasions Shah Jehan went so far as to declare Dara his desired successor, while adding that the matter rested in the hands of Allah.
Meanwhile the Emperor ordered that Aurangzeb should remain — unrewarded — on gruelling campaign against the empire's  enemies in the Deccan.
It was against this background that the crisis of September 1657 was played out.
The emergency had a most unexpected cause.
Shah Jehan's extraordinary sexual appetites were always a matter of some speculation in the Imperial City, both to travellers and to native Delhi-wallahs.
Many contemporary writers comment on Shah Jehan's legendary appetites: the Emperor's lust for his daughter Jahanara, his penchant for seducing the wives of his generals and relations, and the numbers of courtesans invited into the palace to quench the monarch's thirst when his expansive harem proved insufficient.
Manucci's writings are full of more or less fanciful speculation on this matter:
All the world knows that the Mohammedans, following the example of their master, Mohammed, are very licentious; wherefore the men among them do not content themselves with a few wives, but seek every method of gratifying themselves in this particular.
Shah Jehan, not contenting himself with the women he had in his palaces, forfeited the respect of his nobles by intrigues with their wives…
[Moreover]for the greater satisfaction of his lusts, Shah Jehan ordered the erection of a large hall adorned through out with great mirrors.
All this was made so that he might obscenely observe himself with his favourite women.
It is impossible to explain satisfactorily the passion that Shah Jehan had in this direction.
While the passing of time did nothing to lessen the Emperor's appetites, it apparently did nothing either to improve his performance.
It was rumoured that as the monarch's virility grew less reliable he developed a habit of taking substantial quantities of aphrodisiacs.
Whether they worked or not, the potions had a serious and potentially fatal side-effect: ‘these stimulating drugs,’ wrote Manucci, brought on a retention of ‘urine…for three days Shah Jehan was almost at death's door.’
Jahanara Begum moved into Shah Jehan's apartments to nurse the Emperor herself.
The gates of the palace were closed.
In the city it was rumoured that the Emperor was already dead.
In the Chandni Chowk shopkeepers boarded up their premises, buried  their treasure and prepared for a long period of unrest.
Meanwhile spies in the Red Fort reported the developments to each of Shah Jehan's four sons, all of whom assumed that the long-awaited succession battle was now imminent.
Each began to gather troops and to borrow money from usurers.
The first to make a move was Shah Shuja, the Emperor's second son and viceroy of Bengal.
Collecting a large army, he marched it across the width of northern India, supported on his flank by a flotilla of ships advancing slowly down the Ganges.
In a battle before the walls of Agra, Shah Shuja was defeated by the Imperial army commanded by Dara's twenty-five-year-old son, Sulaiman Shikoh.
Shah Jehan had now recovered from his illness and was able to move to Agra and join in the victory celebrations.
These festivities were, however, soon cut short when news arrived that the Emperor's third and fourth sons, Aurangzeb and Murad Baksh, had joined forces and were heading north.
Their army was about half the size of Dara's, although highly trained and confident.
But Aurangzeb was rarely prepared to rely on military prowess alone.
He opened up a correspondence with the more pliable officers among Dara's army and with promises of rewards secretly won over a sizeable proportion of his opponent's force.
Despite the April heat, the rebel army made fast progress through Central India and by the end of the month had reached a position near Ujjain.
Crossing the last barrier, a narrow but fast-flowing river, the rebel army drew up on the plain of Samugarh a few miles from Agra.
It was 29 May 1657.
Facing them were the battalions of Dara Shukoh, among them Dara's junior artilleryman Niccolao Manucci:
When placed in the field our army looked like a lovely city adorned with beautiful tents flying innumerable flags of all colours…
Prince Dara amidst his squadron appeared like a crystal tower, resplendent as a sun shining over the land.
All around him rode many squadrons of Rajput cavalry whose armour glittered from afar.
In front went many ferocious war elephants clad in shining steel with tusks encrusted with gold and silver.
The vast army numbered around 100,000 cavalry and 25,000 musketeers as well as divisions of war elephants and camel-artillery.
Nevertheless, for all the glitter and gold, Manucci was not overconfident: ‘The greater number of soldiers that Dara had enlisted were not very warlike; they were butchers, barbers, blacksmiths, carpenters, tailors and such like.
It is true that on their horses and with their arms they looked well at a review; but they knew nothing of war.’
The day of the battle dawned a hot May morning.
On the insistence of Khalil Ullah Khan, one of Aurangzeb's agents in the Imperial army, Dara made a decision to leave his strong defensive position and open the attack.
Soon after nine o'clock his army lumbered forward.
Aurangzeb's musketeers held their fire until the last minute, then discharged their entire artillery.
The Rajputs who had been in the lead took the full force of the barrage; the new conscripts behind them turned and fled.
But Dara did not waver.
He pressed on, encouraging his army from the top of his great caparisoned war elephant.
Around him the Rajputs regrouped.
The superior numbers of the Imperial army stood them in good stead: within a few minutes, Dara's forces had broken through the rebels' artillery and put to flight the infantry.
It was then that Aurangzeb's cunning saved the day for the rebels.
His agents within the Imperial army managed to assassinate three of Dara's generals as they sat exposed on their elephants.
One, Ram Singh Rathor, was controlling the left wing.
When his Rajputs saw that their leader had fallen, they began to give way.
Seeing his opportunity, Khalil Ullah Khan rode up to Dara and advised him to dismount from his war elephant and ride over to take charge of the wavering left wing.
In the panic of the moment, the prince agreed.
With Dara no longer visible on his elephant a rumour spread that he had been killed.
Aurangzeb seized the moment and pressed forward.
By noon, Dara's poorly disciplined troops had given way ‘like dark clouds blown by a high wind’.
The battle was lost.
Dara fled back to Agra and set off on the road to Delhi without daring to face his father.
On hearing the news of the battle, Shah Jehan prepared to ambush Aurangzeb as he entered the Agra Fort — but his plan was betrayed by Aurangzeb's sister and ally, Roshanara Begum.
The rebels besieged the fort, sent in troops to rescue Roshanara, then left the old monarch locked into the harem, a prisoner in his own palace.
Later, while the rebel army celebrated their victory, Aurangzeb invited Murad Baksh to his tent and there got him drunk.
When he had fallen asleep, Aurangzeb quietly chained up his brother in silver fetters and sent him off to Delhi in a covered elephant howdah.
On his arrival, Murad was thrown into a dungeon in Selimgarh, opposite the Red Fort.
There he was force-fed poppy-water, an extract of opium guaranteed to leave the drinker crippled and quite insane within the space of a few months.
In a brief campaign, Aurangzeb had seized the empire, imprisoned his father, and had begun hunting down and murdering his three brothers.
Now, although Shah Jehan still lived, Aurangzeb decided to have himself crowned.
For this ceremony he chose the beautiful pleasure garden of Shalimar, about five miles north of Old Delhi.
Although few Delhi-wallahs know of its existence, the garden of Shalimar still survives today.
I went there one spring evening with my diary under my arm, looking for a peaceful place to write.
Bernier describes Shalimar as ‘handsome and noble…although not to be compared to Fontainebleau, Saint Germain or Versailles.’
He is right: by both Mughal and French standards it is a large but hardly dramatic garden.
There is a single Shahjehani-style pavilion, a few dry water channels and fine surrounding wall.
But though simple, Shalimar is still very atmospheric: it is overgrown and forgotten, heavily haunted by djinns.
It is a good place to sit and watch the sun go down.
I came to the garden by way of the village which has grown up on its edge.
The villagers were sitting on their charpoys, sucking lengths of sugarcane.
One lady crouched under the leathery flanks of a water buffalo, gently pulling at the beast's udders, shooting warm jets of frothy milk into a battered tin pail.
Nearby, a cart horse had just been released from its harness and was busy munching at its fodder; the up-ended cart stood to one side.
I wound my way  through this village scene, then quite suddenly I was no longer in an Indian village, but instead in a Mughal garden.
The dusty cart-track had become a lawn; the village houses had given way to straight, symmetrical lines of bottle-palms; in the borders the lilies and irises were in full bloom — wonderful swathes of azure and magenta leading on into the char-bagh.
I realized then quite what an intrusion any Mughal garden is into the Indian scene.
Hindus revere nature but never feel any need to marshal or mould it into a design of their own: a banyan tree will almost be encouraged to spread its drooping creepers into the middle of any village market, or to block any backwoods track.
It is revered for itself; however it develops, that end is regarded as a sort of perfection.
As in nature, so in architecture: Hindu palaces seem to grow organically of their own will: a hall here, a shrine there, a sudden inexplicable curve in the curtain wall somewhere else.
The Muslim tradition is quite different.
Inheriting the Greek love of order and logic, Islamic gardens — like their buildings — are regimented into lines of perfect symmetry; balance and design is all; nothing is left to impulse or chance.
With these qualities, the Mughal gardens dotted around the subcontinent are as alien to the Indian environment as the Brighton Pavilion is to the English south coast, or the Chinese Pagoda to Kew.
Outside the garden, all is delightful chaos; inside, reflecting the central concept of Islam, spontaneity is crushed by submission to a higher order.
as if they had subconsciously realized this, a little party of Muslims had taken up their station on a carpet by the edge of the garden.
Here an elderly mullah was nodding his turban as he instructed a party of young novices on the Koran and the Hadiths, the sayings of the Prophet.
Books were spread out on the ground.
The murmur of chanting voices carried above the far-distant thunder of the Grand Trunk Road, the old Mughal highway linking the farms of the Punjab with the bazaars of Delhi.
In the undergrowth around them, village women were heading back home, carrying on their heads great bundles of firewood for their cooking-hearths.
There was that all-pervasive evening scent of cut grass and jasmine.
I came across the garden's central pavilion quite by chance, stumbling on it as I followed a dried water-course.
It is now so overgrown with vines and creepers that it has half returned to the jungle.
The plasterwork has peeled to reveal the red sandstone underneath; and in places that sandstone has in turn crumbled away to reveal the intricate brickwork that lies at the core of the structure.
As the sun began to go down, I wandered happily through the ruins until I came across a band of Timurid star-vaulting in one of the side chambers.
Here a few fragments of painted stucco still remained and on these were painted a tangle of trailing flowers: roses, tulips and irises, some cut, some growing from the ground, others emerging from cornucopias — ancient symbols of fertility and plenty, merging and tangling with the real creepers of the jungle.
Perhaps partly because of the decay, the garden had retained the atmosphere of enclosure and secrecy — that feeling of shutting out the world beyond — essential to any walled pleasure garden.
It was just this conspiratorial atmosphere that Roshanara Bagh and the Red Fort both now lack.
I walked on, past mango trees, sisam and jamun to the garden wall.
This faces out on to a flooded water meadow full of grazing buffaloes.
An elderly herder in white pyjamas was sitting to one side.
Around him swooped two hoopoes.
It was spring and the hoopoes were dipping and diving, circling each other, so that the black and white of their zebra-underwings melted into the scarlet of their crests.
Behind me, over by the pavilion, the colour on the red-stone pillars grew more vivid as the evening light slipped down their sides.
Suddenly there was a loud screech, and on the roof a wild peacock appeared.
I opened my diary and started scribbling.
But as I sat with my legs dangling over the edge, looking out on to the quiet water meadow, the anarchy of Delhi seemed far away and I began to see why in all the most sensible cultures, Paradise was envisaged as a walled pleasure garden.
Before I came to India, I had not realized that the English word ‘paradise’ was borrowed from the ancient Persian words pairi (around) and daeza (a wall).
The word was brought west by Xenophon, who introduced it into Greek when describing the fabulous garden built by the Persian Emperor Cyrus at Sardis; from the Greek paradeisoi it passed into Latin as paradisum; and hence into Middle English as paradis.
Now, sitting in the Shalimar Garden, it was very easy to see why the Persian word for an enclosed garden had become an English synonym for bliss.
The day after the Shalimar crowning ceremony, Aurangzeb again gathered his army and headed north after Dara Shukoh.
But it was not until August 1659, a year and a half after Dara's defeat, that Aurangzeb finally captured him.
Fleeing across the western deserts, abandoned by all but his immediate family, Dara was eventually betrayed by Jiwan Khan, a local chieftain whom Dara had personally saved from death only a few years before.
Like Murad before him, Dara was seized, manacled and sent to Delhi in a closed howdah.
Just before he entered the city, he was transferred to a ‘miserable and worn out animal, covered with filth’.
Holding his young son in front of him in a sort of cruel parody of his wedding procession, he was humiliatingly marched publicly down the full length of the new Chandni Chowk.
Bernier, who was in Delhi that day, witnessed the procession.
Dara was dressed in ‘dirty cloth of the coarsest texture, and his sorry turban was wrapped around with a muffler like that worn by the meanest of people.’
Half-way down the great boulevard a fakir shouted up to Dara that previously he had always been generous to the poor; but now he understood that Dara had nothing to give.
Hearing the man, Dara stripped off his sackcloth cloak and threw it down.
But Aurangzeb's troops forbade the holy man to accept the gift.
Dara, they said, no longer had any right to give anything to anyone.
A few days later a group of nobles keen to impress Aurangzeb broke into the quarters where Dara was being kept, a small garden outside the walls of Shahjehanabad towards Nizamuddin.
Dara seized a kitchen knife and tried to defend himself, but the thugs overpowered him.
They threw him to the ground and beheaded him in front of his son.
The prince's head was cleaned, wrapped in a turban and presented to Aurangzeb on a golden dish.
The new Emperor called for lights, examined the face, then thrust at it three times with a sword.
He said: ‘Behold the face of a would-be king  and Emperor of all the Mughal realms.
Take him out of my sight.’
No one was more pleased about Dara's demise than Roshanara Begum.
She had begged Aurangzeb not to spare Dara, and now that she heard of his end she threw a great party in the Imperial harem.
At this gathering she persuaded Aurangzeb that it would be an amusing joke to send the head to their father in his palace-prison in Agra.
It was duly dispatched the following morning with Aurangzeb's chief eunuch, I'tibar Khan.
‘[The eunuch]waited until the hour Shah Jehan had sat down to dinner,’ wrote Manucci.
When he had begun to eat, I'tibar Khan entered with the box and laid it before the unhappy father, saying: ‘King Aurangzeb, your son sends this plat to your majesty to let you see that he does not forget you.’
The old Emperor said: ‘Blessed be God that my son still remembers me.’
The box having been placed upon the table, he ordered it with great eagerness to be opened.
But on withdrawing the lid, he discovered the face of Prince Dara.
Horrified, he uttered a cry and fell on his hands and face upon the table, and, striking against the golden vessels, broke some of his teeth and lay there apparently lifeless.
Jahanara Begum and the other women present began to wail, beat their breasts, tear their hair and rend their garments…
But the eunuch I'tibar Khan made a report to King Aurangzeb of what had passed, with all the details, whereby he and Roshanara Begum received great delight.
The unnatural act of Dara's murder and the treacherous overthrow of Shah Jehan acted like a curse upon Delhi.
Never again did it match that apex of prosperity that it reached during the brief nine years that Shah Jehan ruled from the Red Fort.
Aurangzeb spent as little time as possible in the city, preferring to continue his campaigns from Aurangabad, his own foundation in the Deccan.
Delhi had lived by the court and when the court disappeared, the city emptied like a basin of water whose plug had been removed.
Travellers began to describe the city as being like a ghost town: ‘The city appears to be a desert when the King is absent,’ wrote the French traveller Jean de Thevenot.
‘If there have been four hundred thousand Men in it when the King was there, there hardly remains the sixth part in his absence.’
But it was not just the absence of the Emperor.
Aurangzeb's rule proved harsh and repressive.
Spies were everywhere; men never knew whom they could trust.
All the things that had made Delhi an amusing and lively city were one by one forbidden.
Dancing women and courtesans were forced to marry.
Prostitution was banned, as was wine-drinking, hashish-smoking and the playing of music.
More serious were Aurangzeb's actions against non-Muslims.
His fundamentalist outlook led him to destroy Hindu temples across the empire.
He imposed a special tax on all Hindus and executed Guru Teg Bahadur, the ninth of the great teachers of the Sikhs.
The religious wounds he opened up have never again entirely healed; but at the time they literally tore the country in two.
From the fissures between the two religions, there emerged whispers of sorcery, of strange  succubuses , of unrest among the city's djinns.
In the wilds of Rajasthan a naked army of shaven-headed Hindu sadhus was rumoured to be marching on Delhi, led by an old sorceress.
Early reports had the sadhus sweeping the Mughal army in front of them — until, so it was said, Aurangzeb deployed strange magic against them.
It was the golden age of the fakirs.
Their activity amazed and baffled even the sceptical Bernier: ‘They tell any person his thoughts, cause the branch of a tree to blossom and to bear fruit within an hour, hatch an egg in their bosom within fifteen minutes, producing what ever bird may be demanded, and make it fly around the room.’
Later, when Aurangzeb ordered the decapitation of the naked fakir Sarmad, an Armenian Jew who had converted to Islam, the sage allegedly picked up his head and walked up the steps of the Jama Masjid.
There he said a final set of prayers before departing to the heavens.
Meanwhile in the court, the dam-burst of treachery unleashed by Aurangzeb left the principal players wading deeper and deeper into the darkness.
Roshanara Begum, the Lady Macbeth of Delhi, had taken over the position vacated by Jahanara Begum: chief of the Imperial Harem.
She gathered about her a vast retinue and used to enjoy making pompous processions through the streets of  Delhi.
But then, during the monsoon of 1661, she made her fatal mistake.
Aurangzeb had been struck down with a fever, and it was believed that he was beyond recovery.
Believing this to be the case, Roshanara stole the Imperial seal and used it to forge an order that proclaimed Aurangzeb's nine-year-old youngest son to be the next Emperor in preference to the rightful heir.
This switch was intended to enable Roshanara to retain her influence by stepping in as the child's regent.
But at this awkward moment, Aurangzeb suddenly recovered.
He discovered from his eunuchs what Roshanara had been up to, and, despite her support for him over many years, he disgraced her.
Later, after she was caught red-handed in an orgy with nine lovers in her Red Fort harem apartments, Aurangzeb arranged for his sister to be discreetly poisoned.
She died in great pain, ‘swollen out like a hogshead, leaving behind her the name of great lasciviousness’.
She was buried under the pavilion she had built in the Roshanara Gardens.
With his sister poisoned, Aurangzeb was now able to trust no one.
In his old age he marched to and fro, viciously putting down rebellions, trying to impose his harsh regime on his unwilling subjects.
On his death in 1707 the empire fragmented.
Yet the Mughal line never quite died out.
‘It was all great-grandfather Aurangzeb's fault,’ said Pakeezah Sultan Begum, rearranging her cardigan.
‘If it wasn't for him we'd still have the empire.’
The Crown Princess angrily seized a book held out by one of the other staff at the library.
‘Please be stamping this for me, Highness.’
Pakeezah Begum took the plastic stamp, wetted it on the ink-pad and firmly stamped the return-by date on the leaf at the front.
‘Tell the boy to bring this back on the 20th of March or there will be a fine of five rupees.’
The woman took the book and moved away, but the Princess had not finished: ‘Oh, and Mrs Bannerji?’ she said.
‘Please bring me some more tea.
These cups are both stone cold.’
Mrs Bannerji nervously took the cups and muttered an apology: ‘Sorry, Highness.’
‘They know who I am, so these people give me respect,’ said Pakeezah when Mrs Bannerji had disappeared.
‘We are colleagues and we are working together.
But they know my ancestral chain so they are not trying it on too much.’
‘Do many people in Delhi know who you are?’
I asked.
‘The old Delhi-wallahs know.
Also some other people guess.
Last weekend I went to a wedding and one lady came up and said: ‘You are different from these people.’
I was not wearing any special clothes, but this lady — she was from an old Lucknow family could see by my manners that I was not a common person.’
Pakeezah nodded her head: ‘I find it is the little things which give you away if you are royalty: how you eat, how you talk, how you welcome people.
Small and subtle things.
But important.
Although we now live with the common people we don't have their habits.’
Mrs Bannerji brought two new cups of tea and placed them beside Pakeezah Begum's big, black bakelite telephone.
Pakeezah thanked her: ‘Now that's what I call a nice cup of tea,’ she said.
‘Do you think you would have made a good Empress?’
I asked, nibbling a biscuit.
‘If I was Empress I would be a constitutional Empress only,’ said Pakeezah, drawing herself up.
‘I would be like your Queen: not having so much power but maintaining my dignity and status.
Probably I would have an elected Prime Minister beneath me,’ she said.
‘Democracy is a good thing for modern times.’
Pakeezah looked at her watch: it was just after five o'clock.
She said: ‘We can't talk here — library is closing now.
Perhaps you would come to my home.
Then you could meet my mother.
She knows our family history better than I.’
The Princess gathered her things together and wrapped a tatty shawl over her sari and cardigan.
I followed her as she waddled out of the library.
‘Whatever glory my ancestors had,’ she continued, ‘that is gone now.
My family should accept that fact.
We have no official royal status.
We have nothing.’
We wandered past the Delhi Gate and on through the crumbling streets of Old Delhi; as we went, Pakeezah stared sadly around her.
‘Look what this so-called government has done to my city,’ she muttered.
‘My ancestors built the most beautiful city in the world.
They had the finest food, the finest way of living, the most lovely gardens, the finest dress.
Everything was perfect in Delhi when they were ruling.
Now no one is maintaining anything.
These people have become so careless.
They are not proud of their past.’
We turned off the main road at the Faiz Bazaar and wandered through dirty back lanes towards Daryaganj.
‘This area used to contain big havelis,’ explained Pakeezah.
‘It was the home of all the great omrahs and poets from my ancestor's court.
So many famous families used to be living here.
Now working-class people from all-over have come in.
Naturally their way of living is very different from ours.’
A squatting beggar wailed at us from his place beside an open sewer.
Pakeezah Begum frowned.
‘I think we should move to another area, but my mother says the family should stay here.
Daryaganj is near the Fort.
My mother says if we can't live inside the Fort at least we should live in its suburbs.’
The house consisted of a small corner of an old, much-partitioned haveli.
It had a little courtyard off which led three simple, whitewashed rooms.
In one of these, perched on a bedstead, sat the senior-most descendant of Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Babur and Shah Jehan.
She had been paralysed for thirty years.
For all this time the bedstead had been her throne.
Beneath it, two geese were pecking at some grain.
Sahabzadi Qamar Sultan, born in the first year of the twentieth century, was wrapped up in an all-enveloping white salwar kameez.
She chewed paan from an elaborately incised silver box.
She was very old and very deaf.
Her old-fashioned courtly Urdu was difficult to understand and her daughter translated for me.
‘He's writing a book about our Delhi,’ Pakeezah shouted into her mother's ear.
‘I'm sorry?’ whispered the old woman.
Pakeezah repeated what she had said.
This time the old Princess smiled and said something to her daughter.
‘She says welcome.
May God bless you and may you have a long life.’
‘Thank you,’ I said.
‘May your mother also have a long life.’
‘She's already ninety-one,’ said Pakeezah.
I asked exactly how they were related to the Great Moguls.
I had expected the women to be fairly distant cousins of the Emperors.
I was quite wrong.
According to the old Princess, she was the granddaughter of Fateh-ul-Mulk, the heir apparent of the last Mogul Emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafur II.
Fateh-ul-Mulk had been poisoned in a court intrigue well before 1857, but his six-year-old son, the Princess's father, had survived both this and the Mutiny.
When the British took the Old City after the  Siege of Delhi, the child had been smuggled out of the fort and hidden in the jungle around Mehrauli.
Later, when tempers had cooled, her father, Mirza Farkunda Zamal, had been awarded a pension by the penitent British authorities; he was even given a seat of honour at the first Delhi Durbar in 1877.
According to my scribbled sums, the old Princess would have been conceived when her father was forty-nine.
‘Neither my brothers or sister or I have any children,’ said Pakeezah when her mother had finished telling the story.
‘Our only nephew died of typhoid thirty years ago.
He was just fourteen.
When we pass away the direct line will end.’
‘Does your mother not have any brothers or sisters?’
I asked.
‘She had a younger sister.
She was extremely beautiful, but she had no children because she was married to a djinn.’
‘You're being serious?’
‘Of course.
My aunt was satisfied with her djinn and refused to marry.
They lived together in their own apartment.
The djinn used to support her — to give her money and so on.’
‘Could anyone else see this djinn?’
‘No, but my mother could see the presents the djinn brought her.’
‘You really believe this?’
I asked.
‘Why not?’ said Pakeezah Begum.
We talked of Partition and the how the old princess had thrown the last family heirlooms — a series of beautiful inlaid jade daggers down the haveli well, in case the police arrested them for possessing offensive weapons.
We talked of the old Princess's meeting with Jawaharlal Nehru when he whispered into her ear: ‘Sister, if ever you need anything, just let me know.’
We talked of the hard times after Independence, of how the old princess had refused to take the charity of the government.
After this, Pakeezah's brothers went   to Pakistan while her younger sister emigrated to England: she now lived in Wembley where her husband worked in a biscuit factory making shortbread.
And we talked of the Red Fort and how Pakeezah had cried the first time she went around it as a schoolgirl.
‘In the fort I saw the finest set of buildings in the world — but no one was caring for them.
They were all falling apart.
My ancestors brought such sophisticated culture to India — but they have just let it disintegrate.
In time it will just disappear and no one will ever know.’
It was getting late and the old Princess was visibly tiring.
It was time for me to go.
I said my goodbyes to the head of the House of Timur; Pakeezah offered to lead me back through the labyrinth of Daryaganj to the Faiz Bazaar.
As we walked she told me how she had always resisted her brother's attempts to persuade her to emigrate to Pakistan.
‘I always felt Pakistan would be a very unstable country,’ said Pakeezah.
‘And anyway.
My sixth sense told me to stay here.
Delhi is our home.’
She shrugged: ‘For all its faults we love this city.’
Then, after a pause, she added: ‘After all, we built it.’
EIGHT
AS SOON AS YOU AWOKE you knew it was going to be hot.
The sun had just appeared over the treeline, as blond as clarified butter but powerful none the less, hinting at the furnace-heat to come.
Soon the kites were circling the thermals, a great helix of wide-winged birds sailing the vectors in sweeping corkscrew spirals.
By late morning the air was on fire; to open the door on to the roof terrace was to feel in your face a blast of heat as strong as that from a blazing kiln.
Noon came like a white midnight: the streets were deserted, the windows closed, the doors locked.
There was no noise but for the sullen and persistent whirr of the ceiling fans.
The heat had sprung up quite suddenly: the change from late winter to high summer — six months of European weather — was compressed into little more than a Delhi fortnight.
The previous autumn, the muggy monsoon heat had begun to diminish on the very day following the festival of Dusshera.
In the same way the change of season and the onset of the sledgehammer-heat of summer was exactly marked by another Hindu holiday — the spring festival of Holi.
One day everyone was laughing and singing in the Delhi gardens, covering each other with pink powder and coloured Holi-water; the next they had imprisoned themselves in the silent air-conditioned purdah of their bedrooms and offices, waiting patiently for the reprieve of evening.
The rising mercury changed everything.
In the gardens the annuals shrivelled and died.
The earth cracked; the lawns became  bald and bleached.
The tar on the roads glistened like liquid quicksilver.
People became tired and listless.
Fruit decayed: an uneaten mango, firm at breakfast, could be covered with a thin lint of mould by evening.
Water shot boiling from the cold taps.
There was no relief except to shower with bottles of cold water from Mrs Puri's fridge.
Added to the morning procession of salesmen were melon sellers and juice boys, cool water vendors (50 paise a glass) and great caravans of ice cream wallahs.
In the Old City men set up small roadside stalls around big red earthenware pots containing jal jeera, a dark, spicy, green liquid which burns the mouth but cools the body: a more primitive yet more effective coolant than anything on offer in the new town.
Unconsciously, we adapted our routine to suit the new conditions.
We rose at five-thirty and breakfasted outside on fresh mangoes.
After a light lunch we would siesta in our bedroom, and not emerge until sunset.
The balmy evenings were the compensation for the unpleasantness of the day.
At six p.m. we would call Mr Singh to take us to swim in one of the hotel pools or maybe to wander among the old tombs in the Lodhi Gardens; as we passed, black bats would flit through the ruins like departed spirits.
Later we would sit outside on the terrace reading and drinking cold beer by candlelight; translucent green geckos would hoover up the mosquitoes from around the flames as we read.
Sometimes, on the nights when there were power cuts and the ceiling fans ceased to whirr, we would drag our mattresses outside and sleep under the stars.
As the sun grew more fierce, our complexions darkened and Olivia's freckles sprang into prominence.
I thought them beautiful, but they clearly alarmed Mr Singh who was not used to my wife's Celtic colouring.
One morning, while driving through the Old City, he turned quite suddenly into the Meena Bazaar near the Jama Masjid.
Without any explanation, he jumped out and approached one of the Ayurvedic healers who for centuries have sat on the roadside here, surrounded by the ingredients of their trade: live iguanas whose fried juices are said to cure impotence; ginseng for philtres used to spread or extinguish the fires of love; tree bark to  ward off a woman's menopause; the bringraj herb from the high Himalayas said to conquer baldness or thicken the beard of the most effete Sikh.
As I sat in the hot taxi I could see Balvinder Singh haggling with one of the healers.
Eventually Balvinder handed over a pocketful of change and the healer gave him a small pot of white powder.
On returning to the car, to my surprise Balvinder solemnly handed the pot to me.
‘For madam,’ he said earnestly.
‘Thank you,’ I said.
‘But what is it?’
‘Medicine,’ said Balvinder.
‘To cure Mrs William.’
‘Of what?’
‘Her face,’ said Balvinder, drumming his fingers on his cheekbones.
‘This powder will cure Madam's pox.’
He pointed to the sky: ‘Indian sun.
Very bad for Britisher ladies.’
I looked baffled; my friend looked embarrassed.
‘Sahib,’ he whispered.
‘This powder will make Mrs William's skin white again.’
One evening in mid-April, Dr Jaffery and I were walking down the Chandni Chowk heading towards the doctor's rooms in the Ghazi-ud-Din Medresse.
It was the end of Ramadan and the Old City, funereal for the last month, had sprung back to life with a vengeance.
Fairy lights were hung over many of the mosques and houses.
As we walked we had to negotiate our way through thick crowds clustering around the sweet shops and the sewing machines of the derzis (tailors):
‘This is the day we call al-vida,’ said Dr Jaffery.
‘It means ‘the goodbye’.
It is the last Friday of our fast.’
We passed Gunthe Wallah's, the old Mughal sweet shop, once so legend has it — patronized by Shah Jehan's chief elephant.
The elephant had been leading a procession down the Chandni Chowk but had halted outside Gunthe Wallah's and had refused to move on towards the Red Fort, despite the frantic proddings of its mahout, until it was first allowed to consume a box of Gunthe Wallah's best mithai.
Now, although there were no signs of any elephants, the    shop was besieged by crowds of equally persistent villagers competing with each other to be served.
To help cope with the demand, the shop assistants had arranged a line of trestles outside the shop, each one piled high with the Gunthe Wallah's stickiest and most sickly sweets.
Nearby other shops had set up trestles loaded with silk saris and embroidered salwars, high-heeled shoes and embroidered mosque hats, trinkets and bracelets, jewellery and decorations.
The owners of the roadside dhabas had placed steaming cauldrons full of saffron-coloured biryani rice outside their doors; from inside came wafts of grilling kebabs.
To one side, a Sikh was doing a roaring trade in posters of Saddam Hussein.
Despite the Iraqi president's failure to win the Gulf War, Saddam was still regarded as something of a hero by the Delhi Muslims, although this failed to explain why the pin-up most popular in the city was that which showed Saddam dressed in full Austrian costume: lederhosen, braces, Tyrolean hat, knobbly knees and all.
Dr Jaffery and I passed by a cluster of black-chadored ladies spooning ice cream under their veils.
‘Today all the village people come into Delhi to buy presents for Id,’ said the doctor.
‘For us it is like your Christmas Eve.
The feast will probably be held tomorrow.’
‘Why only probably?’
I asked.
‘It depends on the moon,’ replied the doctor.
‘Tonight the Moon Committee will meet in the Jama Masjid.
If they judge that the New Moon can be clearly seen, then it will be Id.
If not — if there is too much cloud cover-we will have to fast for one more day.
–
After the hot, dusty bustle of the Chandni Chowk, Dr Jaffery's simple white cell was marvellously cool and welcoming.
The thick stone walls, the domed ceiling and the bamboo blinds on the arched windows controlled the temperature as efficiently as any air conditioning system.
After Dr Jaffery had finished his evening prayers we ate a simple iftar together: dates, grapes and a plate of curried lamb.
As we ate, Dr Jaffery promised to give me a ring the following morning to confirm that the festival was going to be celebrated.
‘And if it is cancelled?’
‘Then I will not ring,’ said the doctor, raising his eyebrows.
‘Do  you not know the story of the Persian warrior who was marching to battle?’
‘I don't,’ I said.
‘Tell me.’
‘The warrior was carrying a bow but no arrows.
On the road he met a friend who asked why he had not brought any ammunition.
‘How will you fight?’ asked his friend.
‘I will use the arrows sent by the enemy,’’ he replied.
‘But what if no arrow comes?’
‘Then,’ replied the bowman, ‘there will be no war.’
In the same way, if there is no call from me there will be no Id prayers.’
While we were talking, from outside in the courtyard there came the sudden sound of excited shouting.
We left our food and went to the door.
On the opposite side of the quadrangle, silhouetted figures were standing on the roofs, whooping and jumping about.
One figure was letting off a Roman candle.
‘What's happening?’
I asked.
‘Look!’ said Dr Jaffery.
‘Over there!
The new moon.’
I looked in the direction Dr Jaffery was pointing.
There, suspended just above the domes and minarets of the old city, a perfect silver crescent could be seen shining out over the rooftops.
‘The fast is over,’ said Dr Jaffery.
‘Everyone will be relieved.
Although —’ and here he lowered his voice ‘— a few of the more pious mullahs will pretend to weep and to be unhappy.
They will say ‘Ramadan is the month of blessings.
Now the angels will not bless us for another year.’
But secretly these people will be happy, too.
No one likes to fast.’
The following morning there was a cool breeze blowing down from the hills; the sky was the colour of attar of roses.
Woken by Dr Jaffery's dawn call, I went to see the Id prayers at the Jama Masjid.
Mr Singh and i drove through the wide streets of New Delhi, empty now but for a few pilgrims washing under the public pumps near the shrine of Nizamuddin.
We headed up the Ring Road towards Old Delhi, and as we drove the avenues began to fill with bicycle rickshaws, all heading in the same direction.
By the time we reached the Red Fort we had hit a traffic jam.
It was barely six in the morning.
Leaving Mr Singh near the Fort, I jumped out and joined the throng of figures, all dressed in new white homespun.
All the ages of man and all the races of Islam seemed to be  represented: mustachioed Arabs, dark-skinned Somalis, small South Indians in lungis, huge Delhi businessmen bulging out of their pyjamas, prodigiously bearded Afghans swathed in shawls like Old Testament prophets — all of them surging up through the Meena Bazaar towards the Jama Masjid steps.
As they walked, some threw Id alms to the cripples, lepers and Bangladeshi refugees who lined the way like a guard of honour, palms extended, heads bowed.
As you passed you could hear them murmuring ‘Ya Allah!
Ya Allah!’
Mixed in with the beggars sat the occasional hawker eager to empty his stock of mosque caps or rosary beads before the holy month had ended.
The tide of Muslims washed on, up into the mosque.
We had all arrived early — the prayers were not due to start for another half-hour — but already the vast courtyard was three-quarters full.
Seven or eight thousand figures had taken up position kneeling on prayer carpets, so that as you walked in through the great red-stone gate you were confronted by rank upon rank of white-clad backs topped with brightly coloured turbans or embroidered mosque-caps.
To get a better view, I climbed the narrow staircase leading to the balcony at the top of the east wall.
This platform was also fast filling up, but I managed to edge my way along the wall-walk to the shade of a chattri at the south-east corner.
Here, a group of young Muslim girls in new mirror-work costumes were sitting cross-legged under the watchful eye of their father; each one wore a tinsel hairband plaited into her pigtails.
Choosing a space on the edge of the wall, a respectful distance apart from the girls, I dangled my legs over the edge and took in the spectacle unfolding below.
I have always thought that Hinduism is at its most sympathetic and comprehensible in the countryside: a simple roadside shrine, a sacred river, a holy spring — these things are the life-blood of that great religion.
In the same way, Islam has always been an urban faith, ill at ease with the wilderness; its civilization has always flourished most successfully in the labyrinths of the ancient bazaar towns of the East.
Certainly there can be no doubt that Islam looks at its most impressive in a great urban cathedral mosque, especially on an occasion like Id.
From all directions people were still pouring out of the maze of the Old City and heading towards one of the three gates of the Jama  Masjid — three seething crocodiles of humanity heading towards the same walled courtyard.
Within minutes the last remaining areas of pink stone flooring were covered with bodies and had turned homespun-white.
The mosque was now packed full, but still crowds were pouring in.
Finding the courtyard full, latecomers were taking up their stations in perfectly straight ranks first on the steps, then in the roads leading up to the mosque, then out in the gardens and bazaars beyond.
Five minutes before the prayers were due to start, the waves had nearly stilled.
Twenty or thirty thousand people were kneeling down facing westwards, patiently waiting for the final prayers of Ramadan.
Had I taken up my station on the same day two, three or even four hundred years earlier the same spectacle would have presented itself, completely unchanged.
Then the Imam began to speak.
For thirty minutes Imam Bukhari — the direct descendant of the mullah Shah Jehan called from Bukhara to inaugurate his new mosque on 23 July 1656 — addressed the faithful through the minaret's loudspeakers.
His Urdu was difficult to understand, but his message was clearly political — there were frequent references to America, Israel, Kashmir and Rajiv Gandhi.
Overhead, flights of pigeons wheeled through the minarets, cutting over the heads of the congregation towards the Red Fort.
One of the girls beside me began to fidget, and her father tried to retain her interest by pointing out Delhi landmarks visible from our turret.
Bukhari reached his climax and, with a final burst of electronic feedback, the sermon rasped to a close.
Then the prayers began.
The congregation stood up and raised their open palms to their ears.
They bent double, and from the front prayer aisle came the distant cry: Allah hu-Akbar!
God is Great!
Bismillah e rehman e rahim!
In the name of God most generous and merciful!
The faithful knelt down and placed their heads on the ground: La Allah illah Allah, Muhammad Resul-allah!
There is no God but God and Muhammad is the Seat of God!
Over and over again, for twenty-five minutes, the heads rose and fell before the final triumphant cry of Allah hu-Akbar!
Then, to mark the end of the service, three enormous thunder-flashes were let off in the rear gatehouse.
The sound ricocheted off the walls of the Red Fort and echoed back; a plume of purple smoke rose into the morning air.
Everyone stood up.
The worshippers headed off in their own directions, and the ordered chequerboard shattered.
Suddenly patches of pink sandstone were again visible in the courtyard.
The crowd flowed out through the gates and the pink patches grew.
All around, men were embracing and wishing each other‘Id Mubarak.’
The little girls in my chattri were standing expectantly around their father who was distributing Idi-their long-awaited Id pocket money.
Below, in the Meena Bazaar, the dhabas had begun to fill with feasting families, all wolfing down piles of biryani rice, extra-large cajra puris and a special Id sweet named peni (made with minced carrots but surprisingly tasty.)
I sat in a dhaba in the shade of a tarpaulin, nibbling Id sweets and watching the festive crowds milling all around me.
It was only nine o'clock.
But already it was becoming unbearably hot.
During the sweltering Id of 1333, a camel caravan could be seen winding its way through the narrow passes and defiles of the Hindu Kush.
On the principal camel sat an irascible Muslim judge.
He had been travelling for eight years and was now heading south towards Delhi, the capital of the Sultan of Hindustan.
Sheikh Abu Abdullah Muhammed ibn Abdallah ibn Muhammed ibn Ibrahim al-Lawati, known to his friends by the diminutive Ibn Battuta, had left his birthplace of Tangier in the early June of 1325.
He was then only twenty-one, a callow aristocrat fresh from law school.
Resolving to ‘quit all my friends and tear myself away from my home’, he headed off along the North African coast in the direction of Mecca, driven onwards by what he described as ‘an overmastering impulse from within'.
At the beginning of his journey he suffered badly from homesickness.
‘I set out alone,’ he wrote, ‘finding no companion to cheer the way with friendly intercourse, and no party of travellers with whom to associate myself.’
By the time he arrived in Tunis he was so ‘affected by loneliness that I could not restrain my tears and wept bitterly.’
Since then, however, the Moroccan had completed his pilgrimage and visited Palestine, East Africa, Khorasan and Byzantium.
He had married several times, bought himself a small harem of slave girls, and gained a reputation as a traveller and a teller of interesting tales.
No longer was Ibn Battuta inexperienced or vulnerable.
Instead his diaries had begun to assume something of the knowingness of incipient middle age; at times, indeed, he was in danger of becoming priggish and opinionated.
As with many later European voyagers, travel in this part of the world, far from broadening the mind, seemed instead to lead to a blanket distrust of anyone of a different creed, colour or class.
Thus while Ibn Battuta was tolerably enamoured of a pretty Greek slave girl he had bought in Ephesus, he wrote that the filthy freedmen of her accursed race were ‘swine eaters’, drinkers of intoxicating liquors and ‘enemies of Allah’.
Provincial Muslims, so he discovered to his horror, could sometimes behave almost as badly.
The beautiful and promiscuous Muslim women of the Maldives, for example, he thought shockingly immodest, and though Battuta frequently ‘ordered them to wear clothes…
I met with little success.’
China was even worse: ‘I was sorely grieved that heathendom had so strong a hold over [this rich country],’ he wrote after a few weeks in Qanjanfu.
‘Whenever I went out of my house I used to see any number of revolting things.
It distressed me so much that I used to keep indoors and go out only in case of necessity.’
Expecting little good to come out of any country even partially populated by non-Muslims, Ibn Battuta had few expectations of India.
The Hindus, he knew, at least refrained from eating pigs (unlike the Chinese or the disgusting Christians of Byzantium), but he had heard that they had other habits the very thought of which made him swoon.
‘The Hindus venerate oxen,’ he wrote, ‘and it is said that they actually drink the oxen's urine when they fall sick.’
Later, on witnessing a sati (the immolation of a Hindu widow), Ibn Battuta was so shocked he nearly fell off his camel.
As he rode down the narrow goat-trails of the Khyber Pass, Battuta would have known that the Delhi Sultanate was violent frontier country, constantly in a state of war with the pagan Mongols to the north and the infidel Hindus to the south.
In this connection he mentions one of his friends, Malik Warna, who chose to move to India from the then far more peaceful and civilized country of Afghanistan.
Battuta clearly thought his decision extra  ordinary: ‘Warna was an excellent man, with a liking for hunting, falcons, horses, slaves, servants and rich and kingly robes…
Of course India is no place for a man of his character.’
‘A man is honoured in that country,’ he continues, ‘according to what may be seen of his actions, conduct and zeal, since no one in India knows anything of family or lineage.’
It was, in short, no place for a gentlemen.
But more worrying even than India's lack of blue-blooded Arab families, was the prospect of its tyrannical Sultan, the blood-thirsty parricide Muhammed bin Tughluk.
Stories of Tughluk's excesses were common across the width of Asia.
A Chancellor of the Exchequer who had failed to prevent thieves penetrating his treasury was summarily beaten to death.
A mystic who refused to retract a statement accusing Tughluk of tyranny had his mouth held open by skewers while excrement was poured down his throat.
Worst of all was the fate that befell a captured rebel general: he was flayed alive ‘and when he had been flayed his flesh was cooked with rice and sent to his sons and family.’
Ibn Battuta soon felt the deadening hand of Tughluk's rule.
Having passed from the Mediterranean to the Indus without attracting the attention of a single government official, Battuta, like so many subsequent travellers, crossed the Indian frontier only to find himself caught up in an impenetrable web of bureaucracy: no sooner had they set foot on the east bank of the Indus than intelligence officials ‘wrote to Delhi informing the king of our arrival and giving him all the details concerning us.’
The traveller was then grilled by the corrupt Indian border officials: ‘Their custom was to take a quarter of everything brought in by the merchants and to exact a duty of seven dinars for every horse.’
None of this was at all to the Moroccan's taste: ‘The idea of having my baggage searched was most disagreeable to me.
There was nothing valuable in it, though it seemed a great deal in the eyes of these people.’
Battuta put up with all this for he had reason to believe that the Sultan would amply reward him for his efforts.
Delhi may have been a relatively unsophisticated frontier town, a vast barracks-metropolis built to defend Islam's boundary with the Mongols and Hindus, but it was still very much a land of opportunity: an  ambitious Muslim could achieve great wealth and prominence there in very little time.
Ibn Battuta was always one to try his luck.
After all, as he wrote in his diary: ‘Muhammed bin Tughluk was especially well known in his generosity to foreigners for he preferred them to the peoples of India.
He singles them out for favour…[especially]Arabs for whom he has a particular affection.’
Formalities completed, Battuta again mounted his camel.
Beating off an ambush by ‘eighty infidels on foot’, he and his train headed off on the last stage of his journey through the burning plains of the Punjab towards the mighty Indian capital and the palace of the Sultan.
Few maps of modern Delhi bother to mark Begampur.
It lies engulfed amid the new colonies that have recently sprung up along the way to Mehrauli, a small enclave of mud-walled, flat-roofed village life besieged by a ring of high-rise apartments.
The smart metalled road which links the new colonies to Aurobindo Marg gives out a few hundred feet before you get to the village.
Bouncing along the rubble track, you arrive in the midst of a dust storm of your own creation.
I saw Begampur for the first time on a hot evening in early May.
As the dust began to subside, shafts of late afternoon light could be seen raking down the village streets.
Beyond the flour mill, the rim of the horizon was on fire; mynas and parakeets were calling to roost.
Wandering from house to house I asked for directions to the ruins of the palace.
The villagers shrugged their shoulders: what palace?
Finally, turning a corner, I saw what I was looking for.
Lying amid waste land to one side of the village, there rose the jutting silhouette of a cyclopean wall.
It was flanked on one side by a great domed hall, supported on a quadrant of megalithic arches, each one at least twelve feet thick; to its side the palace wall rose upwards with a colossal, almost Romanesque massiveness.
The walls of both palace and hall were completely undecorated; there was none of the intricate sculptural filigree normally embroidered on the stonework of early Islamic buildings.
This puritanical, megalithic masonry was the chosen style of Muhammed bin Tughluk.
From here, the grim Hazar Ustan or Thousand Pillared Palace, Tughluk ruled the largest and most powerful empire India had known since the time of Ashoka, one and a half millennia previously.
From here he controlled a web of spies and informers that ran from Madurai to Attock, from the beaches of Malabar to the mangrove swamps of Bengal.
Climbing up several flights of narrow, twisting stairs, I reached the Sultan's penthouse pavilion with its view over the rooftops of Begampur.
Ibn Battuta describes arriving at this place through a succession of now-vanished gates and courtyards, each surrounded by cohorts of trumpeters and guards.
It was the second court that contained the infamous corps of executioners.
‘Tughluk was far too free in shedding blood,’ writes Battuta.
‘Every day hundreds of people — chained, pinioned and fettered were brought to [the sultan's hall]and those who were for execution were executed, those for torture tortured, and those for beating beaten.
It was but seldom that the entrance to his palace was without a corpse.
One day as I arrived at the palace my horse shied at the sight of a white fragment on the ground.
I asked what it was and one of my companions said: ‘It is the torso of a man who was [this morning]cut into three pieces.’’
To enter into the third court, the visitor had to receive the written permission of the Sultan.
Only the most distinguished visitors were admitted: ‘The third gate opens into the Thousand Pillars,’ noted Battuta.
It is here that the Sultan holds his audiences…
[He]sits cross-legged on a throne above a great dais while one hundred elite guards stand on either side carrying shields, swords and bows…
[When all the functionaries have assembled]fifty elephants are brought in.
Each is adorned with silken cloths and has its tusks shod with iron for the greater efficacy of killing criminals.
These elephants are trained to make obeisance to the Sultan and incline their heads, and when they do so the Chamberlain cries in a loud voice: ‘Bismillah!’
Then the musicians and dancers come in.
The first to  enter are the daughters of the infidel Indian kings who have been taken captive during that year.
After they have sung and danced, the sultan presents them to the amirs and the distinguished foreigners.
Eventually the time came for Battuta's own audience with the Sultan.
Battuta presented the gifts he had brought from Khorasan; and in return he was given the post of Qazi (or judge) and presented with two villages, a pension of twelve thousand dinars and a house in which to live.
He was terrified of the Sultan, but for his own safety decided the best policy was to cling to the Tughluk's fingertips ‘and every time he said any encouraging word to me I kissed his hand, until I had kissed it seven times.’
It is obvious from his writings that Battuta was most impressed by what was to be for eight years his adopted city.
Delhi then consisted of five or six distinct districts dotted between the banks of the Jumna and the plains around the old Hindu fort of Lal Kot.
Several of these settlements had recently been united into a single city called Jahanpanah (The Refuge of the World) by a great loop of wall forty miles long.
Its total population was just under half a million.
‘Delhi,’ writes  Battuta , is a ‘vast and magnificent city, uniting beauty with strength.
It is surrounded by a wall that has no equal in the world, and is the largest city in India, nay in the entire Muslim Orient.’
Other authorities fill out the Moroccan's picture: ‘The houses are built of stone and brick, and the roofs are of wood,’ noted the Arab geographer al-Umari in his encyclopaedic Masalik-ul-Absar Fi Mamalik-ul-Amsar (‘The Visions of the Kingdoms’).
‘There are great monasteries, large open spaces, and numerous baths.
There are also about two thousand small mosques and hermitages.
Gardens extend on three sides of the city in a straight line for twelve thousand paces.’
The domes of one of Jahanpanah's finest buildings, its great cathedral mosque, lay just a little to the south of the pavilion where I was now sitting.
Rising up above the rooftops of Begampur, the mosque — a great ripple of egg-shaped cupolas arranged around a shady cloister garth almost as broad as that in the Old   Delhi Jama Masjid-dwarfed the village that lay scattered all around it.
The building had certainly seen better days.
From my rooftop I could see that one side of the prayer hall roof had collapsed.
The once gleaming whitewash was dark and smoke-blackened; in places the plaster had fallen away to reveal the messy rubble-walling beneath.
Goats grazed on the grass growing unkempt between the paving stones.
But despite the decay, the mosque still somehow retained a profound and venerable grandeur.
Its strength lay in its simplicity.
Its pillars were just rectangular blocks of mousy-grey ashlar; its capitals plain but for a fringe of simple water-leaf scallops.
There was no colour, little ornament, no distraction.
Yet the utter simplicity of the individual parts focused attention on the balance and harmony of the whole: the rhythm of the arches, the rise and fall of the cupolas, the austere curves of the domes.
Unerringly, the  eye was drawn towards the towering ivan punctuating the middle of the west wall.
In its clarity and purity of form, the mosque reminded me of the best early Cistercian architecture — that brief and precious half-century before the original ascetic urge began to give way to the worldly frivolity of the Later Middle Ages, the period that produced the great Chapter House at Fountains and the original dark-stone nave at Rievaulx.
All around my rooftop pavilion could be seen other fragmentary remains of the Jahanpanah which Ibn Battuta would have known: a series of fragile mediaeval islands standing out amid the sea of modern sprawl.
Turning a quarter circle away from the mosque towards the setting sun, through the early evening heat haze I could see the distant silhouette of the Qutab Minar, the tower of victory built by the first Sultan immediately after he had driven the Hindus from Delhi in 1192.
The tower still stands above the walls of the old Hindu fortress, a tapering cylinder rising up 240 feet in four ever-diminishing storeys like a fully extended telescope placed lens-down on a plateau in the Aravalli hills.
The tower is a statement of arrival, as boastful and triumphant as the Tughluk buildings around me were understated and austere.
Turning to the north-east, I could just make out the lines of the walls of Siri, the first completely new city to be built by the Muslim conquerors in the Delhi plains.
But the greatest of the ruins of mediaeval Delhi, the great fort of Tughlukabad, lay some six miles due east of my rooftop, virtually invisible now in the gathering darkness.
As the sun began to set behind the Qutab Minar, I made up my mind to explore sometime soon what was once the most enormous complex of fortifications in all Islam.
But with the growing ferocity of the Delhi heat it became increasingly easy to find excuses to put off ever leaving the house at all.
The sky turned the colour of molten copper.
The earth cracked like a shattered windscreen.
April gave way to May and every day the heat grew worse.
Hot sulphurous winds began to rake through the empty Delhi avenues.
The walls of the houses exuded heat like enormous ovens.
The rich fled to the hill stations and the beggars followed them.
The activity of those Delhi-wallahs that remained in their city slowed to a snail's pace.
One Delhi-wallah of whom this was not true was our unfortunate mali.
At the beginning of May, Mrs Puri's businessman son decided to build a ‘Japanese’ garden facing on to his veranda.
From the early hours of the morning the unfortunate mali could be seen labouring away, pouring with sweat — despite the heat he still insisted in wearing his thick serge uniform — as he constructed a sort of miniature Mount Fuji in the corner of the front lawn.
Sadly, this exercise in horticultural Orientalism proved too much for the mali.
After a heroic week of earth moving, he went down with heatstroke.
He retired to his charpoy leaving Mrs Puri's lawn resembling an open-cast coal mine; on one side a slag heap drifted on to the driveway, blocking access to or from the house.
The inconvenience these excavations caused was second only to that created by the dust storms.
In Delhi the high summer is enlivened by the advent of the Lu, the hot desert wind which in May begins to blow in from Rajasthan, bringing with it much of the Thar Desert.
Burning grit rains down on the city then blows gusting through the grid of scorching streets.
At the road junctions, spiralling dust-devils replace the absent beggars.
Up in the sky, the sun hangs like a red disc behind the veil of sand.
Inside our flat, small drifts of this sand began to blow in under the doors and through the cracks in the window frames.
All this proved a formidable challenge to our sweeper, a delightful Rajasthani lady named Murti.
Murti is beautiful, charming and intelligent.
She has many talents.
Sadly, sweeping is not one of them.
Every morning she arrived at our door and spent five minutes flustering around with her hand-broom.
Clouds of dust would fly up into the air, drift around the flat for a while, then settle on the beds and desk and chairs.
There it remained.
Dusting was a particular bugbear of Murti's, rarely attempted and never with any success.
But Olivia, a model employer, believed it would be churlish to point this out.
After Murti had completed her statutory five minutes  of dust re-distribution, my wife waved her a cheery goodbye.
‘Jolly good, Murti,’ she would say.
‘That's enough for today.’
This pantomime went on happily until the first week of May, when Mrs Puri appeared one morning unannounced at our door, intent on doing a spot-check of her property.
She took one look at the sand dunes drifting around our sitting-room and shook her head.
‘What is this?’ she said, drawing a circle in the sand with her stick.
Olivia began to explain about not wanting to upset Murti, but Mrs Puri raised her hand.
‘Mrs William,’ she said firmly.
‘I am thinking you are not understanding the management of these people.’
‘But…’
‘If Murti is not doing her duty properly then you must be telling her to do it again.’
‘But Murti hates sweeping,’ said Olivia.
‘Then,’ said Mrs Puri, rapping her stick on the floor.
‘Then she must be made to enjoy it.’
While all this was going on in our flat, something was clearly up at International Backside.
Balvinder Singh was in high spirits.
Despite the terrible heat, for a month now his conversation had gradually been becoming even more venal than normal.
‘You like this one, Mr William?’ he would ask as we passed some pretty Punjabi girl along Lodhi Road.
‘What do you mean?’
‘That young lady.
Standing by traffic light.
She with long hair.’
‘I'm a married man, Mr Singh.’
‘Me too.
Same thing, no problem.
You like?’
‘She's okay.
Bit young.’
There would be a pause.
‘You know something, Mr William?’
‘What?’
‘She going kissing Lodhi Garden.’
‘But the girl's only about ten.’
‘Maybe,’ Mr Singh would whisper.
‘But Lodhi Garden is Love Garden.’
I had learned by now that an upsurge in Mr Singh's libido was usually brought on by some other outside circumstance.
It was not until the middle of May that I discovered what it was that had so stimulated my friend.
One morning I called International Backside and Balvinder said he would be around in five minutes.
When he finally appeared, it was in a brand new Ambassador taxi.
By the time I had come downstairs and made it over the mali's trenchworks, Balvinder had polished the bonnet so bright he could curl his moustache in the reflection.
‘Balvinder,’ I said.
‘Congratulations!’
Mr Singh beamed with pride.
‘Many months I have been saving,’ he said.
‘Now big loan has been granted by Bank of Punjab.’
‘Well done,’ I said.
‘Before every time you tell me: very old car, very smell, very dirt.’
‘Balvinder, I would never…’
‘Now new car.
You not complaining.’
Balvinder briskly opened the door and indicated that I should get in.
‘Yesterday Sikh temple going with family.
First going God, puja doing.
Afterwards whisky and German Beer drinking, taxi-stand party having.
No smell, no dirt, no problem!’
‘I didn't know you were religious, Balvinder,’ surprised by his admission that he had been to the gurdwara.
‘I going Sikh temple one time one year.
Tip-top special occasion only,’ he muttered.
‘And what have you done with the old car?’
‘Brother Gurmack Singh giving.’
‘You really gave it away?’
‘Almost giving.
Seventy thousand rupees only.’
Balvinder inserted the gleaming new key into the ignition.
‘Look!’ he said, gesturing towards the instrument panel.
‘All new design.’
This was perhaps stretching the point.
The Ambassador was, without doubt, fresh from the factory.
It had sparkling white antimacassars  new footmats and a splendid technicolour Guru Nanak pasted over its glove compartment.
A garland of freshly picked marigolds hung from the mirror.
But for all that, in its basics it was indisputably the same Indian-made version of the 1956 Morris Oxford that had lorded it over the roads of India for some thirty-odd years now.
I tentatively suggested as much to Balvinder.
‘No, no, Mr William,’ he replied.
‘All new computer design.
Look — computer system.’
Balvinder turned the key, then pressed a button.
The dashboard lit up, miraculously illuminated from behind.
There was a hushed silence before Balvinder whispered: ‘Mr William, this vehicle computer product of Indian Space Programme.
It driving speed-of-light.’
And so we set off towards Tughlukabad, Balvinder doing his best to prove his point.
Rays from the rising sun were shining through the thick undergrowth of the jungle as we drove past.
Keols, invisible in the forest canopy, were calling to each other in their incessant woody voices.
Then, quite suddenly, we were out of the jungle and into the daylight and the walls of the great fortress, as solid and immobile as stone elephants, were rising up all around us.
Tughlukabad is the most uncompromisingly militaristic ruin in Delhi, perhaps in all India.
Ring after ring of rough-hewn stone walls thunder their way across the open plain on the deserted south-eastern edge of the city.
As at Begampur there is a complete absence of decoration or of any aesthetic consideration.
Instead, massive blocks of stone are simply piled high, block upon block, until the towers reach up, in some places to a height of nearly thirty metres.
But with the Mongol hordes massing in the Hindu Kush, the Tughluks could take no chances.
The whole spreading fortress was surrounded not just by a moat, but by a deep artificial lake.
Dams were built linked by causeways to a series of smaller outpost forts.
The flood waters were controlled by a succession of carefully engineered sluice-gates and locks.
To take the complex, the Mongol   hordes would have had to abandon their steppe ponies and turn aquatic before they could even reach the outer defences.
I climbed up through one of the thirteen gates and clambered over the piles of collapsed masonry blocking the way to the top of the citadel.
Even today, seven hundred years after it was built, the vast walled enclosure is still an impressive sight.
But at the time of the Tughluks, when the gridded lines of now-collapsed rubble were bustling streets and bazaars, armouries and elephant stables, all rising up from the glittering waters of the lake, then the sight must have been breathtaking.
Ibn Battuta was lucky enough to see it in its prime:
The walls which surround this city are simply unparalleled.
There is room inside the wall for horsemen and infantry to march from one end of the town to the other…
Inside Tughlukabad is the great palace whose tiles the Sultan has gilded.
When the sun rises they shine with a brilliant light that makes it impossible to keep one's eyes fixed upon it.
The Sultan deposited within this town a vast store of wealth.
It is said that he constructed a tank and poured into it molten gold so that it became one vast molten block.
From where I was standing, far below me I could see a separate miniature fort linked to the mother fortress by an umbilical causeway.
Here, in the midst of the most defensible position in all Tughlukabad lies the tomb of Ghiyas-ud-Din Tughluk, the father of Sultan Muhammed and the creator of this impregnable complex.
The tomb is an almost pyramidal cube of red sandstone whose almost absurdly thick inward-battering walls are topped by a dome of solid white marble.
Like a miniature expression of the whole, the tomb is defended on all sides by its own set of machicolated walls, built as if to keep the Angel of Death at bay; they represent perhaps the most elaborate set of defences ever raised to protect a corpse.
Nothing could be further removed from the graceful garden-tombs of the Great Moguls than this warrior's memorial, as narrowly militaristic as theirs were elegant and sophisticated.
One breathes silky refinement; the other still rings with the clank of rusty chain-mail.
This enclosure is the key to the entire complex.
It demonstrates the extent of the Tughluks' obsession with defence, and highlights the essentially militaristic nature of their Sultanate.
The Damascene geographer al-Umari confirms what is implied by the tomb: that Delhi, for all its bazaars and shrines and fine architecture, was above all a barracks: ‘The army [of Delhi]consists of 900,000 horsemen.
These troops consist of Turks, the inhabitants of Khata, Persians and Indians.
They have excellent horses, magnificent armour and fine costumes.
The Sultan also has 3000 elephants and some 20,000 Turk mamluks (warrior slaves).’
I tramped through the ruins of Tughlukabad trying in my mind to fill the deserted barracks with Turkish mameluks and Persian cavalry officers.
I thought of them studying the Military Manual of Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, the Adab al-harb Wa'l-Shaj'a, which was written at about the time Tughlukabad was being built.
The manual is not only one of the most interesting documents to come out of the Sultanate, it is also one of the most precious keys we have to the concerns that meant most to the war-obsessed amirs of Tughluk Delhi.
Climbing up on to a high bastion, I looked down over the shimmering interior of the fort and thought of the words that must once have been a set text for the cavalrymen stationed here:
The sword was invented by Jamshed, the first of monarchs and its terror and majesty are greater than those of all other weapons.
It is for this reason that when a Kingdom has been taken by force of arms, it is said to have been taken by the sword.
As to the different kinds of swords there are many sorts: Chini, Rusi, Rumi, Firangi, Shahi, Hindi and Kashmiri.
Of these the Hindi sword is the finest, and of all Hindi swords, that known as the mawj-i darya, the waves of the sea, is the most lustrous.
The bow was the pre-eminent weapon given by Jibrail to Adam in Paradise.
It will never be superseded in this world or the next and in Paradise the blessed will practise archery.
When choosing a bow you should try to acquire above all others the mountain bow of Ghazna.
It is made of horn and its aim is straight.
The Indian bow — the kaman-i Hindavi-is made of cane.
Its arrows do not travel very far but at a short distance it inflicts a very bad wound.
The head of the arrow used with it is usually barbed and if lodged inside the flesh, the shaft is liable to break off.
This leaves the head, which is usually poisoned, in the flesh.
It is impossible to extract.
The bows of Central Asia use horse hide as the bowstring.
It is a poor material.
Use instead a bowstring of rhinoceros hide, for it will snap asunder the bowstrings of all other bows to which the sound reaches whether these are made of the hide of wild ox, the horse, or even the flanks of a young nilgai.
What Tughlukabad was to the military of fourteenth-century Delhi, the suburb of Hauz Khas was to the savants.
For while Tughluk  Delhi was first and foremost a barracks-town, it was not entirely without culture or civilization.
Educated refugees fleeing the Mongol conquests of Samarkand and the Central Asian university towns had taken shelter in the city in their thousands and there they acted as an intellectual leaven to the warrior slaves who had dominated Delhi since its conquest.
At Hauz Khas a beautiful tank had been excavated by the Sultan Iltutmish and the artists and intellectuals slowly collected around its banks.
On one of its sides stood the most elegant set of buildings ever erected by the Tughluks.
The Hauz Khas medresse was a college whose academic reputation was as wide as the Sultanate itself.
Its principal hall, which still stands, is as long and as narrow as a ship, with delicately carved kiosks and balconies projecting out over the lake.
Contemporary memoirs are as full of praise for the building's beauty as they are for the work which took place within its walls: ‘Its magnificence, proportions and pleasant air makes it unique among the buildings of the world,’ wrote the chronicler Barni.
‘Indeed it could justifiably be compared to the palaces of ancient Babylon.
People come from East and West in caravan after caravan just to look at it.’
The excitable Delhi poet Mutahhar of Kara went even further: ‘The moment I entered this blessed building,’ he writes, ‘I saw a soul-animating courtyard as wide as the plain of the world.
Its fragrance possessed the odour of amber, and hyacinths, basils, roses and tulips were blooming as far as the eye could reach.
Nightingales were singing their melodious songs and…[their voices blending]with the debates and discussions of the students.’
More impressive still was the menu in the college dining-room, something which the salivating Mutahhar singles out for special praise: ‘Pheasants, partridges, herons, fish, roasted fowl, grilled kids, fried loaves, brightly-coloured sweets of different kinds and other good things were heaped everywhere in large quantities.’
Pomegranate syrup prepared with a mixture of sorrel was served as a drink and betel nuts were brought in on gold and silver dishes after the meal.
As they ate, the students sat cross-legged on carpets brought from as far away as Shiraz, Damascus and the Yemen.
The curriculum of the college centred on Muslim jurisprudence and Quranic studies, but Delhi had a reputation for astronomy and  medicine and it is probable that these were also taught at the Hauz Khas.
Medicine was a particular interest of the Tughluk Sultans, and Sultan Muhammed's nephew Firoz Shah founded no fewer than seventy dispensaries and a Shifa Khana (or Central Hospital) where free food, drink and medicine were supplied to the sick at the expense of the treasury.
The doctors of the college and the hospital practised a highly sophisticated offshoot of classical Greek medicine that would have been immediately recognizable to Hippocrates or Galen; it was known, after its Greek origins, as Unani (Ionian) Tibbia.
The secrets of Unani medicine were originally passed from the Byzantine Empire to Sassanid Persia by heretic Nestorian Christians escaping the oppressive Orthodoxy of Constantinople.
The exiles set up a medical school at Jundishapur, south of modern Teheran, where their arcane and esoteric formulae were stolen by the Arabs during the early conquests of Islam.
Adapted in Baghdad and Cairo, cross-fertilized with the ancient medical practices of Pharaonic Egypt, Sumeria, Assyria and Babylon, Unani medicine was finally codified into a cohesive system by the great Arab scholar Ibn Sina (or Avicenna as he was known in the mediaeval west).
Thus refined, the medicine passed to Central Asia and into the syllabuses of the universities of Samarkand and Tashkent.
Thence it was finally brought to India in the thirteenth century by refugees fleeing Genghis Khan — at about the same time as Abelard was lecturing to his students at the new university of Paris.
While western medicine has always tended to concentrate on the elimination of germs, the Unani doctors tried not to lose sight of the patient as a whole being; they conceived of therapy in the original Greek sense of healing, at once taking into account physical, mental and spiritual well-being.
Unani medicine emphasized aiding the body's inbuilt ability to heal itself and its ethics forbade any treatment which, while curing a specific ailment, harmed the soundness of the body as a whole.
Treatment was not merely a matter of prescribing herbal medicines, but a whole regimen which controlled the diet and the life-style.
For this reason Unani hospitals were equipped with the best cooks, and, in the case of the sixth-century Bait al-Hikmah in Baghdad, a whole troupe of singers and musicians as well.
All these elaborations were built on the basic Hippocratic theory of the Four Humours.
The theory postulates the presence in the human body of blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile.
Each person's unique mixture of these substances determines his temperament: a predominance of blood gives a sanguine temperament; a predominance of phlegm makes one phlegmatic; yellow bile, bilious (or choleric); and black bile, melancholic.
As long as these humours are in balance, the human system is healthy; it is imbalance which can result in disease.
A Unani physician attempts to diagnose the imbalance and restore each individual to his proper equilibrium.
As no two humours are identical, no two people are treated in exactly the same manner.
While Unani medicine has completely died out in the area where it was born and developed, I had not been surprised to find that like almost every other tradition which has ever come to Delhi it still survived intact in the alleys of the Old City.
There are now some 1500 hakims still practising their Byzantine medicine in Delhi, and they appear to do a thriving business.
Unani medicine is regarded every bit as seriously as conventional western treatment and it is quite distinct from the dubious folk-medicine offered to passers-by by roadside fakirs, or Balvinder Singh's freckle-destroying friends in the Meena Bazaar.
The centre of the modern Unani hakims is still around Ballimaran, the Street of the Cat Killers, where the doctors moved when the area was first built in the late 1640s.
Under the Mughals, Ballimaran was an aristocratic enclave full of large and airy havelis.
But for centuries now — like the rest of Old Delhi — the area has been in slow decay.
Boys with wicker baskets full of bricks and masonry hurry past; the streets stink and run with mud and excrement.
Yet behind the grubby façades, if you know where to look, you can still find the Unani doctors, practising in exactly the way they always have.
Their surgeries are wonderful.
Inside dark, vaulted rooms whose mahogany shelves are heavy with jars, bottles and vials, elderly white-bearded men can be seen feeling the pulse of heavily-veiled women; behind, in the shadows, their assistants are busy decanting liquids like mediaeval alchemists: white powders are mixed with grey crystals then, slowly, crystal by crystal, dissolved in a vat of bubbling, frothing liquid.