

Mr Stanforth came from behind his desk to meet his visitor in person, and settle her with ceremony into the client's chair, though she was not a client, had no need whatever of a solicitor, and had come here in response to his telephoned request chiefly out of pure curiosity, of which she had a woman's proper share.
Mr Stanforth was not entirely what she had expected, but neither, she deduced from the covert glances he was using upon her like measuring instruments, was she quite matching up to his preconceived picture of her.
He was small and nimble and immaculate in fine grey mohair, with a clever, froggish, mildly mischievous face, like a very well-turned-out troll from under some Scandinavian mountain.
But towards her he was being punctilious in a way which seemed slightly out of character, as though he did not quite know how to approach her, even though it was he who had brought her here.
Her part was easy.
She had only to sit back with perfect composure — something at which she was adept — and wait for him to find his way through the necessary preliminaries to the real business of this meeting.
After all, he had initiated it.
He must have some need of her; she had none of him.
This could not even be a matter of learning something to her advantage.
Her mind — and she was well aware that it was an elastic and enterprising mind — was quite open.
Perhaps that was what baffled him about her.
She should have been more concerned, more anxious to know what he had to confide, since he had invited her here for that very purpose.
‘Mademoiselle Rossignol, it's very kind of you to spare me a little of your time…’
‘Miss will do,’ said Charlotte helpfully.
‘I'm almost completely English, you know, apart from the name, although I've lived most of my life in France.
My father walked out on my mother when I was seven, so the English influence came out on top from then on.’
Her mother, flighty as a butterfly, had heaved a sigh of relief at getting rid of a whole entrenched family along with Maitre Henri Rossignol, who still, perhaps, coloured Charlotte's image of the law, and made Mr Stanforth incongruous, with his pricked ears and his mild, perilous, goatish hazel eyes.
‘That certainly makes things easier,’ he said heartily, and leaned across the monumental desk to offer her a cigarette and a light.
He was just warming up; she knew the signs, knowing quite accurately the effect her looks had on most males of most ages.
What she had was not beauty, and she had learned that early, and come to terms with it, being of a practical mind.
But there was something more adventurous than beauty in her, a tendency to surge forward into situations somewhat risky in their ambiguity, a taste for accepting any challenge that offered, and a manner and a gait to match the proclivity.
Angels might well have feared to tread where Charlotte habitually planted her size four sandals with zest and aplomb.
‘You must be wondering,’ said Mr Stanforth, approaching by inches, ‘why I asked you to come here like this.
It was pure luck, my seeing that notice of your concert.
There couldn't be many Charlotte Rossignols who happen also to play the oboe.
So I made enquiries at the hall.
It was an  opportunity for me.
I hope you didn't mind my asking you to come here.
I would gladly have come to you, but I thought we could talk more freely here than in an hotel.
Briefly, I need to ask you, my dear Miss Rossignol, if you have had any word within the last year from your great-uncle, Doctor Alan Morris.’
There was a moment of absolute silence and surprise.
Her eyes had opened wide in wonder, and the light entered their long-lashed blackness and turned it to a dusky, flecked gold.
Her small, delicate monkey-features quivered into childish candour, reassuring him that for all her formidable composure she was, indeed, no more than twenty-three.
She had fine, white skin, not opaque and dull, but translucent and bright, with the vivid come-and-go of vibrant blood close beneath it; and she had beautiful hair, fine as an infant's and black as jet, curving but not curling about a very shapely head, and cropped cunningly to underline the subtlety of the shaping.
Oh, yes, there was a great deal of France there, whether she knew it or not.
And her lips, opening to reply to his question, were long and mobile, eloquent even before she spoke, though she might sometimes go on to contradict what they had intimated.
‘Mr Stanforth,’ she said now, ‘I've never once in my life had any communication from my Great-Uncle Alan.
I've never set eyes on him.
I know quite a lot about his work and his reputation, and am quite proud of him, but I don't expect ever to exchange one word with him.
My mother was his niece, and the only daughter of his only sister, but she was as foot-loose as he, and when she married into France she never kept in touch with her English connections at all.
I grew up detached.
I'm sorry if it seems almost unnatural.
It wasn't out of any want of feeling.
No, I've had no word ever from Doctor Morris.
I should have been very  astonished and concerned if I had.
I should have taken it for granted there was something the matter.’
Mr Stanforth massaged his sharp jaw with one finger, and looked thoughtful.
‘Is there?’ asked Charlotte, making connections with her usual rash speed.
‘Something the matter?’
‘That's exactly the trouble, we don't really know.
Naturally I hope not, and the probability is that we're exercising ourselves over nothing.
But the fact remains, we can't be sure.
I'm not surprised,’ he agreed, ‘that you've received no word from him, but it was just a chance.’
‘I'm sorry to be a disappointment.
Was that the only reason you asked me to come?’
She was reasonably certain by then that it was merely a necessary preliminary to the real business he had with her.
‘Hardly, or I could have asked it over the telephone, and avoided imposing upon you.
No, circumstances make it very desirable that we should have this talk, and continue in close touch afterwards, if you're agreeable.
I had better,’ said Mr Stanforth, philosophically accepting the fact of her total ignorance, ‘tell you exactly what the position is.
I have acted for your great-uncle for more than twenty years now, and have often been left in charge of his affairs during his long absences abroad, on digs all over Europe and North Africa and the Middle East, everywhere that the Roman and Graeco-Roman power extended.
You're familiar with his subject, you know he is an authority, internationally known and universally respected.
So naturally he travels a great deal, and is in demand as a consultant wherever Roman sites are being excavated.
A year ago last October he planned a year's tour in Turkey.
It was approaching the end of the season, of course, but he intended to make a first flying visit to Aphrodisias, where some old friends of his were at work, and then to spend the winter on research in  libraries and museums, and have the whole of the following summer for field work.
He let his house in Chelsea furnished for the year, with the usual proviso that his own staff should remain to run it — he has a housekeeper who has been with him for years, and one daily maid.
All quite in order, of course, he has done the same thing at least twice before.
And of course no one expected to hear much from him during his sabbatical year, unless, as you say, something was wrong.
But the trouble is that no one has heard anything from him even now that the year is over.’
‘Nearly six months over,’ Charlotte pointed out.
‘Quite an edgy matter for his tenants.’
‘Precisely!
Finding accommodation in London is difficult in any circumstances, and this couple happen to be Australians who don't intend to stay permanently, but are anxious to see their daughter through her physiotherapy training here, and take her back with them afterwards.
It would suit them very well to have the tenancy of the house for at least another year.
But without any instructions from Doctor Morris it's difficult to know what to do.’
‘And what,’ she asked practically, ‘have you done about them so far?’
‘In the absence of any word from my client, I took the responsibility of renewing the tenancy for six months.
They could hardly be expected to agree to less, and they're excellent tenants.’
‘And now the six months is nearly up.
And still no word!
Yes, I see why I represented a last hope,’ she said.
‘Is this very unlike him?’
‘Very.
He is a man who has deliberately avoided certain responsibilities in his life, and certain involvements, but those business obligations which do unavoidably devolve upon him he has always observed punctiliously.
There are money matters, investments, tax affairs to be considered.
It  is, one might say, a conscious part of his policy of personal detachment to have all his affairs in scrupulous order, and so obviate pursuit and inconvenience of any kind.
To be slipshod is to be hounded, which is the last thing he wants.
No, I must say that things have now gone so far as to justify me in feeling considerable uneasiness about his continued absence.’
She gazed back at him in thoughtful silence for a moment, and shook her head doubtfully.
‘I don't know…he's a free agent, and he has confidence in you.
At a pinch, he might very well feel safe enough in going ahead with what he's doing, and leaving all the rest to you.
Supposing he got excited about some new discoveries, for instance…’
‘During the winter months work would be at a standstill.
In many places it couldn't open up again before June, late May at the earliest.’
‘You ought, perhaps, to start official enquiries,’ she suggested hesitantly.
‘I already have, more than a month ago.
I rather wish I'd taken the step earlier.
The trail came to a dead end.
One that might be perfectly normal, though it leaves us in complete uncertainty.’
‘How much do we know?
I mean really know?
Do we even know that he ever reached Turkey?
Exactly what did they find?’
‘Oh, yes, he got to Istanbul, all right.
He caught his flight from Heathrow on the 6th of October, the flight-list has been checked through.
He claimed his reservation at the Hotel Gul Bejaze, and stayed there for three weeks.
We even know just what he was doing, intensively, during that time.
He took a piece of work with him to finish.
He was commissioned to write one of a series of monographs on the settlements of Roman Britain, and he took the almost  completed text with him when he left England.
I knew of that from him before he left, for he was going to spend his last few days before the flight actually on the site, refreshing his memory on certain details.
Well, he posted the finished text to his publishers from Istanbul about three weeks after he arrived there.
The book has been out several months, of course, now.
A few days after he mailed it, he telephoned his friend and colleague at Aphrodisias, in Anatolia, and called off his visit.
He said he was afraid the delay over the book had lost him the opportunity of reaching the city in time to take part in any meaningful work, and promised to join the next summer's dig in June.’
‘But he didn't.’
‘He didn't.
The day after that telephone call he paid his hotel bill and left by taxi for the main station.
Attempts to trace one taxi in Istanbul, after a year and more, naturally fell flat.
No one has heard from him since, no one knows where he is.’
It began to sound more serious than she had realised.
‘Who undertook these enquiries?’
‘The police, through their Turkish colleagues.
Missing Persons has all the information available.
But I'm afraid the trail was cold before I called them in, and we didn't take it the length of broadcasting or advertising.
One doesn't want to set a public hue and cry in train after a perfectly rational and responsible person who knows very well what he's about.’
‘He may still be that,’ she said.
‘There may be reasons for his silence, perfectly good reasons if we only knew them.
And he may turn up at any moment with a simple explanation, and wonder what we've been worrying about.’
‘So I think, too.
Though let's admit that personal security has recently become distressingly tenuous all over the world, and the most innocent and uninvolved of people can  still find himself made a pawn in all manner of dangerous games.
And Turkey has its share of the modern virus.
But urban  guerrillas don't kidnap distinguished foreigners only to keep their exploit secret, hijackers can hardly help becoming news on the instant, and here there has been profound silence.
I tell myself that silence is more likely to be a personal choice than an imposed one.’
‘There is such a thing as amnesia, I suppose,’ Charlotte said dubiously.
‘Illness or accident could have isolated him somewhere.
I mean, if he did go off into the wilds of Anatolia, or somewhere remote like that — something might happen to him in some village, where he isn't known.’
‘Villagers would be all the more anxious to get the responsibility for him off their hands.
And there are quite a number of people in Turkey who do know him, people in his own field.’
They looked at each other for the first time with a long, speculative look, weighing up the possibilities honestly and in much the same terms.
‘You think, then,’ she said, ‘that this disappearance is more likely to be voluntary on his part.
But in that case, all we have to do is wait, and when he chooses, he'll reappear.
And I take it the police still have his case more or less open, and will be looking out for news of him, in case there's something more in it.
There isn't much more we can do, short of going off to Istanbul in person to try and find his tracks.
And if, for some reason, he has really chosen to drop out for a while, he wouldn't be grateful for too much fuss, would he?’
‘You state the position admirably.
That's exactly how we are situated — you and I both.’
‘I?’ she said, drawing back slightly into her crystalline, black-and-white reserve, and becoming in a breath notably more French.
‘I realise that I come into the picture as a relative, and I do feel natural interest and concern for my  great-uncle.
But I can't feel that I have any more positive standing than that in the matter.’
‘You have a very positive standing, my dear young lady,’ said Mr Stanforth patiently, and perhaps a little patronisingly, too, for this was where money entered into the reckoning, and very young concert artists and music teachers with a living to make must surely react to the alluring image.
‘Let us suppose, just for one moment, that we are being over-optimistic, and that Doctor Morris will not reappear, as, of course, we hope and believe he will.
If this situation goes on unchanged, then it may become necessary eventually, for legal reasons, to take steps to presume his death.
That need not jeopardise his position if he should subsequently emerge from his limbo.
But it would, meanwhile, regularise his affairs and ensure proper continuity, proper attention to investments, and so on.
In short, Miss Rossignol, I've reached the point where I must have your approval and consent for whatever steps I take in protection of his financial affairs.
Since your mother's death you are his only remaining relative, apart from some distant cousins in Canada, several times removed.
And Doctor Morris — a remarkable quirk in his otherwise orderly character, I may say — has always stubbornly refused to make a will.
There are people,’ said the Norse troll, burning into sudden antagonistic fervour across his cavern-desk, ‘who hypnotise themselves into believing that they are going to live for ever.’
His client's optimism and appetites, with equal suddenness, burned clear in opposition, and Charlotte had a vision of two principles in headlong collision, and chose to ally herself with her own kinsman, by intuition and once for all.
‘If we do not see him again — for we must take that possibility into account — you are his next of kin and his sole heiress.
That is why I need to consult with you over anything I do, from now on, in his name.’
Charlotte had never in her life felt obliged to examine her relationships with anyone.
Her mother, once rid of the armour-plated respectability of Maître Henri and his phalanx of parents, brothers and sisters, all devoted to the law, had married a happy-go-lucky literary exile from Leeds, as nearly as possible his opposite, and the half-English, half-French child had been absorbed into their slapdash household with the greatest enthusiasm and affection, and never given time to doubt or worry, surrounded as she was by joyous evidence of her own importance and value.
There had never been too much money, but never less than enough.
She had no vision of money as an independent power, or a formidable opponent.
It was there to be used, insofar as you had it; and when you were short, you worked a little harder, and made good the deficiency.
And foreseeing that necessity, you made sure that you knew something which could earn you money at need.
It was as simple as that.
She did not even know what it meant to adapt oneself to another person's requirements for the sake of self-interest.
All she had, to enable her to visualise Mr Stanforth's view of her position, was a vivid imagination and a very acute intelligence.
They helped her to understand him, and even, regretfully, to sympathise with him.
‘If you're asking me,’ she said carefully, ‘to come into consultation and share responsibility for whatever decisions we have to make about Great-Uncle Alan's affairs, of course I will, though I don't claim to know anything about business and I probably shan't be much help to you.
I can't even claim to know what he would want done, because I know almost nothing about him.
But I don't at all mind saying what I think I should want done in the circumstances.
I don't think, for instance, that I should want my death assumed and my property disposed of too soon, so we  won't go into that part of the affair just now, if you don't mind.
He'll probably live to be a hundred, and make a will leaving whatever he's got to his old college, and I shan't mind at all.
But I quite see that you need someone to come in on a practical issue like what to do about his tenants.
I think you should extend the tenancy for another full year, if that's what they would like.
It would ensure the house being taken care of, and the staff maintained, since you say they're good tenants.
And even if Uncle Alan turns up within a month or two, he can hardly complain.
It's his own fault.
And the inconvenience will be only slight, he can always take up residence at his college again until their time's up.’
She made it sound very simple, as young people do; and she hadn't yet considered the implications for herself, Mr Stanforth reflected cynically, or she would not so blithely dismiss the matter of the inheritance.
It was not a fortune, but it was a respectable competence, thanks to royalties, which would continue for years yet, whether the doctor reappeared or remained in limbo.
‘I'm gratified,’ said Mr Stanforth, with only the mildest irony, ‘that your judgement agrees with mine.
That is indeed what I had intended suggesting to you, and it disposes of the immediate problem.’
‘If you want me to keep in touch, and be available for consultation, of course I will.’
‘Thank you, that will ease my position considerably.
And as you say, all we can do is wait, and continue to expect Doctor Morris to turn up in his own good time.
May I ask what your own plans are?
Do you intend to stay some time in England?’
‘I'm making my home here,’ she said.
‘I'm taking a teaching job in a new comprehensive school, but that won't begin until the September term.
That's why I'm trying to fill  up the gap with a few concerts, but of course I'm not good enough for the big dates, it will be mostly provincial engagements.
I'll let you have word of all my movements.’
‘That would be most kind and helpful.’
The interview seemed to have reached its natural conclusion.
She picked up her handbag, and he rose from behind his desk to take a relieved and ceremonious farewell.
But before they had reached the doorway she hesitated and halted.
‘You know what I would like?
Could you let me have a list of all the books Uncle Alan's written?
If I'm going to be a stand-in for him, even temporarily, like this, I really need to know more about him, and that seems as good a way as any.
They must surely convey something about him.’
Strange, he thought resignedly, she's not at all interested in how much her kinsman's worth, only, rather suddenly and rather late, in what he's like.
And at this stage, isn't that rather an academic consideration?
But he said politely: ‘Yes, of course.
If you'll allow me, I'll have a few of his titles sent round to your hotel.
This last one, the text he sent from Istanbul — the publishers took care of the proofreading, of course— that one I believe I've got here.
Take it with you, if you'd care to.
Though it's hardly the most riveting of his works.
He found Aurae Phiala, it seems, rather an over-rated site in revisiting it.’
There was a large bookcase in the corner of his office, stocked mainly with leather-bound volumes; but the end of the lowest shelf was brightened by the clear colours of a number of paperbacks.
He plucked one of them from its place and brought it to her.
‘The Roman Britain Library’, the jacket told her, and in larger print: ‘AURAE PHIALA’, and Alan Morris's name, with a comet's-tail of letters after it.
The cover was a fine, delicately-composed, atmospheric  photograph of a shallow bowl of meadows beside the silver sweep of a river, the whole foreground patterned with a mesh of low walls in amber stone and rosy, fired brick and tile, with two broken pillars to carry the accented rhythms up into a sky feathered with light cloud.
Charlotte gazed at it, fascinated.
A landscape obviously planned, disciplined, tamed long, long since, and long since abandoned to the river, the seasons and the sky; and not a human soul in sight.
A less cunning photographer might have felt the urge to place a single figure, perhaps close to the columns, to give life and scale.
This one had understood that Aurae Phiala was dead, and immense, needing no meretricious human yardstick to give it proportion.
‘But it's beautiful!’ she said, and voice and accent had become wholly French for one moment.
‘This is where he spent those last few days?’ she said.
‘Before he caught that flight into Turkey?’
‘Yes.
He knew the site from many previous visits, though I think he had never organised a dig there himself.
The curator is an old friend of his, a fellow-student, I believe.
But less distinguished.’
‘So Uncle Alan would be with friends, when he stayed there?
And he went straight from this place, to catch his plane?’
‘So I understand.
It is an attractive picture,’ said Mr Stanforth, with patronising tolerance.
‘Wonderful what a first rate photographer can do with even unpromising material.
But you'll see what Doctor Morris has to say about the place.’
‘Where is it?’ she asked, still viewing the sunlit, fluted hollow with pleasure and wonder.
‘Somewhere on the Welsh border, I believe.
The text and maps will show you exactly where.
The name means something like ‘the bowl of the gentle wind’.
Apparently an  ideal climatic site.
But you'll discover all about the place if you read it.’
Clearly he hardly believed that she would stay the course.
She wondered if he himself had survived it.
She closed the little book between her palms, and put it away in her handbag.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘I look forward to setting foot in my uncle's field.’
She was not sure herself how much in earnest she was, at that stage; and if she had had any other agreeable reading matter to fill up her evening, she might never have started on Aurae Phiala at all.
But she had no concert, and no engagement socially, since she knew hardly anyone in London, the small hotel in Earls Court was not productive of amusing company, and the television was surrounded by a handful of determined fans watching a very boring boxing match.
Charlotte returned almost gladly to the recollection of her morning interview, and in retrospect it seemed to her far more strange and mysterious than while it was happening.
She had never been brought face to face with her great-uncle, and never devoted any conscious thought to him.
He became real and close only now that he had vanished.
Such a curious thing for an established and respected elderly gentleman to do, now that she came to consider it seriously.
How old would he be now?
Her grandmother, his elder sister, would have been seventy if she had been still living, and there were several years between them.
Probably sixty-three or sixty-four, and according to the photographs she had seen in newspapers and geographical magazines, and his occasional appearances on television, he looked considerably younger than his age, and very fit indeed.
Say a well-preserved sixty-four, highly sophisticated, speaking at least three languages, enough to get him out of trouble in most countries, and with a select if scattered network of  friends and colleagues all across the Middle East, to lend him a hand if required.
And on his last known move obviously still in full control of his actions.
A taxi had dropped him and his luggage at the main railway station, he had walked in through the entrance with a porter in attendance; and that was that.
On the face of it, a man about whom the whole world knew, whose life was an open book — no, a succession of books.
But what did she really know about him?
She roamed back thoughtfully into childhood memories, hunting for the little clues her mother and grandmother had let fall about him, and the sum of them all was remarkably meagre.
A handsome, confident man, who had managed to retain his friends without ever letting them get on to too intimate ground.
No wife ever, and (as far as anyone knew!) no children anywhere, but all the same, his kinswomen had spoken of him tolerantly, even appreciatively, as an accomplished lady-killer, evading marriage adroitly but finding his fun wherever he went.
An eye for the girls at sixty no less than at twenty; and silver-grey temples, blue eyes and a Turkish tan were even more dangerously attractive than youth.
He played fair, though, her mother had said of him generously.
Not with the husbands, perhaps, but with the ladies.
They had to be more than willing, and as ready as he to part without hard feelings afterwards.
Doubtful if he ever dented a heart; more than likely he gave quite a number of hearts a new lift after they'd imagined the ball was over for them.
It seemed she did, after all, know a few significant things about him.
He lived as he chose, one foot in home comforts, the other shod for roaming.
She understood now what Mr Stanforth had meant by describing him as a man who had deliberately evaded certain responsibilities and involvements, and even kept his affairs in scrupulous order  mainly to avoid being badgered, or giving anyone a hold on him.
And she thought suddenly, with a totally unexpected flash of dismay and sympathy: My God, you overdid it, didn't you?
You were so successful at it that in the end you could vanish without leaving a soul behind sufficiently concerned about you to kick up a fuss — only a solicitor worried about the legal hang-ups, and especially the money!
Sympathy, of course, might be misapplied here.
For all she knew, so far from being lonely and deprived at this moment, he might well be taking his mild pleasures in his usual fashion, with some lady chanced upon by pure luck in the wilds of Anatolia.
In which case he would surface again when it suited him.
All the same, the image of his isolation remained with her, and made her feel uneasy and even guilty towards him.
So it was partly out of an illogical sense of obligation that she began to read his book on Aurae Phiala.
Eighty or so acres of Midshire by the river Comer, close by the border of Wales.
A recreation city, apparently, for the officers of the garrison at Silcaster, and the legions tramping the long course of Watling Street.
The account he gave of it was detailed, detached and distinctly unenthusiastic.
A place of historical interest in its small way, especially for its sudden death at the end of the fourth century, after the legions that were its life and its protection had been withdrawn.
But otherwise a site very unlikely to repay much further examination, and hardly worth spending money on, while so many more promising sites waited their turn to snatch a crumb of the meagre and grudging funds available.
In plan after plan and page after page, Doctor Morris amended the estimates even he had given in articles previously published, and disputed various claims made for Aurae Phiala by other authorities.
Their aerial photographs he subjected to  destructive scrutiny, the light crop lines they detected under the unbroken fields he dated several centuries later than the sacking of Aurae Phiala, the dark crop marks emerging so strongly in contrast he refused to consider as early Roman military lines, but set well back into pre-Roman settlement.
(A light, sandy sub-soil, Charlotte learned, provided a first-class ground for crop-marks, since crops growing over ancient foundations tend to ripen and show yellow while the rest of the field is still green.
And the crop-marks that show dark instead of pale are likely to lie along the lines where timber walls stood, prior to the stone.)
In short, Doctor Morris was bored with Aurae Phiala, and succeeded in making it slightly boring for his readers.
Charlotte found herself intrigued by his handling of some of his colleagues who took views different from his own.
His deference, while he refuted their conclusions, was careful and considerate.
Even, perhaps, a little cagey?
She felt almost sorry for Professor M. L. Vaughan, who was obviously in the same rank as her self-confident great-uncle, and differed from him on almost every point.
She would have been completely convinced, but for that limpid, lovely photograph on the book's cover, so serene, and pure, and gracious in its emptiness of man, a tragic landscape recognised and captured.
It was one of those cosmic accidents which are no accident, that the next day, when she called in at a bookshop to look for some more Morris titles, she should find on the same shelf the total output of Professor M. L. Vaughan; and among the rest his: Aurae Phiala: A Pleasure City of the Second Century A.D. She took it down and opened it at random, and the prose caught her by its incandescent fervour.
He was Welsh, of course, by his name; this frontier site might be expected to excite him.
But he wrote like a sceptic captured and moved against his will.
She bought another of her uncle's books, but she bought, also, Professor Vaughan's; and his was the one she began to read, in the train to a modest concert engagement in Sussex.
Experts do differ, of course, even experts of equal eminence.
And yet they were writing about the same place, and both of them knew it intimately, and had known it for years.
Every indication Alan Morris rejected, Professor Vaughan accepted and expounded.
He gave the city not eighty or so acres of ground, but more like two hundred and twenty, he burned to have the funds to take up lovingly every acre of those two hundred and twenty, and tenderly brush away the dust of centuries from every artifact he expected to recover; and his expectations were high.
It was all very odd, very attractive, very mystifying.
Charlotte got back into London rather late that night, and rather tired, but hooked beyond redemption upon Aurae Phiala.
It was the last preoccupation of her kinsman before his exit from England, and it was a strangely appealing bone of contention between him and several of his peers.
Charlotte lay stretched upon her bed, waiting to relax enough for her bath, reviewing her evening's performance with merciless austerity — the oboe is a tyrannical instrument, and demands lofty standards — and confronting her odd, challenging, unknown English great-uncle, unexpectedly lost before she had ever become aware of him.
He was beginning to threaten her personal security, her conviction of her own integrity.
He was a ghost — a figure of speech, of course, she was in no doubt of his irrepressible re-emergence — whom she had to placate and exorcise.
She knew, then, that she was going to Aurae Phiala, to look at that charged, controversial, emotional ground-site for herself.
It was a gesture without any wider significance, she knew that; she was exorcising and placating no one but  herself.
But at least she would be treading in his footsteps, and somewhere along the way a clearer picture of him might emerge.
The move to Midshire even made economic sense; she had several modest school recitals in Birmingham and the Black Country during the next month, and it would be cheaper to move up there and find a furnished room somewhere, rather than spend the intervening time here in town.
She left by train for Comerbourne the next morning.
She paid her ten pence at the glass cage of the entrance booth, to a young man who could not possibly be the custodian, Great-Uncle Alan's contemporary, but was clearly something rather more scholarly than a mere gate-keeper.
He had a long, agreeable, supercilious face, dark eyes which dwelt upon his latest customer appreciatively but not offensively, and a general style that hovered oddly between the fastidious and the casual.
His long hair stopped neatly at the level where it curved most attractively, but his shave was indifferent.
Either that, or he had only yesterday decided to bow to fashion and grow a beard.
His slacks and sweater were well-styled and good, but he managed to wear them as if they were about to fall off him.
His aim had been either hopelessly inaccurate, or else capricious of intent.
He had a pile of books, two or three open, and a large loose-leaf notebook at his table in a corner of the booth.
It was early in the season yet, and he probably had long periods of inactivity to fill up between visitors; but he was not going to be left at leisure for long this time, for in the gravelled car park outside the enclosure a large bus was just disgorging a load of loud and active schoolboys, shepherded by a frantic youth hardly older than the eldest of his charges.
The schools were evidently back after Easter.
Charlotte took her ticket, and went on into the enclosure  of Aurae Phiala.
Once round the low barrier of the gatehouse and the prefabricated museum building, with her back turned on the plateau along which the road cruised towards distant Silcaster, the shallow, silver-green bowl of the book-jacket opened before her, wide and tranquil.
There, even on this windy and showery day of late April, there was a stillness and a warmth, and in the flower-beds that had been laid out among the stretches of lush emerald turf the daffodils and narcissi were at least two weeks ahead of their fellows in the outer world.
It was a naturally sheltered basin, a trick of the undulating meadows along the Comer.
Narrow, gravelled paths led forward into the maze of low, broken stone walls, the pale ground-plan of a dead settlement.
Delicately placed on a slight ridge, left-centre and midway between gatehouse and river, the surviving columns of the forum balanced, lifting the eyes to the exactly right focal point in a sky of scintillating, tearful blue feathered with airy clouds.
Two groups of higher walls clustered below in the hollow of the bowl.
And everywhere the orderly, skeletal bones of foundations, brittle and austere, patterned the brilliant grass.
The distant border of the enclosure was the river itself, sweeping in serpentine curves round the perimeter.
From where she stood it shimmered in silver under a glancing sun, though upstream at the inn, where she had seen it close to, it rolled darkly brown and turgid, and laden with the debris of bushes, for the spring thaw had come late and violently, bringing down an immense weight of snow-water from the mountains of Wales.
They were constructing a series of weirs upstream, so they had told her at ‘The Salmon's Return’, which would eventually control this annual predator, but for this year, at least, it surged down irresistibly as ever, biting acres out of its banks as it cornered, like a ferocious animal frustrated.
Its wildness and  this elegiac calm met, circled each other, and survived.
The demon passed, not once for all, but constantly, and the dead turned over in their sleep, and went on dreaming.
From here, where she stood orientating herself to the unknown photographer's vision of Aurae Phiala, and sharing his revelation, even that violent force, at once protection and threat, seemed charmed into tameness, passing on tiptoe by this idyllic place.
‘Idyllic!
You're perfectly right,’ said a voice just behind her shoulder; a male voice, pitched almost apologetically low, to make its uninvited approach respectable and respectful.
And she was quite sure she had not said a word aloud!
How did he know what she was thinking?
It was a liberty.
But wasn't it also a compliment?
‘That's why they chose it,’ the voice said, diverting her possible resentment before she could even be aware of it herself.
‘It was a pleasure city, quite unreal like all its kind.
And then it turned real — always the beginning of tragedy.
People walked a tightrope here, in search of a secure living, just like today.
And history walked out on them, and left them to die.
It happens to most paradisal places.
That's the irony.’
Many times during this pocket lecture she could have turned and looked at her instructor, and put him clean out of countenance merely by looking; but she had not done it because she was so sure that he was the young man from the entrance booth, a licensed enthusiast, and entitled to his brief moments of emotional escape.
His bus-load of senior schoolboys were all over Aurae Phiala by this time, gushing downhill towards the river like streams in spate, and no doubt he was free for a minute or two to breathe again and care about his own theories and idylls.
Besides, she liked his voice.
It was low-pitched and reverentially modulated, a nice, crisp, modest baritone.
And knowledgeable!
She had a respect for people who knew their subject, and she was  here to discover Aurae Phiala; he could be very useful to her.
‘Are you doing research here?’ she asked, and turned to face him.
Leaning over the glass counter of his booth, the young man in charge was deep in conversation with an elderly gentleman draped with cameras, and she was gazing into the face of quite a different person.
The small shock of surprise disturbed her judgement for a moment, and the awareness of feeling and looking disconcerted inclined her to resent him, and to look for and find impudence in an approach which would have seemed perfectly excusable in a resident scholar.
For that matter, she might not have been far out in thinking him impudent; his manner was innocence itself, his deference if anything delicately overdone, as though he were ready to come down off his high horse the moment she came down off hers, and didn't anticipate that the descent need be long delayed.
He had the wit to keep talking.
‘It began as a sort of rest-station and leave resort, as seasonal and artificial as a seaside fun-fair.
And then it grew, and traders and service providers thought it worthwhile to settle here and go into business.
They brought their families, some of them intermarried with time-expired soldiers who chose to settle here, too, and it grew into a real, life-and-death town, where everyone had a stake sunk so deep that when the legions started to leave, the locals still couldn't get out.
Everything they had was here.
No, I don't belong here, I'm only visiting,’ he ended disarmingly, coming roundabout to the answer to her question.
‘It's my subject, that's all.
But I could see what you were thinking.
It is a beautiful place.’
He was taller than she by only a few inches, and slenderly built, an athletic lightweight in a heather tweed sportscoat  and grey cords.
He had a thick crop of wiry hair the colour of good toffee, and heavy eyelashes many shades darker, as lavish as on a Jersey cow, fringing golden-brown eyes of such steady and limpid sincerity that she felt certain he could not possibly be just what he seemed.
The face that confronted her with so much earnest goodwill and innocence, and with, she felt mistrustfully, such incalculable thoughts behind it, was square and brown, with a good deal of chin and nose to it, and an odd mouth with one corner higher than the other.
He could have been anything from twenty-five to thirty, but not, she judged, beyond thirty.
He did not look like a wolf, but he did look like a young man with an eye for a girl, and techniques that would bear watching.
‘How kind of you,’ she said, balancing nicely on the edge of irony, in case a few minutes more of this should see him running out of line to shoot, and make it desirable to jettison him, ‘how kind of you to tell me all about it!’
‘Not at all!’ he said, and had the grace to flush a little ; she even had a fleeting suspicion that he enjoyed the ability to flush at will.
‘How kind of you not to resent being told!
I get carried away.
Amateurs do.
And this one I really like.
Look at that hillscape over in Wales!’
Fold on fold, rising gently from the water-meadows, the foothills receded in softening and paling shades of blue into the west.
‘No wonder the men who'd served out their time put their savings into market stalls and little businesses, tanneries, dye-works, gardens.
Nobody knew the risks better than they did.
It was a brave gamble, and in the end they lost it.
But it was a stake worth throwing for.’
‘I should have thought,’ said Charlotte, trapped into genuine interest and speculation, ‘that they'd have built just a little further from the river.
Weren't they for ever in danger of floods?
Look at the height of the water now.’
‘Ah, now, that's interesting.
You see, the Comer has changed its course since the third century.
Exactly when, we don't know, it may have been as late as the thirteenth century before it cut its way through.
Come on down, and I'll show you.’
And he actually took her arm, quite simply and confidently, and rushed her on the wings of his enthusiasm down through the green complexities of the bowl, between the crisp, serrated walls, across the fragments of tiled pavement, past the forum pillars, down to where the emerald turf sloped off under a token wire barrier to the riverside path and the waters of the Comer.
Here, at close quarters, the fitful, elusive silver congealed into the turgid brown flood she had seen upriver, a silent surge of water looking almost solid in its power, sweeping along leaves and branches and roots and swathes of weed in its eddies, gnawing away loose red layers of the soil along this near bank, and eating at the muddy rim of the path.
The speed of its silent, thrusting passage dazzled her eyes as she stared into it.
The snows in Wales had lain long, and the spring rains had been heavy and protracted; the Comer drank, and grew quietly mad.
‘That's it!’ she said, fascinated.
‘That's what I meant.
Would you choose to live close by that?’
‘But look across the river there.
You see how the level rises?
Gently, but it rises, look right round where I'm pointing, and you'll see there's a whole oval island of higher ground.
In Roman times the river flowed on the far side of that.
Aurae Phiala was close enough for fishing, close to two good fords, in all but the flood months, and safe from actual flooding.
In a broad valley like this you inevitably get these S-bends, and this was the biggest one.
By the Middle Ages the river had gradually cut back through the neck of land at this side of the rise, until it cut right through to where it runs now.
You can still trace the old course by the  lush growth of bushes and trees.
Look, a regular horse-shoe of them.’
She looked, and was impressed almost against her will, for everything was as he said.
Alders and willows and rich grass and wild rose briars described a great, smooth horseshoe shape that was still hollowed gently into the green earth, with such authority that it had been acknowledged in perpetuity as a natural boundary, and a single large field hemmed within it.
‘Probably if they ever raise the funds to do a proper dig here, they'll find the town had a guard outpost on that hillock.
Not that the tribesmen would attempt anything more than a quick raid by night, not until the legions were withdrawn.
And if they ever did set out to open up this place,’ he said consideringly, ‘there are a dozen more important places to begin, of course.’
‘Why haven't they ever?
Labour isn't a problem, is it?
I thought there were armies of students only too anxious to join digs in the long vacation.’
‘It isn't the labour, it's the money.
Excavation is a costly business, and Silcaster hasn't got enough money or enough interest.’
‘Oh?’ she said, surprised.
‘I thought it was Ministry property.’
‘No, it's privately owned.
It belongs to Lord Silcaster.
He keeps it up pretty decently, considering, but it's all done on a shoe-string, it has practically to pay for itself.
The curator has a house downstream there, among the trees — you can see the red roof.
And the only other staff seems to be that young fellow in the kiosk, and I rather think he's working for peanuts while he mugs up a thesis.’
‘And a gardener-handyman,’ said Charlotte, her eyes following the vigorous heave and surge of the mole-brown water as it tore down past them and ripped at the curve of  the bank, lipping half across the trodden right of way.
It had been higher still, probably some three or four days earlier, for it had bitten a great red hole in the shelving bank, like a long wound in the smooth turf, and left the traces of its attack in half-dried puddles of silky clay and a litter of sodden leaves and bushes.
Round this broken area a big, blond young man in stained corduroys and a donkey jacket was busy erecting a system of iron posts striped in red and white, and stringing a rope from them to cordon off the slip.
‘Hey, there's brickwork breaking through there!’
Charlotte's companion said with quickening interest, and set off to have a closer look.
The cordoned area was much bigger than they had realised, for several square yards of the level ground on top had subsided into ominous, shallow holes, here and there breaking the turf, and the slope down to the river path, once dropping gradually a matter of fifteen feet or so, now sagged in red rolls of soil and grass.
The gardener had completed his magic circle, and was hanging three warning boards from the stanchions, with the legend boldly and hurriedly slashed in red paint: DANGER!
KEEP CLEAR!
By a natural enough process, this injunction immediately attracted the most unruly fringe of the school party, straying from the group of their fellows in the forum.
They came like flies to honey, not the heedless junior element, either, but a knot of budding sophisticates in their teens, led by a tall, slim sixteen-year-old on whose walk, manner and style all the rest appeared to be modelling themselves.
The young teacher, observing this deliberate defection, broke off his lecture to raise his voice, none too hopefully, after his strays.
‘Boys, come back here at once!
Come here and pay attention!
Boden, do you hear?’
The boy who must be Boden heard very well.
His  strolling gait became exaggeratedly languid and assured.
One or two of his following hesitated, wavered and turned back.
Most of the others hovered diplomatically to make it look as if they were about to turn back, while still edging gingerly forward.
Boden advanced at an insolent saunter to the stretched rope.
The gardener, suddenly aware of him, reared erect to his full impressive six-feet-two and stood still, narrowly observing this unchancy opponent.
The boy gazed back sweetly, forbearing from touching anything, and daring anyone to challenge his intentions.
He was a good-looking boy, and knew it.
He was pushing manhood, and much too well aware of that, though he believed himself to be much nearer maturity than he actually was.
Twice he advanced a hand with deliberate teasing towards the hook that sustained the rope on the posts, and twice diverted the gesture into something innocuous.
The gardener narrowed long, grey-blue eyes and made never a move.
The boy stretched out a foot under the rope, and prodded with the toe of a well-polished shoe at the edge of one of the ominous cracks in the grass.
The gardener, with deliberation, put down the spade he held, and took one long step to circle the obstruction between them.
The boy gave an amused flick of his head, swung round unhurriedly — yet not too slowly, either — and sauntered away with a laugh, his admirers tittering after him.
Distant across the grass, the young teacher, with opportunist alacrity, chose that moment to call: ‘That's better, Boden!
Come on, now, quickly, you're holding up the whole party.’
‘The secret of success with performing fleas,’ said Charlotte's self-constituted guide startlingly, diverted even from his Roman passion, ‘is to synchronise your orders with their hops.
Our unfortunate young friend seems to know the principle, whether he can make it work or not.’
The gardener stood a moment to make sure that his antagonist was really retiring, then turned back to complete his work.
His eye met Charlotte's, and his face flashed into a sudden brief, almost reluctant smile.
‘Flipping kids!’ he said in a broad, deep country voice, with a hint of the singing eloquence of Wales.
‘They give you much trouble normally?’ asked the young man.
‘What you'd expect.
Not that much,’ he allowed  tolerantly .
‘But that one's a case.’
‘You know him?’ the young man asked sympathetically.
‘Never seen him before.
I know his sort, though, on sight.’
‘Oh, I don't know…he's just flexing his muscles.’
He looked over his shoulder, to where the youthful shepherd was fretfully hustling his flock from the forum into the skeleton entrance of the baths.
‘He's got a teacher bossing him around who's about four years older than he is, if that, and a lot less self-confident, but holding all the aces.
Not that he plays them all that well,’ he admitted, thoughtfully watching the harried youngster trying to be as tall as his tallest and most formidable charge.
‘And of course,’ he said aside to Charlotte, with a devastating smile, ‘having a girl like you around doesn't make their problem any easier for either of them.’
‘I could go away,’ Charlotte offered, between offence and gratification.
‘Don't do that!’ he said hastily.
‘Each of them would blame the other.
And you haven't seen half what's here to be seen yet.
’ He turned back to the gardener.
‘When did this slip happen?’
‘This morning.
Water's been right up over the path two days or more, I reckon it's loosened part o’ the foundations under here.’
He stood at the edge of the slope, looking  down the line of his cordon and into the turgid water.
‘Who'd get the blame, I ask you, if some young big-head like him got larking about in that lot, and the whole thing caved in and buried him alive?
I don't reckon they'd allow as a rope and three notices was enough.
It'd be me for it, me and Mr Paviour and his lordship — ah, and in that order!
But they expect us to keep the place open for ‘em.
We got stated hours, nobody lets us off because the Comer floods.’
His deep, warm western voice had risen into plangent eloquence, indignant and rapt.
And Charlotte was suddenly aware of him as a person, and by no means an unintelligent person, either; but above all a vital presence, to be ignored only at the general peril.
He was built rather heavily even for his height, a monumental creature admirably suited to these classic and heroic surroundings; and his face was a mask of antique beauty, but crudely cut out of a local stone.
She could see him as a prototype for the border entrepreneur trapped here in the decline and fall of this precarious city, the market-stallholder, the baths attendant, the potter, the vegetable grower, any one of the native opportunists who had rallied to serve and exploit this hothouse community of time-expired settlers and pay-happy leave-men.
He had a forehead and nose any Greek might have acknowledged with pride, and long, grey-blue eyes like slivers of self-illuminating stone, somewhere between lapis-lazuli and granite.
His fairness inclined ever so slightly towards the Celtic red of parts of Wales, an alien colouring in both countries.
He had a full, passionate, childlike mouth, generously shaped but brutally finished; and his cleanshaven cheeks and jaw were powerful and fleshless, pure, massive bone under the fine, fair skin.
It was easy to see that his roots went down fathoms deep in this soil, and transplanting would have destroyed everything in him that was of quality.
There was nowhere else he belonged.
Charlotte said, on an impulse she only partially understood: ‘Don't worry about him.
In an hour they'll be gone.’
And just as impulsively she turned to check on the movements of that incalculable swarm of half-grown children who were causing him this natural anxiety.
The boys and their uneasy pastor were moving tidily enough into the first green enclosure which must be the frigidarium of the baths, emerging in little, bulbous groups from between the broken walls of the entrance.
She saw the stragglers gather, none too enthusiastically, but not unwillingly, either, and waited for the last-comers.
Something was missing there.
It took her a few minutes to realise what it was.
The teacher, self-consciously gathering his chicks about him, was now the tallest person in sight.
Where had the odious senior, Boden, gone, somewhere among those broken, enfolding walls?
And how had he shed his train?
The numbers there looked more or less complete.
He was a natural stray, of course.
He needed the minimum of cover to drop out of sight, whenever it suited him.
But at least he was well away from here.
No doubt something else had diverted his attention, and afforded him another cue to spread confusion everywhere around him.
‘There's always closing-time.’ said the gardener-handyman philosophically.
He lifted one narrowed glance of blue-grey eyes, slanting from Charlotte to her escort and sharing a fleeting smile between them as recognised allies.
He was gone, withdrawing rather like a mountain on the move, downriver where the water most encroached.
He walked like a mountain should walk, too, striding without upheaval, drawing his roots with him.
‘Come down to the path,’ said the enthusiast, abruptly returning to his passion as soon as the distractions withdrew, ‘and I'll show you something.
Round this way it's not  so steep.
Here, let me go first.’
He took possession of her hand with almost too much confidence, drawing her with him down the slippery slope of wet grass towards the waterside.
Her smooth-soled court shoes glissaded in the glazed turf, and he stood solidly, large feet planted, and let her slide bodily against him.
He looked willowy enough, but he felt like a rock.
They blinked at each other for a moment at close quarters, wide-eyed and brow to brow.
‘I ought to have introduced myself,’ said the young man, as though prompted by this accidental intimacy, and gave her a dazzled smile.
‘My name's Hambro — Augustus, of all the dirty tricks.
My friends call me Gus.’
‘I suspect,’ she said, shifting a little to recover firmer standing, ‘that should be Professor Hambro?
And F.S.A.
after it?
At least!’
But she did not respond with her own name.
She was not yet ready to commit herself so far.
And after all, this could be only a very passing encounter.
‘Just an amateur,’ he said modestly, evading questioning as adroitly as she.
‘Hold tight…the gravel breaks through here, there's a better grip.
Now, look what the river did to one bit of the baths.’
They stood on the landward edge of the riverside path, very close to the lipping water.
Before them the bevelled slope, fifteen feet high, cut off from them the whole upper expanse of Aurae Phiala, with all its flower-beds and stone walls; and all its visitors had vanished with it.
They were alone with the silently hurtling river and the great, gross wound it had made in this bank, curls of dark-red soil peeled back and rolling downhill, and a tangle of uprooted broom bushes.
At a level slightly higher than their heads, and several yards within the cordon, this raw soil fell away from a dark hole like the mouth of a deep, narrow cave, large enough, perhaps, to admit a small child.
The top of it was arched, and looked like brickwork, the pale amber  brick of Aurae Phiala.
Bushes sagged loosely beneath it; and the masonry at the crown of the arch showed paler than on either curve, as though it had been exposed to the air longer, perhaps concealed by the sheltering broom.
‘You know,’ said Gus, as proudly as if he had discovered it himself, ‘what that is?
It's the extreme corner of what must be one hell of a huge hypocaust.’
‘Really?’ she said cautiously, still not quite convinced that he was not shooting a shameless line in exploitation of her supposed ignorance.
‘What's a hypocaust?’
‘It's the system of brick flues that runs under the entire floor of the caldarium — the hot room of the baths — to circulate the hot air from the furnace.
That's how they heated the place.
Narrow passages like that one, built in a network right from here to about where the school party was standing a few minutes ago.
They'd just come in, as it were, from the street, through the palaestra, the games courts and exercise ground, and into the cold room.
The chaps who wanted the cold plunge would undress and leave their things in lockers there, and there were two small cold basins to swim in — two here, anyhow — one on either side.
The sybarites who wanted the hot water bath or the hot air bath would pass through into the slightly heated room one stage farther in, and undress there, then go on in to whichever they fancied.
The hypocaust ran under both.
If you were fond of hot water, you wallowed in a sunken basin.
If you favoured sweating it out, you sat around on tiered benches and chatted with your friends until you started dissolving into steam, and then got yourself scraped down by a slave with a sort of sickle thing called a strigil, and massaged, and oiled and perfumed, or if you were a real fanatic you probably went straight from the hot room to take a cold plunge, like sauna addicts rolling in the snow.
And then you were considered in a fit state to go and eat your dinner.’
‘By then,’ she said demurely, ‘I should think you'd, want it.’
He eyed her with a suspicious but quite unabashed smile.
‘You know all this, don't you?
You've been reading this place up.’
‘I could hardly read up this bit, could I?
It only came to light today.’
She strained her eyes into the broken circle of darkness, and a breath of ancient tension and fear seemed to issue chillingly from the hole the river had torn in history.
‘But they're quite big, those flues, if that's their width.
A man could creep through them.’
‘They had to be cleaned periodically.
These aren't unusual.
But the size of the whole complex is, if I'm right about this.’
She let him help her back up the slope, round the other side of the danger area, and demonstrate by the skeletal walls where the various rooms of the baths lay, and their impressive extent.
She had no idea why she suddenly looked back, as they set off across the level turf that stretched above that mysterious underworld of brick-built labyrinths.
The newness of the scar, the crudity of the glimpse it afforded into long-past prosperities and distresses, the very fact that no one, since this city was abandoned overnight, had threaded the maze below — a matter of fifteen centuries or more — drew her imagination almost against her will, and she turned her head in involuntary salute and promise, knowing she would come back again and again.
Thus she saw, with surprise and disquiet, the young, dark head cautiously hoisted out of cover to peer after them.
How could he be there?
And why should he want to?
The incalculable Boden had somehow worked his way round once again into forbidden territory, had been lurking somewhere in the bushes, waiting for them to leave.
The twentieth century, inquisitive, irreverent, quite without feeling for the past, homed in upon this ambiguous danger-zone with its life in its hand.
She clutched at her companion's arm, halting him in mid-spate and bringing his head round in respectful enquiry.
‘That boy!
He's there again — but inside the rope now!
Why do they have to go where it says: Danger?’
Gus Hambro wheeled about with unexpectedly authoritative aplomb, just in time to see the well-groomed young head duck out of sight.
He dropped Charlotte's hand, took three large strides back towards the crest, and launched a bellow of disapproval at least ten times as effective as the hapless teacher's appeals:
‘Get out of that!
Yes, you!
Want me to come and fetch you?
And stay out!’
He noted the rapid, undignified scramble by which the culprit extricated himself from the ropes on the river path, followed by ominous little trickles of loose earth; and the exaggerated dignity with which he compensated as soon as he was clear, his slender back turned upon the voice that blasted him out of danger, his crest self-consciously reared in affected disregard of sounds which could not possibly be directed at him.
‘Those notices,’ announced Gus clearly to the general air, but not so loudly as to reach unauthorised ears, ‘mean exactly what they say.
Anybody we have to dig out of there we're going to skin alive afterwards.
So watch it!’
It was at that point that Charlotte began seriously to like her guide, and to respect his judgement.
‘That's it,’ he said, tolerantly watching the Boden boy's swaggering retreat towards the curator's house.
‘He'll lay off now.
His own shower weren't around to hear that, he'll be glad to get back to where he rates as a hero.’
She was not quite so sure, for some reason, but she didn't  say so.
The tall, straight young back that sauntered away down-river, to come about in a wide circuit via the fence of the curator's garden, and the box hedge that continued its line, maintained too secure an assurance, and too secret a satisfaction of its own, in spite of the dexterity with which it had removed itself from censure.
This Boden observed other people's taboos just so far as was necessary, but he went his own way, sure that no values were valid but his own.
Still, he removed himself, if only as a gesture.
That was something.
‘You did that very nicely,’ she said, surprising herself.
‘I try my best,’ he said, unsurprised.
‘After all, I've been sixteen myself.
I know it's some time ago, but I do remember, vaguely.
And I'm not sure it isn't all your fault.’
She felt sure by then that it was not; she was completely irrelevant.
But she did not say so.
She was beginning to think that this Gus Hambro was a good deal more ingenuous than he supposed; but if so, it was an engaging disability in him.
‘I was going to show you the laconicum,’ he said, and he turned and snuffed like a hound across the green, open bowl, and set out on a selected trail, nose to scent, heading obliquely for the complex of standing walls where several rooms of the ancient baths converged.
The amber brickwork and rosy layers of tile soared here into the complicated pattern of masonry against the pale azure sky.
‘You see?
That same floor we've been crossing reaches right to here, one great caldarium, with that hypocaust deployed underneath it all the way.
And just here is the vent from the heating system, the column that brought the hot air directly up here into the room when required.’
It was merely a framework of broken, blonde walls, barely knee-high, like the shaft of a huge well, a shell withdrawn into a corner of the great room.
Over the round vent  a rough wooden cover, obviously modern, was laid.
Gus put a hand to its edge and lifted, and the cover rose on its rim, and showed them a glimpse of a deep shaft dropping into darkness, partially silted up below with rubble.
‘Yes — it would take some money and labour to dig that lot out!
Wonder what happened to the original cover?
It would be bronze, probably.
Maybe it's in the museum, though I think some of the better finds went to the town museum in Silcaster.’
‘This is what you call the laconicum?’ she asked, drawing back rather dubiously from the dank breath that distilled out of the earth.
‘That's it.
Though you might, in some places, get the word laconia used for small hot-air rooms, too.
They could send the temperature up quickly when required, by raising the cover — even admit the flames from the furnace if they wanted to.
Come and have a look round the museum.
If you've time?
But perhaps you've got a long drive ahead,’ he said, not so much hesitantly as enquiringly.
‘I'm staying at ‘The Salmon's Return’, just upstream,’ she said.
‘Ten minutes’ walk, if that.
Yes, let's see the museum, too.’
It was a square, prefabricated building, none too appropriate to the site, but banished to the least obtrusive position, behind the entrance kiosk.
It was full of glass cases, blocks of stone bearing vestigial carving, some fragments of very beautiful lettering upon the remains of a stone tablet, chattering schoolboys prodding inquisitively everywhere, and the young teacher, perspiring freely now, delivering a lecture upon Samian ware.
Boden was not among his listeners, nor anywhere in the three small, crowded rooms.
By this time Charlotte would have felt a shock of surprise at ever finding that young man where he was supposed to be.
They made the round of the place.
A great deal of red glaze pottery, some glass vessels, even one or two fragments of silver; tarnished mirrors, ivory pins, little bronze brooches, a ring or two.
Gus, tepid about the collection in general, grew excited about one or two personal ornaments.
‘See this little dragon brooch — there isn't a straight line in it, it's composed of a dozen quite unnecessarily complex curves.
Can you think of anything less Roman?
Yet it is Roman — interbred with Celtic.
Like the mixed marriages that were general here.
This kind of ornament, in a great many variations, you can locate all down this border.
In the north, too, but they differ enough to be recognisable.’
She found the same curvilinear decoration in several other pieces, and delighted him by picking them out without hesitation from the precise and formal Roman artifacts round them.
‘Anything that looks like a symbol for a labyrinth, odds on it's either Celtic or Norse.’
It was nearly closing time, and the school party, thankfully marshalled by its young leader, was pouring vociferously out into the chill of the early evening, and heading with released shouts for its waiting coach.
The last and smallest darted back, self-importantly, to inscribe his name with care in the visitors' book, which lay open on a table by the door, before allowing himself to be shepherded after his companions.
On impulse, Charlotte stopped to look at what he had added in the ‘Remarks’ column, and laughed.
‘Veni, vidi, vici’, announced the ball-pen scrawl.
‘You should sign, too,’ said Gus, at her shoulder.
She knew why, but by then it was almost over in any case, for when was she likely to see him again?
So she signed ‘Charlotte Rossignol’, well aware that he was reading the letters as fast as she formed them.
‘Now may I drive you back to the pub?’ he said casually, as they emerged into the open air, and found the studious young man of the kiosk waiting to see his last customers out, one finger still keeping his place in a book.
‘I'm staying there, too.
And as it happens, I didn't walk.
I've got my car here.’
The car park was empty but for the elderly gentleman's massive Ford, which was just crunching over the gravel towards the road, an old but impressive bronze Aston Martin which Charlotte supposed must belong to Gus — it sent him up a couple of notches in her regard — and the school bus, still stationary, boiling over with bored boys, and emitting a plaintive chorus of: ‘Why are we waiting?’
The driver stood leaning negligently against a front wing, rolling himself a cigarette.
Clearly he had long since trained himself to tune out all awareness of boys unless they menaced his engine or coachwork.
And why were they waiting?
The noise they were making indicated that no teacher was present, and there could be only one explanation for his absence now.
‘He's lost his stray again,’ said Gus, halting with the car keys levelled in his hand.
‘Here he comes now.
’ And so he did, puffing up out of the silvered, twilit bowl of Aurae Phiala, ominous at dusk under a low ceiling of dun cloud severed from the earth by a rim of lurid gold.
A glass bowl of fragile relics closed with a pewter lid; and outside, the fires of ruin, like a momentary recollection of the night, how many centuries ago, when the Welsh tribesmen massed, raided, killed and burned, writing ‘Finis’ to the history of this haunted city.
‘Poorboy! 'said Charlotte, suddenly outraged by the weariness and exasperation of this ineffectual little man, worn out by a job he had probably chosen as the most profitable within his scope, and now found to be extending him far beyond the end of his tether.
‘Whoever persuaded him he ought to be a teacher?’
‘He's not that far gone,’ Gus assured her with unexpected shrewdness.
‘He knows when to write off his losses.’
The young man came surging up to them, as the only other responsible people left around.
‘I beg your pardon, but you haven't seen one of my senior pupils around anywhere, by any chance?
A dark boy, nearly seventeen, answers — when he answers!— to the name of Gerry Boden.
He's a professional absentee.
Where we are, he is most likely not to be.
Sometimes with escort — chorus, rather!
This time, apparently, without, which must be by his own contriving.
I'm missing just one boy — the magnate himself.’
Between them they supplied all they could remember of the encounter by the roped-off enclosure above the river.
‘He never did come back to us,’ said the young man positively.
‘I always know whether he's there or not.
Like a pain, if you know what I mean.’
They knew what he meant.
He shrugged, not merely helplessly, rather with malevolent acceptance.
‘Well, I've looked everywhere.
He does it on purpose, of course.
This isn't the first time.
He's nearly seventeen, he has plenty of money in his pockets, and he knows this district like the palm of his hand.
We're no more than ten miles from home.
He can get a bus or a taxi, and he knows very well where to get either.
I don't know why I worry about him.’
‘Having a conscience does complicate things,’ said Gus with sympathy.
‘It simplifies this one,’ said the teacher grimly.
‘I've got a conscience about all this lot, all of 'em younger than our Gerry.
This time he can look out for himself, I'm going to get the rest home on time.’
He clambered aboard the coach, the juniors raised a brief, cheeky cheer, half mocking and half friendly, the driver hoisted himself imperturbably into his cab, and the  coach started up and surged ponderously through the gates and away along the Silcaster road.
Charlotte turned, before getting into the car, and looked back once in a long, sweeping survey of the twilit bowl of turf and stone.
Nothing moved there except the few blackheaded gulls wheeling and crying above the river.
A shadowy, elegiac beauty clothed Aurae Phiala, but there was nothing alive within it.
‘When did it happen?’ she asked.
‘The attack from the west, the one that finally drove the survivors away?’
‘Quite late, around the end of the fourth century.
Most of the legions were gone long before that.
Frantic appeals for help kept going out to Rome — Rome was still the patron, the protector, the fortress, even when she was falling to pieces herself.
About twenty years after the sack of Aurae Phiala, Honorius finally issued an edict that recognised what had been true for nearly a century.
He told the Britons they could look for nothing more, no money, no troops, no aid.
From then on they had to shift for themselves.’
‘And the Saxons moved in,’ said Charlotte.
He smiled, holding the passenger door open for her.
By this time he would not have been surprised if she had taken up the lecture and returned him a brief history of the next four centuries.
‘Well, the Welsh, over this side.
Death from the past, not the future.
A couple of anachronisms fighting it out here while real life moved in on them from the east almost unnoticed.
But their kin survived and intermarried.
Nothing quite disappears in history.’
But she thought, looking back at that pewter sky and narrow saffron afterglow as the Aston Martin purred into life and shot away at speed: Yes, individuals do!
Perversely, wilfully or haplessly, they do vanish.
One elderly, raffish archaeologist in Turkey, one uneasy, spoiled adolescent  here.
But of course they'll both emerge somewhere.
Probably the boy's halfway home by now, ahead of his party, probably he thumbed a lift the other way along this road as soon as he got intolerably bored.
That would amuse him, the thought of the fuss and the delay and the inconvenience to everyone, while he rode home to wherever home is, in the cab of a friendly lorry.
And Doctor Alan Morris?
He could be accounted for just as easily, and much more rationally.
Total absorption in his passion could submerge him far below the surface of mere time.
Somewhere in Anatolia, as yet unheralded, a major news story was surely brewing, to burst on the world presently in a rash of photographs, films, television interviews — some new discovery, one more Roman footprint in the east, stumbled on happily, and of such delirious interest that its discoverer forgot about the passing of the year, his minor responsibilities, and his fretful solicitor.
Over Aurae Phiala the April dusk closed very softly and calmly, like a hand crushing a silvery moth.
But her back was turned on the dead city then, and she did not see.
‘The Salmon's Return’ lay a quarter of a mile up-river, and dated back to the early seventeenth century, a long, low, white-painted house on a terrace cunningly clear of the flood level of the Comer, and with ideal fishing water for some hundreds of yards on either side of it.
It was small, and aware of the virtues of remaining small, lurking ambiguously between hotel and pub, and retaining its hold on the local bar custom while it lured in the fanatical fishermen from half the county for weekend indulgences and occasional contests.
Its ceilings were low, and its corners many and intimate.
And it belonged to a family, and reflected their stubborn conservative tastes, with a minimum of staff providing a maximum of service.
The only relatively new thing about it was its romantic and truthful name, which someone in the family had thought up early in the nineteenth century as an improvement on ‘The Leybourne Arms’; for the Leybourne family had been extinct since the fourteenth century, while salmon regularly did return several miles up-river from this house, and were regularly taken for a mile on either side.
Downstream, the nearest weir was a tourist sight in the season, flashing with silvery leaps as the salmon climbed to their spawning-grounds.
From the narrow approach lane a gravel drive swung round to the side door of the inn, and then continued, dwindling, to the rear, where there was a brick garage and a half-grassy car park.
Gus halted the Aston Martin at the doorway instead of driving straight on to the garage, and was out of the driving-seat like a greyhound out of a trap, to dart round to the passenger side and hand Charlotte out.
His meticulous performance slightly surprised her; there had been moments when they seemed to have achieved a more casual contact, and he couldn't be still trying to impress.
However, she allowed him to squire her to the desk, without comment and with a straight face, told him the number of her key, though keys were almost an affectation at ‘The Salmon's Return’, more for ornament than use, and let him take it down for her and escort her to the foot of the oak staircase, which wound in slightly drunken lurches about a narrow well, the polished treads hollowed by centuries of use.
He stood back then, and let her go, and she mounted the first flight, and the second, planting her fashionable square heels firmly on the beautiful old wood, which was austerely and very properly without covering, and recorded her movements accurately for anyone listening below.
She didn't look back, and she didn't linger, but her ears were pricked at every step.
She felt, rather than heard, how he turned smartly and loped back across the panelled hall towards the door, no doubt to drive the car round into the garage.
No doubt!
Except that he was in no hurry about starting it up.
Its aristocratic note was not loud, but proudly characteristic.
Though she had no car of her own just now, Charlotte had been driving, and driving well, for more than four years.
The second landing was carpeted, the wood of the flooring being slightly worn and hollowed.
Her steps could no longer be heard below, once she reached the corridor.
She did not even go as far as her room — the sound of the door  being unlocked, opening and closing again should surely not carry down to the hall.
She kicked off her shoes on the carpet, and slid back silently to listen down the well of the staircase; and picking up from this level only minor and ambiguous sounds, she went quickly down again one floor, to where she could lean cautiously over the glossy black banister, and train both eyes and ears upon any activity in the hall below.
Visually, her range was limited.
The acoustics were excellent.
She had no idea, until then, why she was acting as she was, or what she suspected, or why, indeed, she should suspect anything but a straight pick-up, and one so simply and attractively engineered as to be quite unalarming; a normal minor wolf on the prowl, with a long weekend to while away, and an eye cocked for congenial company, preferably intimate, but in any case gratifying.
And yet she held her breath as she leaned out from the cover of the first-floor corridor, and hung cautiously over the oak rail.
Mrs Lane was there just below her; she could see the top of the round, erect, crisply waved head of iron-grey hair, and the bountiful bulges, fore and aft, of the pocket-clipper figure below.
Mrs Lane was the miniature goddess who controlled her large, tolerant, good-humoured menfolk, and made this whole organisation work.
And at this moment she had a finger threading the maze of the register, and one hand already vaguely gesturing towards the key-board.
‘Well, yes,’ said the comfortable border voice, pondering, ‘I can give you a single room, but only for two nights, I'm afraid.
Weekends we're usually booked up in advance, you see, even in the close season.
There's a club meeting here for a social weekend — I think they like to keep their places warm here for when coarse fishing starts again.
Number 12, if two nights is any good to you?’
‘Better than nothing.
’ said Gus Hambro's voice heartily, but with circumspect quietness.
‘I'll take it, and gratefully.
This is a dream of a position you've got here, with the path down-river.
You ought to keep rooms for archaeologists as well as fishermen.’
‘They're not so predictable,’ said Mrs Lane practically, ‘and they do so tend to camp, you know.
The fishermen are good men for their comforts, and then they do patronise the bar.
After all, you need an audience when you talk about fish, and salmon especially.
You don't fish yourself now, Mr Hambro?’
‘I never really had time,’ said the winning baritone voice.
‘You might convert me, at that!
Number 12, you said?
And I can move my car round into the garage?
Fine, I'll find my way.
I'll sign in when I've put her away for the night.’
Charlotte withdrew into cover, and hoped no one on the upper deck had fallen over her discarded shoes.
Gus was plunging away out of the door, contented with his dispositions, and Mrs Lane, apparently satisfied of his bona fides— and Mrs Lane had an inbuilt crystal globe, and took some satisfying — had subsided into her private enclosure and was lost to sight.
Charlotte climbed the stairs to her own room, and let herself in silently, with considerable doubts about her own situation.
She sat on the edge of her bed and thought it out.
It need not, after all, be so abstruse, or so deeply suspect.
He was young, alert, very much aware of the opposite sex, and with a personal taste which apparently inclined strongly towards her type.
When she had revealed that she was staying here, he had simply decided to hook up and join on.
But no, that wouldn't do!
She chilled, remembering.
She had told him where she was booked, and at that stage he hadn't reacted at all.
Not until she had signed her name in the book, at his request, and his long-sighted eves had read it over her  shoulder.
Only after that had he said: ‘Let me drive you back, I'm staying there, too’.
As he had certainly not been, it seemed; not until now.
But what could her name mean to him?
It wasn't Morris, it wasn't identifiable, even to a keen archaeologist — not unless he happened to be all too well informed about the experts who had interested themselves in Aurae Phiala, and even in their heirs and heiresses, down to herself.
But why?
What could he be after, where could he fit in, if this was true?
No, she was imagining things.
He had simply hesitated to take the plunge and stake on a worthwhile weekend with her, and it was pure chance that he had made up his mind just after he had learned her name.
Logic argued the case for this theory, but instinct rejected it.
Unless she was much mistaken in that young man, pure chance played very little part in his proceedings.
His manipulation of impudence and deference was too assured for that.
Whatever he was about, there was method in his madness.
Well, she thought, it won't be difficult to judge how right I am, if I pay out a few yards of line for him.
If he isn't just amusing himself, then I can expect total siege.
And I shan't be making the mistake of attributing it to any charms of mine, either.
And even if I'm wrong — well, I might find it quite amusing, too.
She had not intended changing for the evening, country inns being the right setting for good tweed suits; but now she took her time about dressing, and chose a very austere frock in a dark russet-orange shade that touched off the marmalade lights in her eyes.
Why not use what armoury one has?
If he was setting out to find out more about her, she could certainly do with knowing a little more about him, and her chances were at least as good as his.
He was sitting in the bar with a drink and the evening  paper when she came down, and though he appeared not to notice her quiet descent until she was at the foot of the stairs, she had seen him shift his weight some seconds before he looked up, ready to spring to his feet and intercept her.
The look of admiration and pleasure, she hoped, was at any rate partly genuine.
‘May I get you a drink?
What would you like?’
No doubt about it, he meant to corner her for the evening.
If he had been simply playing the girl game, she reasoned, he would be getting steadily more intimate, and here he is reverting to deference.
Because I'm Uncle Alan's niece?
But she could not believe in him as that kind of reverent fan, whatever his enthusiasm for his subject.
‘Since we're both alone here,’ said Gus, coming back from the bar with her sherry, ‘will you be kind enough to have dinner with me?
It would be a pity to eat good food in silence, don't you think?’
‘Thank you,’ she said gravely, ‘I'd like that very much.’
Not that she intended accepting any favours from him, but she knew he was booked in for two nights, which gave her time to return his hospitality if she could not manipulate tonight into a Dutch treat.
‘When you get bored with my conversation,’ he said, ‘I promise to shut up.
There's even a telly tucked away somewhere.’
Boredom, thought Charlotte, as she made her way before him across the small panelled dining-room, is one thing I don't anticipate.
By the time they reached the coffee stage it had become clear that he was doing his best to pump her, though she hoped he had not yet realised how little result he was getting, or how assiduously she was trying, in her turn, to find out more about him.
The process would have been  entirely pleasant, if the puzzling implication had not lingered in her mind throughout, like a dark shadow without a substance.
And his method had its own grace.
She saw fit to admit to her musical background.
Why not, since some of her Midland concerts would be advertised in the local press, and inevitably come to his notice?
‘I call that one of the supreme bits of luck in life,’ he said warmly, ‘to be able to make your living out of what you love doing.’
‘So do 1.
One you enjoy, too, surely?
Don't tell me you don't love your archaeology.
But how does one make a living at it?
Apart from teaching?
Are you attached to one of the universities?’
Her tone was one of friendly and candid interest, but she wasn't getting many bites, either.
We should both make better fish than fishermen, she thought.
‘There aren't enough places to go round,’ he said ruefully, ‘and I'm not that good.
Some of us have to make do with jobs on the fringe.’
‘Such as what?
What do you do, exactly?’
No need for her to be as subtle as he was being.
She had, as far as he knew, no reason to be curious, and therefore no reason to dissemble her curiosity.
It was an unfair advantage, though; it made it harder for him to evade answering.
‘Such as acting as consultant and adviser on antiques generally — or in my case on one period.
Valuer — research man — I even restore pieces sometimes.’
‘Freelance?
It sounds a little risky.
Supposing there weren't enough clients?’
He smiled, rather engagingly, she admitted.
‘I'm retained by quite a big outfit.
And there's never any lack of clients.’
It was at that point that the stranger entered the dining-room, and stood for a moment looking round him as if in search of an acquaintance.
Charlotte had seen him turn in  the doorway to speak to Mrs Lane, whose placid smile indicated that she knew and welcomed him.
He looked like a local man, at home and unobtrusive in this comfortable country room as he would have been in the border landscape outside.
He was tall and thin, a leggy lightweight in a dark-grey suit, with a pleasant, long, cleanshaven face, and short hair greying at the temples and receding slightly from a weathered brown forehead.
He was of an age to be able to wear his hair comfortably short and his chin shaven without eccentricity, probably around fifty.
Middle age has its compensations.
There were only a few people left in the dining-room by that time, two elderly men earnestly swapping fishing stories over their brandy, a young couple holding hands fondly under the table, and a solitary ancient in a leather-elbowed tweed jacket, reading the evening paper.
The newcomer scanned them all, and his glance settled upon Charlotte and her companion.
He came threading his way between the tables, and halted beside them.
‘I beg your pardon!
Miss Rossignol?
And Mr Hambro?
I'm sorry to intrude on you at this hour, but if you can give me a few minutes of your time you may be able to help me, and I'll be very much obliged.’
Charlotte had assented to her name with a startled bow, but without words.
Gus Hambro looked up with rounded brows and a good-natured smile, and said vaguely: ‘Anything we can do, of course!
But are you sure it's us you want?
We're just visitors around here.’
The stranger smiled, still rather gravely but with a warmth that Charlotte found reassuring.
‘If you weren't, you probably wouldn't come within my — strictly unofficial — brief.
We locals don't frequent Aurae Phiala much, we've lived with it all our lives, it doesn't excite us.
I gather from the visitors’ book that you were both there this  afternoon, that's the only reason for this visit.
May I sit down?’
‘Oh, please!’ said Charlotte.
‘Do excuse us, you took us so by surprise.’
‘Thank you!’ he said, and drew up a third chair.
His voice was low, equable and leisurely; so much so that only afterwards did it dawn upon Charlotte how very few minutes the whole interview had occupied.
‘My name is Felse.
Detective Chief Inspector, Midshire C.l.D. — I mention it only by way of presenting credentials.
Strictly speaking I'm not occupied on a case at the moment, and this is quite unofficial.
If you were at Aurae Phiala this afternoon you probably saw something of a party of schoolboys going round the site with a teacher in charge.
A coachload of them from Comerbourne.’
‘We could hardly miss them,’ said Gus.
‘They were loading up to leave just when we came out.’
‘Including a senior, a boy about seventeen, who was probably subjecting his teacher to a certain amount of needling?’
‘Name of Boden,’ said Gus.
‘We had a modest brush with him ourselves.
Incidentally, they'd lost him — the coach set off without him in the end.’
‘Exactly the point,’ said Chief Inspector Felse.
‘He still hasn't come home.’
He caught the surprised and doubtful glance they exchanged, and went on practically: ‘I know!
He's perfectly competent, well supplied with money always, and it's no more than a quarter past nine.
Probably you'd already gathered that it isn't the first time he's played similar tricks, and that he's a law to himself, and comes and goes as he pleases.
The simple fact remains, he's never yet been known to miss a meal.
Suppose you tell me exactly where and how you last saw him.’
They did so, in detail, each supplementing the other's account and refreshing the other's memory.
‘Odd as it seems, that's the latest mention of him I've got so far.
He drew off and went back towards his party?’
‘Not directly,’ said Charlotte.
‘I suppose we just took it that he would, and weren't surprised that he made a pretence of being unconcerned and going his own way about it.
What he actually did was to stroll away down-river, right along the perimeter.
I watched him as far as the corner of the curator's garden, and saw him turn in alongside the hedge.
I didn't pay any attention afterwards.
I just took it for granted he was on his way back to the group.’
‘I've talked to his particular friends.
None of them saw him again.
He never rejoined his party.’
‘Have his parents reported him missing?’ asked Gus.
‘No, not yet.
His father happens to be a close neighbour of mine in the village of Comerford, that's all.
Young Collins — he teaches Latin for his sins — reported to the Bodens when the coach got back to Comerbourne, not to complain of the kid, but so that they shouldn't be worried about his non-arrival.
They know their son, and are more or less resigned to his caprices, but they know his consistencies, too.
He likes his comforts and he likes his food.
When he failed to show up by half past eight they did begin to wonder.
I happen to be three doors away, and dropping it in my lap is a discreet step short of making an official report.
Easier to back out of, and sometimes produces the same result.
This isn't a case.
And if it ever becomes one — God forbid!— it won't be my case.
But the odds are Gerry's merely run into something more interesting than usual, worth being late for supper.’
‘A girl?’ suggested Gus dubiously.
‘It happens.
Though up to now he's been too much in love with himself,’ said the chief inspector frankly, ‘to show much interest in girls.
He's not a bad kid, really.
Just the only one, too spoiled, and too clever.’
He rose, and  restored his chair to its place at the neighbouring table.
‘Thanks, anyhow, for pin-pointing the actual place and time.
No one seems to have caught a glimpse of him since.’
‘You don't think,’ said Charlotte, suddenly uneasy, ‘that he could possibly have missed his footing and slipped into the river?
It's running so high, and so fast, even a good swimmer might not be able to get out if he once got caught in the current.’
‘No, I don't.
He is a good swimmer — quite good enough, and quite mature enough in that way, to respect flood water.
And he wasn't attended by his admirers at that stage, so he had no inducement to show off by taking risks.
No, I feel confident he absented himself deliberately, for some reason of his own.’
‘Then he'll reappear,’ she said, ‘in his own good time.’
‘In all probability he will.
As soon as he begins to think pleasurably of his bed.’
He smiled at her.
‘Thank you, Miss Rossignol, and goodnight.
Goodnight, Mr Hambro.’
He turned and left the room, threading his way between the deserted tables to vanish in the warm, wood-scented half-darkness of the hall.
In a few moments they heard a car start up and drive away.
Down-river, Charlotte thought.
Perhaps he wasn't as completely convinced as he made out that a lost boy, however bright and confident, could not have ended in the Comer.
And perhaps he wasn't going to wait until morning before launching a search.
Gus Hambro was sitting quite still, his brows drawn together in a tight and abstracted frown, and the focus of his eyes fixed far beyond the panelling of the dining-room.
‘Of course he'll be all right,’ said Charlotte, all the more firmly because she was not totally convinced.
Gus said: ‘Of course!’ in a slightly startled voice, and visibly withdrew his vision and his thoughts from some distant preoccupation in which she had no part.
He looked  vaguely at her, and quickly and intently at his watch; but at least he had returned to the consciousness that she was present.
He even managed a perfunctory smile.
‘He'll turn up when it suits him.
Don't worry about him.
What do you say, shall we see what's on television?’
Her thumbs pricked then.
She let him accompany her into the small lounge where the set was kept in segregation from the vocal and gregarious fishermen, and settle her in a comfortable chair, cheek by jowl with a single elderly lady, who seemed pleased to have company, and disposed to conversation.
That suited him very well.
Charlotte was counting the seconds until he should extricate himself, and he did it in less time than she had expected, and without even the pretence of sitting down with her.
‘You won't mind if I leave you to watch this without me?
There's a letter I really ought to get written tonight — I hadn't realised it was quite so late, and I can get it off by first post if I do it now.’
‘Of course!’ she said.
‘In any case, I shall be going to bed very soon, I am rather tired.’
‘I'll say goodnight, then, if you'll excuse me.’
‘Goodnight, Mr Hambro.’
It sounded absurdly false to her, as though they were playing a rather bald comedy for the benefit of the elderly lady, who was dividing her benign attention between them and a quivering travel film.
He withdrew quickly and quietly, closing the door carefully after him.
Charlotte strained her ears to hear whether he would slip out by the side door and make straight for the garage at the rear of the house for his car, but instead she heard the crisp, light rapping of his heels on the oak staircase.
Room 12 was on the first floor.
Arguably he must be bound there now, but almost certainly he had no intention of staying there.
‘Oh, dear!’ said Charlotte, groping in the depths of her  handbag, ‘I seem to have left my lighter in the dining-room.
So sorry to keep disturbing you like this, I must go and get it.’
She closed the door after her no less gently and purposefully than he had done, and snatching off her shoes, ran silently up the two flights of stairs to her own room.
It was a risk, for she might well have run headlong into him on the first floor landing, but she had luck, and was round the next turn of the stairs when she checked and froze against the wall, hearing his rapid steps on the oak treads below her.
Very light, very hurried steps, but the bare, glossy wood turned them into a muffled drum-roll.
Down to the hall again, and across it to the front door.
She had made no mistake; he had an errand somewhere that would not wait.
She ran to her own room, plunged frantically into her walking shoes, and dragged on a black coat.
She had a small torch in her case, and spared the extra minute to find it and thrust it into her pocket.
Even this brief delay meant that he would be out of sight and out of earshot, but did that matter at this stage?
She knew, or she was persuaded that she knew, where he was bound.
And he had gone out by the front door, presumably to present an appearance of normality if he should be seen by any of the family — a late evening stroll before bed being a simple enough amusement — while she could save the whole circuit of the house by using the back door close to the kitchen.
At this moment she did not care at all whether she was observed, or what the observer might think of her.
The curiosity which was quick in her had now a personal urgency about it.
He had picked her up of intent, had followed her into this inn for some purpose of his own.
And now for some purpose of his own he shook her off, and with almost insulting lack of finesse.
Charlotte was not a commodity to be picked up and put down at will, and so he would find.
She saw no sequence in what was happening, and no coherence, but she knew it was there to be seen, if only she could achieve the right angle of vision.
Her walking shoes had formidable soles of thick, springy rubber composition, remarkably silent even on the staircase, and gifted with a firm grip even in wet river mud.
The right footwear for venturing the riverside path, short of gumboots.
She let herself out softly by the family door, and made for the silver glimmer of water in haste.
The trees that sheltered the inn fell back from her gradually, and the vast, chill darkness of the sky mellowed by degrees into a soft, lambent un-darkness, moonless but starry, in which shapes existed, though without precision.
By early habit she was a countrywoman, she could orientate herself by barely visible bulks and air currents and scents in the night, and she was not afraid to trust her feet in the irregularities of an unknown path.
The torch she hardly used at all; only once or twice, shading it within her palm, she let it flash upon the paler gravel of the path, to align her passage alongside the faintly glowing water, and then snapped it out again quickly, to avoid reliance upon its light as much as to conceal her presence here.
She walked steadily, using all her senses to set her course accurately.
And it was several minutes before her quick ears picked up, from somewhere well ahead of her, the snap of a broken branch under a trampling foot.
A sharp, dry crack.
Dead wood, brought down in the flood water and cast ashore perhaps two days ago.
She eased her pace then, knowing he was there in front of her.
She had no wish to overtake him, only to maintain her distance, and keep track of his movements if she could.
He was on his way downriver, by the waterside path that enjoyed right of way through the enclosure at Aurae Phiala.
Ten minutes’ walk at most, by this route.
After that, she did not know.
All she had to do was follow, and find out.
She knew, by the looming bulk of the bank on her right hand, when she reached the perimeter of the enclosure.
To make sure, she risked using her torch, shielded by her body, and saw the single strand of wire, a mere symbol, that separated the path from the city site.
Then, distant beyond the broad bowl full of skeleton walls, she saw the headlights of a car pass on the road to Silcaster, sweeping eerily across the filigree of stonework and grass, and vanishing again at the turn of the highway.
Twice this random searchlight lit and abandoned the past, all in marvellous silence, for the trick of the ground siphoned off all sound.
After every such lightning, darkness closed in more weightily.
Then she went cautiously, losing ground but keeping her bearings.
The river was dangerous here, still gnawing at the rim of the path.
In the night its silence and its matt, pewter gleam were alike deceptive, suggesting languor and sleep, while she knew from her memories of day that it was rushing down its bed with a tigerish fury and force, so concentrated that it generated no ripples and no sibilance.
One slip, and it would sweep you away without a murmur or a cry.
She had lost track of the movement ahead of her.
It was vital here to pay proper attention to every step, or the river would claim forfeit.
A mysterious line of pallor, the nearest thing here to a ripple, outlined the rim of the Comer as it lipped the gravel.
She judged that she was somewhere very near to where the bank on her right had subsided, shattering the outer corner of the hypocaust.
But so much of her attention was now centred on her own immediate steps that she had no leisure to orientate herself in a wider field.
Curiously the darkness seemed to have become more dark.
When she lifted her eyes, she was blind.
Only when she  looked down, fixing upon her own feet, had she at least the illusion of vision.
A degree of light emanated from the silently hurtling water, which she felt as a force urging her forward, as though she were in its grip and swept along with it.
She was concentrating with exaggerated passion upon her own blind, sensitive footsteps when her instep caught in some solid, clinging mass, and threw her forward in a clumsy, crippling stumble, from which she recovered strongly, and kept her balance.
The block, whatever it was, lay still before her, lipped by the faintly phosphorescent rim of shallow water.
All she saw was a rippling edge of pallor, but she felt the barrier as a solid ridge barricading the path.
She fumbled for the torch, and thumbed over the button with a chilly hand, and the cone of light spilled over a man's body, face-down in the shallow water, glistening under the abrupt brightness in violent projections of black and white.
She turned and lunged into the crumbling bank with the torch until it lodged and held still, focused upon the motionless bulk below.
Then she plunged forward with both hands, took fast hold of the thick tweed jacket, and dragged the inert body out of the river.
He was a dead, limp weight, but the smooth mud greasing the path made her task easier.
Clear of the encroaching water of the Comer, she collapsed across her salvaged man, and crouching on her knees beside him, turned up to the tight circle of light the wet, white face of Gus Hambro.
She stooped with her ear against his lips, and could detect no sound of breathing, spread her fingers against his chest under the sodden jacket, and felt no faint rise and fall.
Yet he could not have been long in the water.
She had not been far behind him, and yet had heard no sound to prepare her for this.
She felt nothing now but the urgency of her own role, and acted without thought or need for thought.
She wound her arms about his knees and dragged him laboriously across the gravel into the safe, thick grass; his right cheek suffered, but he was hardly going to hold that against her if he survived.
In the soft turf she turned his face to lie upon that grazed right cheek, and spread his arms above his head.
Somewhere in the depths of her mind the fact was recorded, and later recalled, that from the shoulders down his back was dry, and even in front, from the knees down he was merely damp and muddy from the slime of the river bank.
His head and his chest were soaked, and streaming water into the grass.
But at the time she had no awareness of any such details, though her senses missed none of them.
She was entirely concentrated on the curved grip of her hands on his loins, and the rhythmic swing of her body as she leaned and relaxed, forcing the water out of him and dragging the air into him.
and waited, holding her own breath, for the first  rasping response out of his misused lungs.
At first it was like leaning into a thick, inert sponge, and that seemed to go on for an age.
Actually it was only a matter of perhaps fifty seconds before the first convulsive rattle of protest shook his ribs, and then she felt the first thread of breath drawn out long and fine under her coaxing fingers as she sat back from him.
She dared not halt upon so tenuous a promise.
She went on industriously compressing and releasing, but now she felt the breath of life responding to her touch, following the pressure of her hands in and out, lifting the body under her, until she was only orchestrating the performance, and signalling its progression by the measured touch of her palms and undulation of her body.
She ventured at last to sit back on her heels, let her hands lie in her lap, and listen.
And palpably, audibly, he breathed.
She heard him catch at air, and cough up the last slime of the river.
Then he heaved in a breath that must have gone right down to his toes, and his whole body arched and stiffened, and then relaxed on as prolonged an exhalation.
She waited, for a time renewing the light, guiding pressure on his back, afraid to leave all the labour to him.
By then he was breathing so strongly and normally that she was able to extend her consciousness to details, every one of which was stunningly unexpected and astonishing, even the flickering yellow eye of the torch still beaming upon the recumbent body.
She looked up, and became aware of the vault of faintly luminous sky over them, and the silence.
An absolute silence.
She understood then that if she had had leisure to listen at the right moment, she might have heard the faint, suggestive sounds of a third presence.
For men do not come out by night with the intention of lying down to drown in eight inches of water at the edge of a riverside path.
Not cocky young men with roving eyes and a nice taste in girls.
Now, of course, there was nothing to be heard at all , nothing to be seen but the sudden, wheeling pallor of one more set of headlights taking the curve in the Silcaster road, far beyond Aurae Phiala.
She leaned down to check closely upon the steady rise and fall of his chest, and the slight, rhythmic warmth of the air expelled from his lungs.
The pulse in his wrist was vehement and strong.
Cold, if he lay here too long, might be a greater enemy to him now than anything else.
And if one thing was certain, it was that she could not get him from here alone.
Probably he needed a doctor, but certainly he needed warmth and shelter and a bed.
Twice she turned from him, and again turned back to make a double and treble check.
The third time she clambered stiffly to her feet and looked about her, dazed by the darkness outside the closed circle of torchlight, and switched off the beam to acclimatise once again to the starry night.
It was like enlarging herself tenfold into a chill but resplendent vastness, like taking seisin of the night.
She gave herself a full minute to find her bearings in this mute kingdom, and her senses made the adjustment gratefully.
Gus Hambro — ridiculous name, she thought, with wonder, exasperation and affection, for he enjoyed it now by her grace — continued to breathe strongly and regularly in his oblivion.
And she knew that she not only could, but must leave him.
Her memories of Aurae Phiala were sharp, but now she could not be sure how accurate.
The entrance with its kiosk and museum was away at the far side, and not inhabited by night.
But before her, downstream, was the hedge of the garden hemming the curator's villa.
Gerry Boden, the lost boy, had made off in that direction when he was hunted out of the dangerous area.
Somewhere along that hedge he had last been seen, and by her.
By this time he was certainly in his own home, fed.
unchastened, and ready for fresh  mischief tomorrow.
At this moment she did not believe in tragedies; she had just averted one.
She took the torch, using it freely now because speed was of the first importance, and stealth of none at all, and went on down the slippery path towards the thick box hedge, behind which the invisible red roof hung, representing help and companionship.
There was a narrow gate opening on the pathway, as she had expected there would be.
Within it, the curator's garden climbed in three steep terraces, concrete steps lifting the level at each stage.
The house loomed undefined, a large bulk between her and the milky sky.
She found herself facing a glass-panelled door, with the luminous dot of a bell set in its frame.
She pressed the spark, and seemed to feel a warmth in it.
There were people on the other side of that door.
She was not accustomed to wanting people, but she wanted them now.
She seemed to wait a long time before she heard footsteps within, and then a light sprang up beyond the frosted glass.
There was an interval of clashing bolts and keys turning — she had to remind herself that it must be nearly eleven by this time, and that this was an isolated spot — before the door opened.
But at least it opened fully and vehemently, offering every hope of a welcome within.
Somehow she had expected six inches of semi-darkness, and half a face enquiring suspiciously what her business might be at this hour.
This was not the front door, but a garden way to the river.
She saw a white conservatory full of plants, soft light filling it, a few flowers making knots of dazzling colour; and at the door, casting a spidery shadow, a long, meagre but erect man, all angles, like a lesser Don Quixote put together out of scrap iron.
A well-shaped grey head leaned to peer at her out of concerned hollow eyes, whose colour she could not determine.
By this light they had no colour, only an engraved darkness in his ivory face.
He had a small, pointed, elusive beard like the Don, and wispy grey moustaches drooping to join it.
‘I'm so sorry,’ said a high tenor voice, soft and mild in surprise, and apologising even for the surprise, ‘but we don't normally use this door, and especially at night.
I hope I didn't keep you waiting.’
With distant astonishment at her own efficiency, she heard her voice saying very clearly and reasonably: ‘I do beg your pardon, but I came to you as the nearest house.
I've just pulled a man out of the river, two hundred yards or so upstream.
I've been giving him artificial respiration, and I think he's going to be all right, but we ought to get him into shelter as quickly as we can.
Can you help me?
Could we bring him here?’
After one stunned instant, for which she could hardly blame him, he reacted with admirable promptitude.
The door opened wider than ever.
‘Come inside!’ he said.
‘I'll call my colleague, and we'll get the poor chap indoors at once.
‘I could help you carry him in,’ she said.
‘We ought not to lose any time.’
‘Don't worry, Lawrence is only a couple of minutes away.
He has a scooter, he'll be here in no time.
You sit down by the fire, you're wet and cold.
I'll be back directly.’
And he thrust her briskly into a small, book-lined room, and himself went on along a passage to the hall and the telephone, leaving the door open between them.
She heard him dial, and speak briefly and drily, almost as though similar rescue operations landed on his doorstep every night.
It might not be the first occurrence, she realised.
People who live beside flood rivers are liable to be recruited from time to time.
Certainly he wasted no time in calling up his reserves.
After the click of the hand-set as the  connection was cut, she heard him dial and speak once more.
When he came back into the doorway of the room where she waited, he had a duffle coat over his arm, and was carrying a folding garden-bed with a rigid aluminium frame and a patterned canvas cover printed with brilliant sunflowers.
Incongruously festive for a stretcher, but she saw that it would serve the purpose very well.
‘If you wouldn't mind coming along to light us on the way back?
I've got a coach-lantern here in the garden room.
I called the police, as well,’ he explained.
‘You may not know, but we had an officer here looking for a missing boy, earlier this evening.
I hope you may have found him for them.’
‘No,’ said Charlotte quickly, ‘this isn't the boy.
I do know about that, but this is someone else, a man I know slightly.
He's staying at ‘The Salmon's Return’, like me.’
‘Oh…
I see!
A pity…
I called the number the chief inspector gave me, I felt sure…
Well, never mind, here's Lawrence!
Let's get this one in, at any rate.’
The busy sputter of a Vespa came rocking round the bulk of the house, and the young man of the custodian's box put his head in at the open door, gave Charlotte a brief, blank glance, and asked briskly: ‘Where is he?’
‘By the path, just upstream.
Here, take this!
I'll lead.
And mind how you go,’ he said, heading rapidly out through the garden, the lantern held out beside him to light the steps for Charlotte.
‘That path's in a very dangerous state until it dries out properly.
What was he doing taking a night walk there?
A stupid thing to do!’
His voice was detached and impersonal, but she heard very clearly the implication: And what were you doing taking a night walk there?
‘Lucky for him you came along,’ he  said, almost as if he had recognised the implication, too, and was making a token apology for it.
‘Listen!’ said the young man named Lawrence suddenly, and checked to strain his ears for the small, recurrent sound that had reached him.
‘Someone else out late, too.
This place is getting like Brighton beach.’
They had reached the gate in the box hedge, and froze in the grass for an instant to listen.
Slow, irregular footsteps, audible only by reason of the slight sucking of soft mud at the heels of someone's shoes as he approached along the path.
‘I called the chief inspector,’ said the curator, advancing again to meet the sound.
‘I thought it likely this might be the young fellow he was looking for.
But he couldn't be here yet.’
‘He wouldn't be coming along here, anyhow.
He'll be driving.
Mrs Paviour surely wouldn't walk this way in the dark, would she?’
‘Lesley's home, twenty minutes ago, and gone to bed.
I hope she's sleeping through this disturbance.’
They walked towards the unsteady steps, and a figure took shape out of the darkness, weaving as it came and blinking dazedly as the lantern was lifted to illuminate its face.
Wet and muddy, but moving doggedly under his own steam, Gus Hambro lurched into the circle of his would-be rescuers, braced his rubbery legs well apart, and stood dazzled, holding his head together with both hands.
‘It's him!’ said Charlotte, humanly indifferent to grammar at this crisis.
‘He's walking…he's all right!’
The young man named Lawrence put her aside kindly but firmly, and took over in her place, drawing Gus's left arm about his shoulders.
‘Man!’ he said admiringly.
‘Are you the tough one!
Here, girl, cop hold of this thing, we don't need a stretcher for types like this.’
The curator moved to the other side, encircled Gus competently but aloofly, and handed over the lantern.
It was Charlotte who led the way back slowly and carefully through the garden.
Mounting steps was what Gus found most bewildering at this stage; his feet made manful efforts, but tended to trail, and he was half-carried the last few yards to the door.
And yet he had come to himself unaided, clambered to his feet without even the support of a fence to lean on, and made his way some two hundred yards towards the single light of the curator's open door.
A tough one, as Lawrence had observed.
Or else his handicap had been rather less than she had reckoned.
She was tired by this time, and unsure of her judgement: of stresses, of odds, even of personalities.
‘I'm sorry,’ said Gus, quite distinctly but as if from a great distance.
‘I seem to be causing a lot of trouble.’
‘Not to worry, chum!’ said the Lawrence youth benignly, puffing a little on the steps but indestructibly cool and amiable.
‘See that nice, bright hole in the wall?
Aim for that, and you're home and dry!’
The nice, bright hole in the wall stood wide, as they had left it, gleaming with the reflections of white paint within.
They bore steadily down upon it.
And suddenly the oblong of light was inhabited.
A shadowy silhouette materialised, rather than stepped, into the frame, and stood leaning forward slightly, peering understandably into the dimness outside, and curious about the massed group of figures converging upon the doorway.
There was an outside light which no one, so far, had thought to switch on.
The girl in the conservatory reached out a hand and flicked the switch, lighting them the last few yards, and floodlighting herself at the same time.
Appearing magically out of shadow, suddenly she shone there before them, the focus of light and warmth and refuge.
She had not the least idea what was  going on, and she was smiling into the night in enquiry and wonder, her brows arched halfway to laughter, her lips parted in a whimsical welcome to whatever might be pending.
There was one brief moment while she stood illuminated thus theatrically, and still not at all comprehending that the group which confronted her had had a close brush with tragedy.
She had a heart-shaped face, of striking, creamy smoothness, and broader than its length from brow to chin, like the bright, intelligent countenance of a young cat, innocent, assured and inquisitive.
Her eyes were so wide-set and widely-opened that they consumed half her face in a dazzling pool of greenish-blue radiance.
Her nose was neat, small and short, and her mouth full-lipped and firmly formed above a tapered but resolute chin.
She had a cloud of short hair curving in clinging waves about her head, the colour of barley silk, and under the feathery fringe her forehead bulged childishly, with room in it for a notable brain, the one thing about her that was not suavely curved and ivory-smooth.
The details sounded like a collection of attractive oddities.
The sum total was a quite arresting beauty.
And the most jolting fact about her emerged only by implication.
In a nylon jersey house-gown of peacock pattern and iridescent colouring, which clung like a silk glove, she could not possibly be anyone but Mrs Paviour, that same Lesley who walked when the fit took her, last thing at night, and had been home twenty minutes when Charlotte rang the door-bell.
Ergo, the wife of this elderly Don Quixote, Great-Uncle Alan's colleague and contemporary, who must be well into his sixties at the very least, and slightly arid and passe even at that.
How old was the girl in the doorway?
Not a day over twenty-five, Charlotte reckoned — hardly two years senior to herself.
Perhaps even less.
What an extraordinary mis-match!
And not just  because of the tale of years involved.
The old man was a cracked leather bottle trying to contain quicksilver.
She could not feel anything for him!
It made no sense.
And yet she had not the look of a woman cramped or dissatisfied.
She glowed with ease and wellbeing.
At sight of her Gus, stiffening into startled consciousness between his supporters, set foot of his own volition on the last step, and his soiled eyebrows soared into his muddy hair, in reflection of the apparition before him.
Very faintly but quite clearly he said: ‘Good God!’ and seemed to have no breath left for anything more explicit.
The moment of charmed stillness collapsed — or more properly exploded — into motion and exclamation.
The girl in the Chinese house-coat narrowed her eyes upon the central figure in the tableau before her, and the supple lines of her face sharpened into crystal, and lost their smiling gaiety.
‘My God!’ she said, in the softest of dismayed voices.
‘What's been happening, Steve?’
And she went on briskly, springing into instant and efficient comprehension: ‘Well, come on, bring him in to the fire, quickly!
I'll get brandy.’
She turned in a swirl of nylon jersey, and flung wide the door to the study, where the subsiding glow of the fire still burned.
Her movements, as she receded rapidly along the passage beyond, were silent and violent, a force of nature in action.
Only gradually did it emerge that she was rather a miniature whirlwind, perhaps an inch shorter even than Charlotte, but so slender that she escaped looking like a pocket edition.
When she came back, with a tray in her hands, they had installed their patient by the fire in a deep chair, and peeled the soggy, wet jacket from him.
They were five people in one small room, and hardly a word was said between them until Gus Hambro had a large brandy under his belt, and was visibly returning into circulation.
His still dazed eyes followed his astonishing hostess  around, measuring, weighing and wondering, in forgetfulness of his own predicament.
He said nothing at all, as yet , but very eloquently.
Charlotte hung back in a corner of the room, and let them encircle him with their attentions.
So far he had not even registered her presence, and she was in no particular hurry to enlighten him.
‘He should have a doctor,’ said Paviour anxiously, standing over him with the empty brandy glass.
‘I don't want a doctor,’ protested the patient, weakly but decidedly.
‘What could he do for me that you're not doing?
All I've got is a headache.’
He looked round him doubtfully, winced abruptly back to his original position, and clapped a surprised hand behind his right ear.
‘What happened?’ he asked blankly.
‘You fell in the river,’ said Paviour patiently.
‘I shouldn't worry about remembering, if I were you.
The main thing is, you're here, and you're going to be all right.’
‘Fell in the river?’ repeated Gus like an indignant echo, and stared at the smear of blood staining his muddy fingers.
‘I never did!
I was keeping well on the landward side of the path, on the grass.
And that's where I was lying when I came round just now.
All I've got is a welt on the head here.
Somebody jumped me from behind and knocked me out.’
He looked from face to face, questioning and wondering.
‘If I was in the river,’ he said reasonably, ‘what am I doing here now?’
‘This lady,’ said Paviour, stepping aside to allow him to follow the mild gesture that indicated Charlotte, ‘pulled you out.
Not only that, she administered artificial respiration and brought you round, and then came here to get help.
Why did you suppose we were setting off with a stretcher and torches, at this time of night?’
‘I didn't know…
I never realised…’
He sat forward, staring in outraged recognition at Charlotte.
‘You mean  you…it was you who…’
He shut his mouth and swallowed hard, and in the space of about two seconds she saw a whole kaleidoscope of emotions flash in succession through his mind.
If she's here, if she found me, it's because she followed me!
If she followed me, it's because she doesn't trust me, and if she doesn't trust me it's because she knows something, or has found out something.
So far she was sure of her ground.
And what followed was neither surprise nor mystery to her.
For suddenly Gus Hambro performed a minor miracle, by producing a fiery blush that made itself visible in waves of dubious gratitude and indubitable mortification even through the layers of river mud that still decorated his face.
Tales of gallant rescues ought not to go into reverse, and cast the lady as hero and the man as helpless victim.
Especially when, whatever other circumstances may hold good, the man has been exerting himself to make an impression on the lady in question.
Fate, thought Charlotte, gazing innocently back into his admiring, devoted, humiliated and furious face, has certainly given me the upper hand of you, my boy!
‘The kiss of life, I hope?’ said the young man Lawrence, putting a deliberate finger through the slight tension which was palpably building up within the room.
‘Schafer,’ said Charlotte shortly.
‘The only method I know.’
Gus did not sound at all like a man recently revived from drowning as he said with sharp disquiet: ‘Right, that disposes of how I got out, and I'm duly grateful, believe me.
But now will somebody please explain to me how the hell I ever got in?’
They were all staring at him in speculative silence when the sound of a car's engine circled the house, coming to rest in the arc of gravel before the door.
After it died, the silence was absolute for a few moments.
Then incongruous  suburban chimes jangled from the front porch.
‘That must be the police inspector,’ said Paviour.
‘Will you let him in, dear?’
His wife turned without a word, and went to open the door; and presently ushered in Detective Chief Inspector George Felse, mild, grey-haired and ordinary, a tired middle-aged man who would have been inconspicuous and among his peers almost anywhere he cared to materialise.
‘I got a message,’ he said, ‘that you wanted me here.’
He looked round them all as though none of them afforded him any surprise, though two of them did not belong here, and to his certain knowledge had been elsewhere only a short time ago.
So short a time, Charlotte realised with a shock, that he could not possibly have returned home in the meantime, since he was a close neighbour of the Bodens, who lived ten miles from Aurae Phiala.
The relayed message must have found him somewhere not far from this house.
Somewhere by the river, she thought, downstream.
Whatever went into the flooded Comer here would fetch up at one of several spots, no doubt well known to the police, where curves and currents tended to land what they had carried down.
The chief inspector had just come, case or no case, from setting a close watch on those spots, in expectation — in foreboding, rather — that the flood would bring some unusual freight aground very shortly.
Only then did she fully realise that if she had been five minutes later the watchers keeping a lookout for a stray boy might, tomorrow, have been hauling ashore the sodden body of Gus Hambro.
Washed, warmed, with a shaven patch and an adhesive dressing behind his right ear and a second large brandy nursed gratefully in his hands, Gus told his story; though not, perhaps, quite ingenuously.
‘All I did was come out for a walk before going to bed, and I was about by that place where the bank's caved in, when somebody jumped me from behind.
I never heard a thing until maybe the last two steps he took, I never had time to turn.
Something hit me on the back of the head, here, and I went out like a light.
I remember dropping.
I never felt the ground hit me.
But I do know where I was when I fell — in the belt of grass under the bank, and facing straight ahead the way I was walking.
And when I came round I was in the same place.
I took it for granted I'd just been lying there since I went out, and whoever had jumped me had made off and left me there.
When I could make it, I got up and made for the nearest shelter.
There was a lighted doorway here, I steered for that.
And just outside the garden I ran into this rescue party coming out to find me.
Now they tell me,’ he said flatly, ‘that I was in the river, drowning, and Charlotte here pulled me out and brought me round.’
He had used her Christian name without even realising it, so intent was he on pinning down the details of his own remembrance.
‘When I found him,’ said Charlotte, ‘he was lying right across the path.’
‘Across the path?’
‘Across the path,’ she said firmly, ‘with his feet just touching the grass on the landward side, and his head and shoulders in the river.
His face was completely under water.’
She felt them all stiffen in instinctive resistance, not wanting their routine existence to be invaded by anything as bizarre as this.
‘There may be a simple explanation for this discrepancy,’ ventured Paviour hopefully.
‘If there was a fresh fall of earth there —; he bank is quite high, and we've seen that there's brickwork exposed there…
Perhaps it wasn't a  deliberate attack at all, just a further slip that struck him and swept him across the path.
After all, we didn't go along to have a look at the place.’
‘I was there,’ said Gus drily.
‘There wasn't any fall.’
‘I was there, too,’ said Charlotte.
‘There's something else.
When you get a blow on the head and fall forward, whether it's flying stones or a blackjack, you may fall heavily, but even so I don't think you'd embed yourself as deeply in the mud as Mr Hambro was embedded.’
Chief Inspector Felse sat steadily watching her, and said nothing.
It was Paviour who stirred again in uneasy protest.
‘My dear girl, are you sure you're not recalling rather more than happened?
After stresses like that, the imagination may very easily begin to add details.’
‘I'm recognising things I did see, and never had time to recognise then.
But the other thing is a good deal more conclusive…’
George Felse asked quietly: ‘How were his arms?’
‘Yes, that's it!’ she said.
‘How did you know?
When you fall forward, fully conscious or not, you put out your hands to break your fall.
His arms were down at his sides.
Nobody falls like that.
Even if you were out on your feet, and fell as a dead weight, your arms wouldn't drop tidily by your sides.
And that's how his were.’
She was watching the chief inspector's face as she said it, and she knew that he believed her, and accepted her as a good witness.
Both the Paviours were stiffening in appalled disbelief, even young Lawrence had drawn a hissing breath of doubt.
Probably Gus himself found it hard to swallow, and would have preferred not to accept it, the implications being too unpleasant to contemplate.
But George Felse had come halfway to meet her.
‘But, good God,’ objected Stephen Paviour faintly, ‘do you realise what you're suggesting?’
‘Not suggesting.
Stating.
I'm saying that someone, having knocked Mr Hambro cold, dragged him across the path to the water, and shoved him firmly into the soft mud with his face under water, to die.’
In the stunned silence George Felse got up, without speaking, and crossed the room to where Gus's jacket hung on the back of a chair, turned towards the replenished fire, and steamed gently as it dried.
He slid his hands into the sleeves, and lifted it to turn the back to the light, and for a few minutes stood studying it closely.
‘The back,’ said Charlotte, watching, ‘was dry as high as the shoulder-blades.
Except that I probably made some damp patches, handling him after I got him out.’
‘Quite a difference from actually lying in the river.’
He spread the jacket between his hands, holding it out for them to see.
‘Look in the middle of the back, here, from just above the waist upwards.
What do you see?’
He turned to look at Gus, with a faintly challenging smile.
‘A moist patch — sizeable.
Two patches, rather, but practically joined in one.’
The warm, heathery colours of the tweed darkened there into a duller, peaty shade, two irregular, fading patches, with a vague dry line between.
A thin rim of encrusted mud, drying off now, helped to outline the marks, but even so they were elusive enough until pointed out.
‘Well?
What do you make of it?
You tell me!’
‘It's a footmark,’ said Gus, and licked lips suddenly dry and stiff with retrospective fear.
‘I know what to make of it, all right!
It means some bastard not only laid me out cold, and stuck me face-down in the Comer, but even rammed me well down into the mud with a foot in the small of my back to make dead sure of me, before he lit out and left me there to drown.’
They were too numbed by then, and too tired, to do much exclaiming, however their orderly minds rebelled at believing in mayhem and murder at Aurae Phiala.
They stared in fascination at the imperfect outline which did indeed look more and more like the print of a shoe the longer they gazed.
Lawrence said hesitantly, with almost exaggerated care to sound reasonable and calm: ‘But why?
Why should anyone want to…to kill him?
’ It took quite a lot of resolution to utter it at all.
‘Just a visitor here like anyone else.
There couldn't be any personal reason.’
‘I think,’ said Lesley sensibly, ‘I'll make some coffee.
We could all do with some.’
And she walked out of the room with something of the same wary insistence on normality.
It was then still some twenty minutes short of midnight, though they seemed to have devoured the greater part of the night already in this improbable interview.
‘Someone,’ said Gus, ‘didn't want me around, that's certain.
But wasn't he still taking rather a chance, if it was all that important to him that I shouldn't survive?
I might have revived enough to struggle out, once he was gone.’
‘So you might,’ George agreed.
‘With a river handy, and you past resistance, why not do the obvious thing, and shove you far enough in to make sure the current took you?
Even a swimmer with all his wits about him might well be in  trouble down those reaches at this time of year.
Out cold, you wouldn't have a dog's chance.’
‘You comfort me,’ said Gus grimly, ‘you really do.
Go on, tell me, why didn't he?’
‘Pretty obviously that's what he intended.
He simply didn't have time.’
‘Because he heard me coming,’ said Charlotte.
‘I think so.
He needed no more than one extra minute, or two, but he didn't have it.
He heard you, and he preferred to run for it.
He dropped Mr Hambro where he was, in the edge of the water, and planted a foot between his shoulders to drive him in deeper before he made off.’
‘But without reason!’ protested Paviour.
‘Surely no one but a madman…’
‘The procedure would appear to be far from mad — quite coldly methodical.
And since, as Mr Lawrence says, there could hardly be anything personal in the attack, we're left with the probability that anyone who had happened along at that moment would have been dealt with in the same way.
You were suspected, in fact, of having blundered head-on into something no one was supposed to see.’
‘I didn't see a thing,’ Gus said bitterly.
‘Not a thing!
He needn't have bothered scragging me, if that was his trouble.’
‘He could hardly ask you, and take your word for it, could he?
Obviously he thought you'd witnessed something you shouldn't have.
At best he was afraid you might have, and that was enough.
But Miss Rossignol was some way behind, and advancing without stealth.’
He cast one brief glance at Charlotte, caught her large, clear, self-possessed eye, and one conspiratorial spark of laughter passed between them.
He knew she had been exercising what stealth she was capable of, and he knew why, but that was purely between the two of them.
‘There was no need to  think she'd noticed anything, and whoever he was, he wasn't mad enough to go looking for extra murders.
He took a chance — admittedly an almost negligible one — on you, and slipped away to avoid her.’
Lesley brought in a laden tray, set it down on a side-table, and distributed cups in silence.
‘In view of the apparent urgency of getting rid of you,’ said George Felse, stirring his coffee, ‘it might be an idea if you tried to recall what, if anything, you did see.’
Gus held his head, and pondered.
‘Well, of course there's always some reflected light, once your eyes get used to being out at night.
But I didn't meet anyone, I didn't hear anyone.
Oh, yes, after I got to the perimeter of Aurae Phiala, where you can see clean across the bowl to the road the other side, I did see cars pass there a couple of times.
You get a sort of lighthouse flash from the headlights, as they swing round the curve there and out of sight.
The lights cross the bowl gradually, and out again, and then the dip in the road cuts them off.
Yes, and the second time that happened it swept across the standing walls there, and in the near end of the caldarium there was somebody standing by the wall.
No, not moving, quite still.
It was only a glimpse.
The light swerves off in an instant, and it's darker than ever.
But he was there, all right.’
‘He?’ said George.
‘Oh, yes, it was a he.
The whole cut of him,’ he said, imprecisely but comprehensively.
‘No doubt about it.’
‘But nothing more detailed?
Clothing?
Build?’
‘Oh, for God's sake!’ said Gus irritably.
‘One flash of light, and gone.
Just a mass, like a Henry Moore figure.
He didn't have any clothing, just a shape.
All I know is, it was a he, and he was there.’
‘And how long was this before you were attacked?’
‘I'd say about three full minutes, maybe even four, before I was hit.
I didn't think anything of it.
He had as much right to be out walking as I had.’
‘Not in Aurae Phiala,’ said Stephen Paviour, in tones of quiet outrage.
‘Not at that hour.
Our gates are closed at six — seven in summer.
He had no right inside the enclave, whoever he was.’
‘No, true enough.
But the path along the river is a right of way, and there's only a token wire in between.
Anyone could walk up into the enclosure.
You'd have a job to stop them.’
‘You know,’ said Lesley, busy at the coffee-tray, ‘I must have been out there about the same time.
Oh, no, I wasn't down by the river, I was over on the side next to the road.
I often have a little walk along the new plantation there.
That's what cuts off the headlights, you see.
The site is very exposed on that side, in Roman times there was a woodland there, so it was sheltered.
Now we're trying to replace it, to reproduce the same conditions.
I was home well before ten, though.
I never noticed the exact time, but I was in the bath when I heard the stir down here.’
‘You didn't see anything of this man in the caldarium?’
George asked.
‘No, I didn't.
Though I must have been around just at that time, I think.
I do remember seeing two — maybe three — cars pass on the Silcaster road, but I didn't notice anything shown up in their headlights.’
She hesitated for a moment, poised vulnerably with the coffee-pot in one hand, and the jug of hot milk in the other.
‘You know…please don't think I'm being funny!— maybe Mr Hambro saw the Aurae Phiala ghost.
And don't think I'm crazy, either,’ she appealed warmly.
‘Look, it's only half a joke.
You go and ask in the village.
People have seen things!
You don't have to take my word for it, they'll talk about it quite freely, they're not ashamed or afraid of it.’
‘My dear, this is frivolous,’ her husband said with frowning disapproval.
‘Mere local superstition.
We're concerned with realities, unfortunately.’
‘Are there such stories?’
George asked mildly.
‘Can you imagine such a place as Aurae Phiala existing without giving rise to its own legends?
I have heard loose talk of people seeing things here by night, but I've never paid the least attention, so I can't tell you what they claim.’
‘I'm not being frivolous,’ Lesley declared firmly, ‘and these are realities.
I don't mean helmeted sentries literally do patrol the walls by night, I don't mean even that anything's actually been seen, but the things that go on in people's minds are realities, and do influence events.
It hardly matters whether there's a ghost there to be seen or not — what matters is whether someone is convinced he saw it.
Besides, what's a ghost, anyhow?
I'm not a convinced believer, I just don't find it difficult to credit that in these very ancient sites of occupation, where such emotional things are known to have happened, people should develop special sensitivities, racial memories, hypernormal sympathies, whatever you like to call them.
I don't see anything supernatural about it, just rather outside most people's range of knowledge.
The test of that is, that the local people treat the experiences they claim to have had as perfectly acceptable — almost take them for granted.
They don't go challenging them, they respect them, take what's offered but don't go probing any farther.
A thoroughly healthy attitude, I call it.
Look at Orrie,’ she appealed to her husband.
‘He's seen the sentry twice.
He doesn't run away, or hang out crosses or wreaths of parsley, or ring up the local press, he merely mentions it to his friends in passing, and gets on with his work.
And you couldn't find anyone more down-to-earth than Orrie.’
‘Orrie?’
George enquired.
‘Our gardener.
He's local stock from way back.
They had the same site, even bits of the same cottage, in the sixteenth century.’
She laughed suddenly, the evening's first genuinely gay sound.
‘You wouldn't credit what the Orrie's short for!
Orlando!
Orlando Benyon!
The name's been in the family for generations, too.’
‘And Orrie's seen the Roman sentry?’
‘Listen!’ she said, abruptly grave again.
‘I've seen him myself, or else hearing about it has put me in a special state of mind, and all the other factors have come up right, atmospheric conditions, combinations of light and dark, what you like, and made me create what I believed I was seeing.
Twice!
A figure in a bronze helmet, both times a good way off, and both times close to the standing walls.
I didn't find anything very strange in it, either.
In its last years Aurae Phiala surely did mount a watch every night.
Just such a sentry must have been the first to die, the night the Welsh came.
Paviour's uneasiness and distaste had grown so palpable by this time that his rigid bones looked tensed to breaking point.
He said with nervous acidity: ‘We're not dealing with atmospheric hallucinations here, but with an attempt at murder.
When violence breaks in, something a good deal more material than imagination is indicated.’
She agreed, with an unabashed smile.
‘And when ordinary mundane light like a car's headlights starts making the immaterial perceptible.
Now that would be supernatural!
I paint a bit for fun,’ she said, with a grimace of deprecation for the unsatisfactory results.
‘I do know about masses and light, even if I can never get them right.
No, this person you saw was a pretty solid kind of reality.’
‘And he wasn't wearing a helmet,’ said Gus.
‘Tonight's haunting was for a pretty compelling reason,’ said George.
‘But what you've told us is very interesting, Mrs Paviour.
We'll see what the village has to add.’
He put down his coffee-cup in the tray with a sigh.
‘You've been very kind to put up with us all for so long, I'm most grateful.
But now I think there's nothing more we can do here, and it's time we left you to get some rest.
If you feel fit to go back to the inn, Mr Hambro, I'll be glad to drive you and Miss Rossignol round there.’
Lesley had begun to gather up the remaining cups, but at the mention of Charlotte's name she put down the tray abruptly, and turned with a startled smile.
‘Rossignol?
You're not Charlotte Rossignol?
Steve, did you hear that?
There can't be two — not two and both connected with Roman antiquities!
You must be the niece Doctor Morris mentioned.
He told us once his sister's girl had married a Frenchman.’
Charlotte admitted to her identity with some surprise.
‘I didn't think he took so much interest in me.
We've always been a rather loosely-knit family, and I've never seen him.’
‘It's true he didn't often talk about his family, but I couldn't forget your lovely name, I liked it so much.
You know Steve is an old fellow-student of his, and a close friend?
Isn't it wonderful, darling, Miss Rossignol turning up like this?’
His face was grey and drawn, Charlotte thought, perhaps with pure fatigue, for after all, he was an old man.
He favoured her with a slightly haggard smile, but his voice was dry and laboured as he said: ‘I'm delighted to meet my old friend's niece.
I'm only sorry it had to be in such circumstances of stress.
I hope you'll give us the opportunity of getting to know you better, on some happier occasion.’
His lips were stiff, the words of goodwill could hardly get past them.
‘I'm not quite such a coincidence as I seem,’ she said, ‘I've just been reading my uncle's book on Aurae Phiala, that's why I came to have a look at the place for myself.
He didn't really do it justice, did he?
I find it beautiful.’
‘Stephen doesn't agree with him, either,’ said Lesley, smiling, ‘but of course Aurae Phiala is our life.
Are you going to stay a little while, now you're here?
You should!’
‘I have a few concerts in the Midlands, and I thought I'd make my base somewhere close by until they're over.
Yes, I think I shall stay on for a few days here.’
‘But not at the ‘Salmon’!
Oh, no, you can't!
Anyone belonging to Alan Morris has a home here, of course.
You must come to us.
Look at all the rooms we have, the house is much too big for two.
Do come!
Stay tonight, too, I can find you everything you need overnight, and we'll fetch your things from the pub tomorrow.’
Confronted by sudden and eager invitations from strangers, Charlotte's normal reaction was one of recoil, not out of insecurity, but to maintain her independence and integrity.
She was never afterwards quite sure why she sidestepped only partially and temporarily on this occasion.
There existed a whole tangle of possible reasons.
She was in search of a closer knowledge of her great-uncle, and here were informed friends of his, one of them of long standing, who could surely tell her a great part of what she wanted to know.
She was attracted by this place, and here was her opportunity of remaining.
She was held by the disturbing events of the night, and here was her chance to wait out a better understanding of them on the spot.
And also there was something in Lesley's appeal that engaged her sympathy in a way she hesitated to analyse.
Here was this young creature, beautiful and restless, married to a man almost old enough to be her grandfather, and apparently setting out to make the very best of it, too, with no signs of regret or self-pity; but the prospect of having a girl of her own age in the house, even for a few days, might well matter to her  a great deal more than the extension and acceptance of a mere conventional politeness.
And Charlotte heard herself saying quickly:
‘That's awfully kind of you, and I should love to come for a couple of days, if I may.
But I'd like to go back with Mr Hambro to the ‘Salmon’ now, if you don't mind.
If I may come tomorrow?’
She had not looked at Paviour until then.
Lesley had issued her fiat with such confidence that she had taken his compliance for granted.
His long, lean, lugubrious face was dry and rigid as carved teak, and his eyes, sunken between veined lids and deep in cavernous hollows of bone, looked like roundels of cloudy glass with no light behind them.
With all the grace and spontaneity of a wooden puppet, but in the most civil and soft of voices, he said: ‘We shall both be delighted if you will.
We have the highest regard for Doctor Morris, and of course his niece is most welcome.
And Lesley will enjoy your company so much,’ he added, and the sudden faint note of hope and warmth sounded almost as though he was issuing comfort to himself, looking on the single bright side.
No doubt, she thought, a visitor might be a very unwelcome distraction in his entrenched life.
But it was done now, there was no way of backing out.
And she need not, after all, stay long.
After two days it would be easy enough to extricate herself.
During the short drive back to the inn they were all three monosyllabic, suddenly isolated in private cells of weariness and preoccupation.
The occasional remark passing seemed to come from an infinite distance, and be answered after a prolonged interval.
‘I hope Mrs Lane won't have locked you out.
We should have given her a call.’
‘I've got a key,’ said Gus, and lapsed into silence again.
He made no comment on Lesley's invitation and Charlotte's acceptance of it, none on the curious complexities which had confounded their own relationship since they left ‘The Salmon's Return’ two hours and more ago.
No one said a word about Doctor Alan Morris, and the charged significance of Charlotte's name.
There were things all three of them knew, and things all three of them were wondering, but no one cared to question or acknowledge at this hour.
Silence, if not golden, was at least more comfortable than speech.
Only as the car was crunching softly to a halt in the gravel of the yard did Charlotte ask suddenly, but in a tone so subdued as to suggest that she had been contemplating the question for some time, and refrained from asking it only for fear of the answer:
‘You haven't found him yet?’
The engine fell silent, and there was a brief and pregnant pause.
Then: ‘No,’ said George Felse, equally carefully and constrainedly, ‘we haven't found him.’
In the first chilly greyness of dawn, before the sun rose, Sergeant Comstock, of the uniformed branch, who came of a long line of native fishermen, not to say poachers, and knew his river as he knew the palm of his own hand, thankfully abandoned what he had always known was a useless patrol of the left bank downstream, and on his own responsibility borrowed one of his many nephews, and embarked with him in the coracle which was his natural means of personal transport on the Comer.
They put out in this feather-light saucer of a boat from his nephew's yard only just below the limits of Aurae Phiala, transport downstream in the spate being rapid and easy — for experts, at least— and the return journey much simpler by portage.
This consideration had dictated his choice of nephew.
Dick was the one he would really have preferred, but Dick lived well downstream.
Jack was not only in the right spot, and the family coracle-builder, but a bachelor into the bargain, so that there was no protesting wife to contend with.
The sergeant had already mapped out in his own mind, with an eye to the wind, the speed of the flow and the amount of debris being brought down, the procession of spits, shoals, curves and pools where a heavy piece of flotsam would be likely to cast up, beginning immediately below the village of Moulden, which lay just below the Aurae Phiala enclosure.
Cottages dotted the waterside through the village; and anything which had gone into the water some hours ago must, in any case, either have been brought ashore there already or long since have passed through, before the general alarm went out.
From there they went darting across the boiling surface like a dragon-fly, skimming with the currents where the banks were swept too open and smooth to hold flotsam, swinging aside round the sergeant's paddle in the marked spots; round the shovel-shaped end of Eel Island, which had scooped up a full load of branches, twigs, uprooted grass, and even more curious trophies, but not what they were seeking; a little way down the sluggish backwater beyond, until motion ceased in stagnant shallows, and still there was nothing; out into the flood again, hopping back on to the current as on to a moving belt that whisked them away; revolving out of the race again where the trees leaned down into the water at the curve by the Lacey farm, acting like a great, living grille to filter out debris; clean across the width of the river at the next coil, to where the long, sandy shallow ran out and encircled a miniature beach.
Every junk-heap of the Comer on this stretch they touched at and ransacked.
It was a game they could win only by losing; every possibility checked and found empty was a point gained, and with every one discarded their spirits rose towards optimism.
The sun was up, and they were a mile or more downriver, in wider and less turgid reaches, where some of the best fishing pools deepened under the right bank.
‘Looks like we've had our trouble for nothing,’ Jack said, with appropriate satisfaction.
‘Anything that's run that gauntlet without getting hooked has got to be brother to an eel.’
It was one more case of famous last words.
In the first dark pool under the hollowed bank the steady, rolling eddies went placidly round and round, smooth as cream, their tension dimpling the centre into a slow, minor whirlpool.
And in the middle of the slanting span, circling upon a radius of about three yards, and light enough to maintain its place a foot or so below the surface, something pale and oval went monotonously round and round.
First oval and single, then weaving as it spun, like a water-lily on a stem, then suddenly seen as articulate in separate petals, a limp magnolia flower.
‘Why don't you keep your mouth shut?’ said Sergeant Comstock, with deep and bitter resignation, and reached for the boat-hook they'd brought with them.
His third nephew Ted had made it to family specifications in his forge in the village of Moulden.
‘Cop hold of this paddle, and move us in slow.
And hold us clear of him, or he'll go down.’
There was a second drifting flower now, deep below, and greenish brown with the tint of the water between.
And presently, as Jack held the paddle like a brake and let them in by inches, a third, without petals, a pale disc trailing tendrils of weed.
A spreading darkness wove lazily beneath it, keeping it afloat.
The boat-hook reached overside gently, felt its way under the leaves of dark material, was lifted delicately into their folds, and held fast.
The three submerged flowers lost their rhythm, jerked into stillness, and hung quivering.
A palpable bulk aligned itself beneath them, a fish on a line, but a fish without fight.
‘I've got him,’ said Sergeant Comstock gruffly.
‘Better take us down a piece, where the bank levels out.
We can get him ashore there.’
The fish floated uncomplainingly with them, down to the gentle slope of grass fifty yards downstream.
There they brought the coracle ashore lightly, and drew in, with reluctance and the reverence of finality, what they had been hunting with such assiduity, and so persistently hoped they would not find.
To have settled something is always an achievement and, of sorts, a satisfaction.
This they would rather not have settled, and yet there was a kind of relief in it.
The body came ashore into the grass with monstrous and majestic indifference, for the first time caring nothing at all what impression it made.
A long, young body in correct school uniform, black blazer, white shirt, black tie, dark grey slacks.
Very like its living counterpart still, because it had not been in the river very long.
The Comer had not managed to loosen the knot of the tie, though its ends floated wide, or to hoist off one of the regulation black shoes.
He even had a ball-point pen still firmly clipped to the top of his breast pocket.
‘That's him,’ said Sergeant Comstock, looking down at the slow rivulets of storm-water trickling down out of clothing and hair to wind their way thankfully through the grass back to the river.
‘Hang on here, Jackie, while I cut up to the farm and ‘phone.’
George Felse telephoned his wife from the Sallows farm somewhat after eight o'clock in the morning.
By that time he had not only set in motion all the police retinue that attends on sudden and unexplained death, but also attended their ministrations throughout, seen the body examined, photographed, cased in its plastic shell and removed by ambulance to the forensic laboratory, delegated certain necessary duties, placated the police doctor and the pathologist, come to terms with the inevitable grief and rage which do not reach the headlines, and made dispositions within his own mind for the retribution which is so often aborted.
‘We found him,’ he said.
She, after all, had been left holding up the universe over the parents, and in all probability, whatever strict injunctions he issued now, she would, by the time he rejoined her, have relieved him of the most dreadful of all the duties his office laid on him, and somehow, with sense, sedatives and sturdy, unpretending sympathy, have gone part-way towards reconciling the bereaved to their bereavement.
‘Dead, of course,’ he said.
‘Some hours, according to preliminary guesses.
Yes, in the river.
Drowned?
Well, provisionally, yes.
Personally, I wonder.
Don't tell them that.
They're almost prepared for the other.
I'll tell them later — when we know.’
‘It's all right,’ said Bunty Felse.
It wasn't, but he would know what she meant.
‘I was half expecting it.
So are they, I know.
When will you be home?’
He had been up half the previous night upon a quite different case, and all this night upon this, which had only just become a case, and his, after all.
‘As soon as I can, but it may be three hours or so.
I shall take time out to call at Aurae Phiala.
They won't have heard officially.
I want to be the one to bring the news.
I've got to see their faces.’
‘Not the Rossignol girl,’ said Bunty.
It was a little less than half enquiry, and a little more than half assertion.
He had called her shortly after midnight, she already knew something of the personalities involved.
‘I want to see her face, too.
But no — you're right, not the Rossignol girl.
On present form,’ he said, his voice warming wearily into a semblance of the voice she knew best, ‘she only pulls people out.’
His timing was good, though it was determined mainly by the exigencies of the situation.
When he drove down the gravelled road along the edge of the site to the curator's house, at half past nine, he found the bronze Aston Martin parked in front of the doorway, and Gus Hambro just handing out Charlotte's suitcases.
Both the Paviours had come out to greet their guest, Stephen Paviour long and sad and constrained as ever, Lesley eager and young and welcoming.
Her movements as she ran down the steps had an overflowing grace of energy.
Behind her Bill Lawrence appeared in the doorway.
So much the better.
One was apt to overlook Bill Lawrence, who nevertheless was there on the spot like all the rest, and able to move even more privately, since he lived alone in the lodge cottage, further along the Silcaster road.
Probably he rode over here for his  meals on most occasions.
The Vespa was a handy transport for the mere quarter of a mile involved.
He wore his usual air of meticulously contrived casualness, and the shadow of beard round his by no means negligible jaw was a shade more perceptible than on the previous day.
Apparently he was setting out to grow whiskers of the latest fashion, for his lips were carefully shaved.
Probably he knew and cared, in spite of his cultivated disdain for appearances, that he had a very well-cut and intelligent mouth, too good to be hidden.
His lazy, supercilious eyes, too, managed their affectation of aloofness without actually missing a trick.
It might be a great mistake to overlook Mr Lawrence.
He had been the first to hear the sound of the car approaching, and the quickest to identify it, for he was the only one who looked completely unsurprised as it rolled gently alongside the Aston Martin, while all the rest had checked momentarily and turned to gaze.
Recognition halted their breath for an instant.
He was there with intent.
With news or with questions.
Lesley came towards him, veering from the advance she had been making upon Charlotte.
‘Chief Inspector Felse!
We didn't expect to see you so early.
Is there any news?’
The intense blue of her eyes shaded away into a translucent green in a bright light, burning into emerald in her moments of laughter or animation, clouding over into a ferny darkness when she was grave.
She gazed into his face, and they darkened.
Unexpectedly but very simply she said, with concern: ‘You haven't had any sleep!’
‘I'll catch up on that soon.’
He turned from her to look at Paviour.
To him the light was not kind.
The contrast with his radiant, vital young wife was blatant almost to embarrassment.
‘You wanted to see us?— some one or more of us,’ he said.
‘If we can help you at all…
‘Thank you, but this time I needn't keep you more than a minute.
I thought that as I'd involved you all, to some extent, in the enquiries that were launched yesterday, I ought to inform you of the results of our search for the boy, Gerry Boden…’
He was listening very carefully, for any exclamation, any indrawn breath, even, that would single out one person among these five; but they remained anonymous in their concern and foreboding.
The issue, after all, was fairly plain.
No one is that much of an optimist.
‘One of our sergeants took him out of the river about six o'clock this morning, a mile and a half downstream from here.
Dead.’
They stood frozen, all transfixed by the same small, chill frisson of shock, but no one exclaimed.
He looked round all their sobered, pitying faces, and registered what was there to be registered, but it was not much; nothing more than was due to any boy of sixteen, suddenly wiped out for no good reason.
No use looking for the one who felt no surprise, for after the gradual attrition of hour after hour without word they could none of them feel very much.
‘How awful!’ said Lesley in a resigned whisper.
‘Terrible for his parents.
I'm so sorry.’
‘The poor fool kid!’ said Gus.
‘I wish to God now I'd lugged him back to his chain gang by the ear.
Can't say we didn't half expect it, I suppose, by this time.
It began to look…
But there's always the odd chance.’
‘Which in this case didn't come up.
I thought you should be told.
Sorry to have ruined your day.’
Paviour moistened his pale lips.
‘Do you think it was here, on our premises, that he fell into the river?
I feel to blame.
But the path is a right of way, we couldn't stop it if we tried.’
‘It's too early yet,’ said George with deliberation, ‘to say  where and how he entered the water.
The forensic laboratory has a good deal of work to do on his clothes, and the contents of his pockets.
And of course there'll be a post-mortem.’
‘A post-mortem?
’ The meagre, gallant Don Quixote beard quivered and jutted as though every individual hair had suddenly stiffened to the clenched tension of Paviour's jaw.
He relaxed the convulsive pressure of his teeth cautiously, and drew breath deeply before he resumed with arduous reasonableness: ‘Is that really necessary, in a case like this, I know you have to be thorough, but the distress to the parents…
And surely the cause of death isn't in doubt?
A clear case of drowning…?’
‘It would seem so,’ George agreed gently.
‘But double-checking does no harm, and as you say, we try to be thorough.
I doubt if it's an issue that will affect the parents' distress one way or the other.’
He was turning back towards his car when he looked back with a casual afterthought.
‘By the way, you won't be surprised or disturbed if you find some of our people patrolling the riverside path or inspecting that slip, will you?
A routine precaution, that's all.’
He did not look back again, except in the rear-view mirror as he drove away.
They were grouped just as he had left them, all looking warily after him.
And if he had got little enough out of that interview, at least he had lobbed one small, accurate pebble into the middle of the pool of their tranquillity, and its ripples were already beginning to spread outwards.
A young giant working on the flower-beds along the drive straightened his long, lithe back to watch the car go by, without curiosity though with fixed, methodical attention, his senses turned outwards for relaxation while he took a breather.
The reddish-fair head, Celtic-Roman, with  chiselled features and long, indifferent lapis eyes, belonged to a statue rather than a man.
George knew the type locally, a pocket of fossils preserved among these border valleys, though this superlative specimen was not personally known to him.
Orrie Benyon, of course.
Orlando, who admitted his ghostly ancestors ungrudgingly into his territory by night.
Those cropped military curls, that monumental neck and straight nose, would have looked well in a bronze helmet; no doubt he recognised his own kind, and was at home with them.
And indeed his stock might well go back to just such stubborn settlers, survivors after the death of this city, the offspring of time-expired legionaries and the daughters of enterprising local middlemen.
Deprived of their urban background, they had rooted into the valley earth and turned to stock and crops for a living.
And survived.
Tenacious and long-memoried, they had not allowed themselves to be uprooted or changed a second time.
George stopped the car at the edge of the drive, and walked back.
He stood watching beside the flower-beds; and after a long minute of uninterrupted work, Orrie straightened his long, athlete's back again, and turned towards his audience the massive, stony beauty of his face, flushed with exertion.
At this range the flaws that reduced him to humanity, and a fairly limited humanity at that, were plain to be seen: the stubble of coarse reddish beard he hadn't bothered to shave, the roughness of his weathered skin over the immaculate but brutal bones, the inlaid indifference of the blue eyes.
‘Good morning!’ said George.
‘Nice show of bulbs you've got coming along.’
‘Not bad, I reckon,’ the gardener admitted.
‘Be some tulips out by now if it'd bin a bit warmer.
You come round in three weeks or so, they'll be a show worth seeing.’
George offered his cigarette case and a light.
Both were  accepted tacitly but promptly.
‘You take care of all this place single-handed?
That's a lot of work for one.’
‘I manage,’ said Orrie, and looked with quickening curiosity through the smoke of his cigarette into George's face.
‘You're police, aren't you?
I saw you once when you picked up that chap who was firing ricks, up the valley.’
‘That's right.
My name's Felse.
You'll have heard we fished a young fellow out of the Comer this morning?’
Everyone with an ear to the ground in Moulden had heard the news before ever the police surgeon reached the spot.
‘He was here with a visiting school party yesterday.
You had to chase him off from where you were cordoning off the slip.
That was the last you saw of him?’
‘Last I saw, yes,’ said Orrie, with a long, narrowed glance.
‘I finish here half past four, Wednesdays, I do a bit at the vicarage that night.
I was gone before closing time — the vicar'll tell you where I was.
I told your chap, the one who came after me up home, 'bout nine that'd be.
Seems there was some others saw him after I did, monkeying about by that cave-in again.
But I tell you what,’ he said confidentially, ‘I reckon I know one place he's been since then.
If he hasn't, someone else has.
In my back shed.
Not the tool-shed where I keep the mower and all that — the one down behind the orchard.
I got a little work-bench in there, and me stores of sprays and weed-killers and potting compost.
And I can tell when somebody's bin moving me stuff around.’
There were interesting implications here, if Orrie wasn't imagining the prying fingers; as why should he?
He wasn't the imaginative kind, and a man does know how he puts down his own tools.
The orchard lay well back from the riverside, and the wealth of old and well-grown trees between isolated it from the house.
Gerry Boden had last been seen alive strolling negligently along the garden hedge, and somewhere along the course of that hedge he had vanished.
Now if there should be a hole, or a thin place, inviting him through into the plenteous cover of the orchard, and the solitary shed in its far corner…
‘You don't lock that shed?’
‘It's got no lock.
I keep thinking I'll put a padlock on, but I never get round to it.
Him,’ he said, with a jerk of his head towards Paviour's house, ‘he's always scared of having things pinched, but the stuff in there's mine, no skin off his nose.
Folks are pretty honest round here, I'm not worried.
I do me own repairs — make me own spares when I need ‘em.’
‘And there's nothing missing this time?’
‘Not a thing, far's I can see.
Just somebody was in there, poking around, shifting things, passing the time nosing into everything, and thinking he'd put it all back the way it was before.
Which you can't do.
Not to kid the one who uses the place regularly.’
‘You didn't say anything about this to Detective Sergeant Price.’
‘I didn't know, did I?
I hadn't been back here.
I only went into the place twenty minutes ago.’
‘Fair enough,’ said George.
‘How about coming down there with me now?
No need to disturb the household, if we can come round to it from the other side.’
There was a navigable track that circled the perimeter, and brought the car round to the other side of the curator's house and garden by inconspicuous ways.
The shed was of wood, a compact, dark, creosoted building tucked into the corner of the shrubbery.
Inside it smelled of timber and peat and wood-shavings.
Various small packets and bottles and tins lay neatly but grimily along shelves on one side, folded sacks were piled in a corner, and full sacks stacked along the base of the wall.
Under the single window was  Orrie's work-bench, a vice clamped to the edge of it, and a rack of tools arranged under the window-sill.
He was comprehensively equipped — power drill, sets of spanners, sets of screwdrivers, planes, even a small modern lathe.
In the fine litter of sawdust and shavings under the bench the morning light found a few abrupt blue glitters of metal.
George advanced only just within the doorway, and looked round him.
There was dust and litter enough on the concreted floor to have preserved the latest traces of feet, though it was clearly swept reasonably often.
And if Orrie had not already tramped all over it this morning, since his discovery, nosing out the signs of trespass, there just might be something to be found.
‘Did you move about much in here when you came in and realised you'd had an intruder?’
‘Didn't have time.
I never went no further than you are now, all I come for was my little secateurs, and they were on the shelf here inside the door.
I reckoned I'd come back midday and have a look over everything, but I don't think there'll be anything missing.
Yes, I did go a bit towards the window and had a quick glance round.
That's all.’
‘Then what made you so sure somebody'd been in?
You were talking about something more than just a feeling.’
‘That!’ said Orrie succinctly, and pointed a large brown forefinger at the top right corner of the window, where his periodic cleaning had not bothered to extend its sweep.
He wasn't clairvoyant, after all; he hadn't even needed the tidy workman's hypersensitive unease over his tools.
In the small triangle of dust the tip of a finger had written plainly GB, and jabbed a plump round  full stop after the letters.
The human instinct to perpetuate one's own name at every opportunity, whenever more urgent occupation is wanting, had made use even of this mere three square inches of dusty glass.
The act cast a sharp sidelight of acute  intelligence upon Orrie's remark about passing the time.
‘There's the way things are lying, too,’ conceded Orrie, ‘but that was what took my eye right off.’
What had taken George's eye was that splendidly defined  full stop .
With the morning light slanting in here, and showing up every mote of dust and grain of wood-powder, the individual nodules of that fingertip showed even to the naked eye.
Almost certainly the right forefinger, unless Gerry Boden happened to be a southpaw.
And he had impressed that print with careful precision — he or whoever it was.
It wouldn't take Sergeant Noble very long to find out.
‘Do any of the others ever come here?’
George asked.
‘Legitimately?’
‘Could happen,’ allowed Orrie indifferently, and shrugged.
‘Not often.
Not lately.
What for?’
‘Good!
Then stay away from here today.
Can you do that?
If there's anything you want, take it now.’
‘There's nothing I want,’ said Orrie.
‘It's all yours.’
George made two or three telephone calls from the nearest box, handed over the minute inspection of Orlando Benyon's shed to the appropriate people, made contact with the police pathologist and his own chief at C.I.D.
headquarters, left strict instructions about what news and reports should be channelled to his home number immediately, and what could wait, and drove with the exaggerated care and deliberation of sleeplessness back towards the village of Comerford, uncomfortably in transition to a suburban area, where he, and the unhappy parents of the boy Boden, lived within three doors of each other.
One more hurdle, the highest, and then he could sleep.
Whether the Bodens would be able to sleep was another matter.
With sedatives, maybe.
But not everyone responds to sedatives.
Some people feel them as a kind of outrage and violation, and Boden was a strong-minded and passionate man.
George was not looking forward to that interview.
On the other hand, he would not for any money have delegated it to anyone else.
‘I hope you didn't mind,’ said Lesley Paviour blithely, swinging the wheel of the old Morris nonchalantly as they negotiated the sharp turn by the downstream bend of the Comer, not very far from where Gerry Boden's body had been towed ashore.
‘I had to get away from there for a few hours.
Normally I can ride it.
I mean, for God's sake, I took it on, didn't I?
I don't welch on my bargains, I really don't!
But under pressure, I tell you, it gets tight.
But tight!
’ She sat back in the driving seat, a neat, competent figure in a deep green spring suit as modest and suave as her own creamy countenance.
‘I'm a placid person,’ she said deprecatingly, ‘I have to be.
But I've got my limits.
I know when to duck out for a breather.
Trouble is, I don't always get such a marvellous excuse.
So I know you won't mind being made use of.
Am I making you nervous?
Driving, I mean?’
‘Not in the least.
You drive well.’
And so she did, with verve and judgement, and certainly with decision.
She smiled with quick pleasure at being praised.
‘If I had your friend's Aston Martin, now, instead of this old thing!’
Charlotte declined to rise to this fly.
They had seen nothing of Gus since he had withdrawn, she suspected with reluctance, after delivering her and her luggage at Paviour's house.
He had strung out the conversation, after the chief inspector's departure, or made an attempt to, but without much backing from anyone else, and failing to get any invitation to remain.
had finally taken himself off.
‘He seems to be a gentleman of leisure, that young man,’ Lesley continued thoughtfully.
‘Whatever can he do for a living, if he's free to ramble about in the middle of the working week in April?
Have you known him long?’
‘I don't know him at all, really,’ said Charlotte.
‘We only met walking round Aurae Phiala yesterday, and then found we were both staying at the same pub.
I gathered he's some sort of adviser on Roman antiques — I'm a little vague about details.
Maybe to museums?
Or collectors.’
Those things she knew about Gus Hambro which did not fit into this picture, such as his manipulations over the room at the inn, she did not care to mention to anyone until she herself understood them better.
‘He seems to know his subject,’ she said.
‘At least, I couldn't fault him, but of course I'm only a beginner.’
‘In spite of having Alan Morris in the family,’ Lesley said, and smiled as she drew into the left traffic lane at the lights on the outskirts of Comerbourne.
‘Have you really never met him?
Oh, you must!
You don't know what you've been missing.’
‘Nobody's finding it very easy to meet him at the moment,’ said Charlotte.
‘He seems to have gone off into the wilds of Turkey on some dig or other, and got so interested that he forgot to come back.
Nobody's heard from him for more than a year.
As a matter of fact, his solicitor is getting a bit worried about his silence.
’ She did not care to make the point any more strongly, or to admit any anxiety on her own part, not even to this impulsively talkative companion whose goodwill and sympathy were already taken for granted.
‘Tell me about him,’ she said.
‘What is he really like?’
Lesley turned smartly left as the lights changed, and wound her way by back-streets to the parking-ground on the edge of the shopping centre, a multi-storey monstrosity  of raw concrete, at which she gazed with resigned distaste as she crept slowly up to the barrier and drove in to the second tier.
‘Brutal, isn't it?
In a nice Tudor-cum-Georgian town like this, I ask you!
Doctor Morris?
Well, I suppose I do know him fairly well, he's stayed with us a couple of times.
But of course Stephen knows him much better, he was at college with him, and they've always kept in touch, in a fairly loose sort of way.
Don't think I'm being bitchy if I say that Stephen probably resents him as much as he admires him.
They began more or less level, you see, and then the one went on forging right to the top, and the other came labouring along always further and further in the rear.
They never were less than friends, though, so admiration must have kept on winning out.’
The car slid neatly into its slot, and she cut the engine and opened her door.
‘Grab the shopping bag, would you mind?— it's slid over your side.
Let's go and have coffee first, and then I've got to call at the bank to get some cash, and dump that package, before we start shopping.’
Charlotte lifted out a large bag of pale, soft leather, so limp as to seem empty, and lifted her eyebrows in surprise at the weight of the small, brown-paper-wrapped box that dragged down one corner of it.
And Lesley laughed.
‘Yes, that's why I want to get rid of it first.
It's something of Orrie's, actually.
Country people are odd!
He claims he doesn't trust banks, he refuses to open an account, yet he doesn't see anything illogical in asking me or Stephen to put things in our safe-deposit box to keep for him.
He's not so dumb, you know.
Quite sharp enough to know all about dodging income tax on the odd jobs he does in his spare time.
Cash payments and no account books!
And every now and again he probably gets a shade nervous at keeping cash under the floor-boards or wherever he puts it, and starts spreading the load.’
Now that she was away from Aurae Phiala, Lesley had flamed into an almost delirious fluency and radiance, she who was bright enough to dazzle even in her chosen prison.
She talked incessantly and joyously over coffee in the feminine precincts of the main dress shop: about Aurae Phiala itself, about Orrie, and the village community of Moulden, about Bill Lawrence and his aspirations.
She rejoiced in being free from the place, but she talked of it with comprehension and critical affection.
Perhaps she needed this interlude only as the lover needs a rest from loving.
‘Poor Bill, he has ambitions towards scholarship.
I mean the real thing.
I could be wrong, but I don't think he has the real thing in him.
He's doing a big thesis on the border sites, that's why he's working at our place for a year or so.
It doesn't pay much, so you can imagine he's in earnest about his aspirations.
He's a nice boy,’ she said tolerantly, and a shade absurdly in view of the fact that she was perhaps two years his senior, ‘but somehow I don't see him making it to the top.
He prowls about the place, you know, on his own, and dreams of springing a dazzling surprise on the archaeological world some day.
I don't know!
I see him ending up pretty much like Stephen, half-fulfilled and half-frustrated — a third-rater,’ she said, candidly and regretfully, ‘and knowing it.’
She talked of the limitations of her husband and her acquaintances in a perfectly detached way, quite without personal venom and certainly without any delusions.
Charlotte could imagine her discussing her own imperfections, if the subject should arise, with the same critical precision.
The bank was directly across the street from the shop.
Lesley rummaged in the depths of her calf handbag for a matching key-case as they crossed at the lights, and flicked out the smallest of the keys on the bunch it contained ‘You  won't mind waiting a minute for me?
They make a thing of this strong-box business, but ours mostly has rather dull securities and family papers in it.
And Stephen's will, I suspect.
Not that he ever mentions it, or that I've ever asked him, but he's the type to consider it a sacred duty to have everything in order for every emergency.’
‘It could be a virtue,’ said Charlotte rather drily, reminded of the unimaginably sudden aspect death sometimes assumes.
‘It is a virtue.
One I envy but am never likely to possess.
I'm an improviser, he's a method man.’
She disposed of her errand, and armed herself with cash, and they went to shop, the usual duty shopping for the household, the more esoteric lines which were not stocked and delivered locally; and a few items for her own pleasure.
Then they loaded the purchases into the car, and went with free hands to view the delectable older parts of Comerbourne.
Lesley set herself to be the most enlightening and intelligent of guides.
Her knowledge was wide, and her taste was decisive and good.
‘I was born here,’ she said, sensing the question Charlotte had not asked.
‘Not here in the town, but only about four miles away, in a village.
I used to be a typist in Lord Silcaster's estate office.
Not a very good one.
That's how I got to know Stephen.
We used to do any typing that was needed for the Aurae Phiala publications, and for the few little books and articles Stephen occasionally produced.
I was the one who mucked up his texts worse than any of the others, that's what made him notice me in the first place.’
‘It sounds highly improbable,’ Charlotte said frankly.
They were leaning side by side on the stone parapet of the oldest bridge over the Comer, and the same river that scoured so savagely at its banks upstream flowed beneath  them here full, strong and smooth, partially tamed by two weirs in between.
A few black-headed gulls wheeled headily above the water.
‘No, honestly I wasn't much good.
I wasn't interested enough.
And as I had this urge to correct manuscripts as I went along, and couldn't read his handwriting, and didn't know the first thing about Roman Britain, you can imagine he felt obliged to educate me.
Looks like being a life-work, doesn't it?’
There was no being certain how serious she was, or how flippant.
Her lips were curved slightly in a mild, private smile.
But she did not elaborate anything or withdraw anything, then.
She took Charlotte companionably by the arm, and they turned back together towards the car park, and the Morris, and home.
Not until they were drawing near to Moulden did she suddenly reopen, more gently and more directly, the subject of herself.
‘You're wondering about Stephen and me,’ she said; a statement, not a question, and with nothing defiant or defensive about it.
‘Impossible not to wonder, isn't it?’
And that was a question, and required an answer.
‘Quite impossible,’ said Charlotte, ‘since you ask me.’
It was difficult to feel any tension or embarrassment while Lesley felt none.
‘I do it regularly, about all the interesting people I meet.’
‘Good!
So do I. But I know we're a rather special case.
For one thing, you have to realise that even three years ago Stephen was rather a different person — to look at, I mean, and to be with, and all that.
Growing and ageing don't work in a smooth, regular sort of way.
A stunted little boy suddenly starts to shoot up like a weed, a plain adolescent turns into a beauty overnight, and well-preserved middle-aged men who reach sixty still looking forty-five suddenly make up the deficit and more than overtake their age, all in a few  months.
For no good reason that I can see.
And for another thing, he began to take an interest in me just when I was on the rebound from a very unhappy love affair — the kind of let-down that alters not just your life but even your nature.
He was kind, and attentive, and soothing.
And I'd gone off passion.
I married for safety, and comfort, and consideration.
Not to be alone, and not to be vulnerable any more.
Maybe a little for reputation, too,’ she said, with a serene air of examining her own motives in the light of a new discovery, and finding them credible, reasonably creditable, and slightly amusing.
‘My own family was pretty undistinguished, and Stephen had at any rate a respectable reputation in his own field — though I probably overvalued it at the time.
So I married him.
I think it was just as big a gamble for him, perhaps bigger.’
They had reached the rising curve in the road, where the plantation of young trees came into view, fringing Aurae Phiala with delicate pales of green.
‘Insecure young girls,’ said Lesley seriously, ‘are often happiest with much older men.
They feel safe.’
And suddenly she laughed, a gay peal, refreshed by a whole day of escape from her selected cage.
‘Doesn't always work out that way, though.
Yes, you really must make the acquaintance of your great-uncle.
Now there's a handsome old dog!
He knows it, too!
He must have put in some agile footwork at times, to get this far through his life still single, and yet have all the fun he's had.’
‘I've been hearing about his reputation as a lady-killer,’ Charlotte admitted.
‘Everyone tells the same tale about him, so it must be true.’
‘I speak,’ said Lesley feelingly, ‘as one of the many at whom he made charming and — relatively!— harmless passes.’
‘I thought you might!’
‘But unfortunately — I suppose it isn't surprising in the circumstances — Stephen is almost pathologically jealous of me, so it wasn't much fun.
It was pretty innocuous play, but I had to discourage it.
Absurd, but even so it could have been dangerous.’
‘I suppose,’ said Charlotte casually, ‘you haven't heard from him since he left for Turkey?
He went straight from here to the airport, I was told.’
‘That's right, he did.
No, I haven't had any word.
He knew it wouldn't be a good idea, you know.
Neither has Stephen, I'm sure.
But in the ordinary way we shouldn't expect to, of course, he isn't a writing man.
Only books!
And they've been friends long enough to take each other for granted, turn up when they feel like it, and shut up when they're busy.
They always get on well, except that they never can agree about Aurae Phiala.
After all,’ she said simply, ‘it's all Stephen has, and he's never going to excavate it, not really, nobody's ever going to put up the money.
But he lives on the hope, and that's enough.’
The Morris rolled briskly through the carriage gates, and down the gravelled drive towards the house.
‘And you've never had any regrets?’
Charlotte asked.
‘Me?’ said Lesley, opening her wide eyes even wider in amused surprise.
‘I never regret anything.’
George slept until six o'clock, and was then awakened by the telephone.
Sergeant Noble had a comprehensive report to make, the day's summary of his own activities and those of several others.
‘Got a preliminary estimate for you from Goodwin, but he's not through yet, he'll be on the line again later this evening.’
The pathologist attached to Comerbourne General Hospital enjoyed Home Office recognition in this region, and he was an old friend, and amenable.
‘It confirms what Braby suggested, but we'll have to wait until he's finished the post-mortem.
Yes, the father showed up to identify.
Very composed, considering.
Shall I read it out?’
He did so.
Doctor Braby, hard-worked GP and police surgeon to the district, had done more than confirm the fact of death on this occasion, he had called immediate attention to certain peculiarities about the body, and boldly essayed a guess at the length of time it had actually been in the water.
A very suggestive guess, too, but there was no acting on it until Dr Reece Goodwin had made a more detailed examination and confirmed or corrected Braby's estimate.
Noble's matter-of-fact voice made short work of the interim report.
‘And this shed of Benyon's.
We've about mapped it, took us most of the day.
He was there, all right.
We got a set  of his prints from the body.
The letters on the glass are drawn, of course, but you were right about the dot.
Right forefinger tip — a beauty.
But besides that, we've collected half a dozen more, various but his, from all round the place.
And as good as a complete set off the vice — the metal had the thinnest possible film of oil.
He was there, and there for some time, poking into everything.
No damage, no mischief, just having a look.
Like you and Benyon put it — passing the time.’
‘So, alone,’ said George.
‘That's how it looks.
Nearly all the other prints we lifted are Benyon's, naturally.
One or two of someone else, probably Paviour himself, but of course we haven't got him on file, and these are where you'd expect ‘em, on the door, where you might well finger it if you just looked in to have a word with the incumbent, so to speak.’
‘So young Boden spent some time alone in there, alive and active.
What about getting in there, considering where he was last noticed?’
‘Easy!
The box hedge is solid as a wall as far as the corner, but just round there it ends, and that short side is privet, and there's a place in it where an old wicket's been taken out, and the gap hasn't grown in completely yet.
Not much doubt he slipped in there and went to earth in the shed, for some purpose of his own.
Otherwise someone would have seen him again.’
‘And waited.
For what, I wonder?
I can't think he had any date to meet somebody there.
He came with the party, and halfway through the visit he was still showing off for his fans and being mildly provocative towards all authority.
He wasn't doing any showing off when he slipped quietly away into Orrie's shed.
Something happened, something came into his mind, while he was there at Aurae Phiala, that prompted him to disappear and let the party leave without him.’
‘He may not have expected them to do that,’ objected  Noble reasonably.
‘They never had before.
Maybe he just wanted to make 'em hunt and fret a bit.’
‘Look, Orrie's shed isn't any special joy, and this was a boy who liked his comfort, and company, and adulation.
He might sit it out ten minutes just to annoy, but not the time it took him to fidget all round the place as he seems to have done.
He'd have to have a much more compelling reason than that.
It looks to me more as if he wanted them to push off and abandon him.
For his own reasons.
And that means a reason right there on the spot, otherwise, once out of sight, he'd simply have made off for wherever it was he wanted to be.
But he didn't.
Where he wanted to be was right there, but unobserved.
He camped out and waited.
For what?’
‘Closing time,’ said Noble.
‘For everyone to go away.’
‘You're not far off target, either, but it's no answer.
Look, there wasn't any sign in there of a scuffle of any kind?
Even tidied up afterwards?’
‘Not a thing.
The dust lay peacefully, except where he'd actually trodden or pawed.
Nobody'd been fighting in there, take it from me.’
‘Then nothing to suggest that — granted he walked in of his own will — he didn't walk out the same way?’
‘I was coming to that,’ said Sergeant Noble with satisfaction.
‘He walked out, all right.
I don't know if you noticed, but just outside the door, where the ground's trodden, the grass thins, and there's a slight hollow that obviously holds water every time it rains, and only dries out gradually in between— nice smooth black mud like double-cream.
It's in first-class shape just now.
I've got two and a half beautiful prints in that layer of mud, heading out of the shed.
I haven't got the shoes he was wearing, but I have got his spare school pair.
They're his prints, all right.
If there was any doubt, there's one very nice curl of metal swarf, shed  from the shoe, bang in the middle of one of those prints.
I've got the whole piece of turf under plastic.
It looks like the same sort of swarf that's lying under Orrie's bench.
I reckon when we get the actual shoes we may find some more.
That stuff works into composition soles like nails knocked into wood.
He walked in, and he walked out-alive, in case you were wondering…’
‘For a while,’ George conceded, ‘I was.
It was just a possibility.
Knowing what we know.’
‘Yes, granted.
But there it is.
He went out of there alive and alone, after a fairly lengthy stay.
And where do we go from here?’
‘Home to bed,’ said George, ‘in your case, and leave me the file.
In my case — back to Aurae Phiala.’
It was after nine o'clock, however, by the time he got there, since his route was complicated, and involved calls at the mortuary of the General Hospital, at police headquarters, and a telephone call to the forensic laboratory.
He collected the full list of the contents of the dead boy's pockets, and one unexpected item in the collection sent him out of his way to pay a visit to ‘The Salmon's Return’ before he finally reached Paviour's house.
‘Why, Mr Felse!’ said Lesley, opening the door to him, and blessedly forgetting to think of him first by his rank and office.
‘Do come in!
Do you want Stephen, or all of us?’
He said that he didn't mind who was present, that he had something to communicate which might slightly affect the convenience of everyone in residence here, and therefore could be stated in everyone's presence.
And he hoped it wouldn't inhibit the activities of anybody here.
Anybody, of course, with an easy conscience.
‘I don't promise anything,’ said Lesley serenely, ‘about anybody's conscience except mine.
But I don't anticipate  any real onslaught from you, somehow.
Come along in!’
They were all there, opportunely including Bill Lawrence.
Paviour greeted the visitor with immaculate politeness, but a certain air of acid disapproval which might well have stemmed from nothing more than nervousness.
‘I thought,’ he said, in withdrawn enquiry, ‘that we had answered all the relevant questions already.
Your men have had access wherever they wished.
Is there anything more we can do?
‘No questioning is entailed tonight,’ said George.
‘I called to tell you that we find it necessary to remain on your grounds for a day or two.
It might — it's for you to decide — be preferable to close Aurae Phiala to the public for some days.
No doubt you'll consult Lord Silcaster about that.
We're prepared to cordon off our section if you see fit to continue admitting the public.
I'm sorry to put you to any inconvenience, but it can't be helped.
What we intend is to take up the area of ground you now have roped off, or a part of it — the broken corner of the hypocaust.’
Paviour shot up out of his chair, for once jerked erect to his full gangling height, which was impressive.
He looked more than ever like Don Quixote confronting the most formidable of spectral windmills; and his tenor voice blazed from a reed to a trumpet in his indignation.
‘You can't do such a thing!
You've no right!
Can you imagine the harm you might do?
Uninformed digging is disastrous.
Lord Silcaster will never tolerate it.’
‘Lord Silcaster has already given his permission.
On the grounds set before him.’
‘I can't believe it!
Grounds?
What grounds?
I quite understand that where there's some reasonable connection, some prospect of information to be gained…
But surely here, tragic though the circumstances may be, there's no question of a crime?
This poor boy fell into the river —’
‘I'm afraid your information is not quite complete,’ George said equably.
‘Gerry Boden did not simply fall into the river and drown.
He was knocked on the head, just as Mr Hambro was last night, and put into the river.’
Paviour stood rigid, frozen into silence like the rest.
‘Put into the river,’ said George, studying the circle of shocked faces, ‘somewhere on these premises.
He showed particular interest in that subsidence, it's reasonable to assume that his object was to return to it at a time when there would be no one around to interfere with him.
I can also tell you, roughly, at any rate, the time when he entered the water.
It was somewhere around ten o'clock.
And you won't need reminding what happened here at very much the same time last night.’
No, they needed no reminding.
Charlotte had been the first to make the connection; her eyes lit with a spark of alert intelligence which was meant as a communication, and as briefly acknowledged by a warning flicker of George's glance in her direction.
She said nothing.
Paviour was the last to understand.
His habitual greyness faded into a bleached and waxen pallor.
‘We were concerned last night,’ said George, ‘with the question of what Mr Hambro could possibly have blundered into, to make it essential that he should not survive to talk about it.
Now we needn't wonder about that any longer.’
When he left the house, he went down to the riverside, and spent some time considering the extent of the job they were about to tackle, the resources they were going to need, and the best way of setting about it.
He came back to his car, parked inconspicuously on the grass by the privet hedge, shortly before half past ten.
From the darkness where the thicker growth of box began, a shadowy figure slipped out  to join him, and he saw the oval of a girl's face as a paler gleam above her dark coat.
‘Miss Rossignol!
What are you doing here?’
‘I had to speak to you,’ she said in a hurried whisper.
‘It's all right, they won't miss me.
I think they were glad to have a little time to themselves.
I said I'd like to walk a little way with Bill Lawrence when he left.
I had a sudden thought, when you mentioned the timing.
One I don't much like, and can't quite believe in, but it's there.’
‘What is it?
What's on your mind?’
‘I was pretty close behind Gus Hambro last night.
I know you realised I was following him.
And it was a quiet night, no noise from wind or leaves.
Look, I'm no expert at that sort of thing.
I was as quiet as I could be, but all the same, I can't help wondering if at some stage he realised I was on his heels.
There is something curious about him, you know.
The way he shook me off, as soon as you left us, and hurried off down the river like that.
And even his being there at the inn.
He pretended to me that he was already booked in there, but he wasn't — I heard him ask for the room afterwards.
When he knew who I was.’
‘You think that's significant?’
George asked, and drew her a step deeper into the darkness of the hedge.
‘I think it ought not to be,’ she said earnestly.
‘But yes, I think it is.
So it adds up to something ambivalent about him, so much so that I have to wonder.
Was he genuinely attacked, because he blundered into murder?
That's what the timing suggests, but that's not the only thing it could suggest.
The other is that he heard me following, and staged the attack on himself, with the help of some accomplice unknown — for it couldn't have been done alone, could it?— to put himself in the clear, and immobilise me long enough for the other person to get away, and the body to be well downstream.
Maybe someone bold enough to  improvise like that would even take the risk of getting himself really knocked out and dropped in the water, knowing I couldn't fail to find him in a few minutes.’
‘And knowing you,’ George added.
She sensed that he was smiling, and was a little disconcerted.
‘Enough to estimate your capabilities, at any rate.
In the circumstances you outline, I agree I'd rather take a chance on you than on most people.’
‘Thank you,’ she said, ‘but I think you're laughing at me.’
‘I assure you I'm not.
But I'd still be a bit wary of taking a risk like that.
Even on you.’
‘It would be a pretty desperate choice, though, wouldn't it?
It isn't a thought I like, myself,’ she admitted.
‘But I know he isn't what he seems to be.
He isn't here by accident, and your news about an unofficial hunt being launched for the boy sent him off in a hurry to this place.’
‘As it well might,’ said George, interpreting, ‘if the boy was already dead, and concealed somewhere here, and Hambro had guilty knowledge of it.
The news that the police were interested made it imperative to get the body away at once— and the river was the obvious ally.
Is that what you think happened?’
‘I hadn't thought as far as that,’ she said, quivering.
‘It simply seemed a possibility that he was somehow involved.’
‘That isn't what I asked you.’
Now it was she who was invisibly smiling, oddly encouraged and reassured.
‘No,’ she said, ‘it isn't what I think.
I don't think it.
But I could be wrong, too, that's why I had to hand it over to you.’
And abruptly reverting to painful gravity: ‘Was the boy already dead?’
‘It isn't certain yet.
We shall get the pathologist's report tomorrow.
But yes, I think he was.’
‘Not drowned, then?’
‘In confidence, though again we haven't yet got the word officially — no, not drowned.
I'm trusting you with some part of the background.
I'm afraid you saw the beginning of it.
This boy had found something very intriguing and exciting here at Aurae Phiala yesterday afternoon.
I rather think he must just have picked it up when Mr Hambro chased him away from the cave-in.
He didn't dare attempt to go back again until the coast was clear, so he hid himself until everyone was gone.
Not until dark, since his intention was to search that patch of ground thoroughly.
But he may have waited until it began to be dusk.
And someone — someone from close by, someone on or near this site — caught him in the act, and took drastic action.
Whoever it was didn't go through his pockets.
His find was still there when they stripped him at the mortuary.’
In a whisper she asked: ‘What was it?’
‘A single gold coin.
An aureus of Commodus — that's round about the end of the second century AD.’
‘But you couldn't!’ she said just audibly.
‘You couldn't kill somebody for one gold coin.
It isn't possible!’
‘People have been killed for less, even taking it at its face value, though its actual value is very much greater.
But no, he wasn't killed for that, or it wouldn't have been still on him.
No, whoever caught him hunting for more knew that there was more there to be found — knew it because he himself had come out as soon as he dared, to remove whatever was there to a place of greater safety.
Don't forget the landslip had taken place only that morning, Orrie Benyon was just cordoning off the dangerous area and putting up warning notices.
If someone had valuables hidden in the hypocaust, he must have been waiting on thorns for the chance to get his hoard away, and baulked all day by staff and visitors wandering around.
He came at dusk, as soon as he dared, when everyone was gone.
So did the boy.
Maybe  he'd already unearthed what was left, and it was too late just to warn him off and hope for the best.
X preferred a final solution.’
‘Is this a theory?’ she asked in horrified fascination.
‘Or do you know it?’
‘It's a theory.
One that fits.
In the last days of Aurae Phiala the coinage was shaky in the extreme, a lot of barbarous, debased pieces were being struck everywhere.
But this — I'm well briefed on the subject, this isn't my own knowledge — is a fine, full-weight aureus from two hundred years previously, enormously enhanced in value.
And the Romans were hoarders.
Now supposing some family here had a store of such good gold pieces at the end, when the Welsh attack was threatening, they might very well bury it for safety, in the hope of recovering it later.
They seem to have shut their eyes and hoped to the very end.’
‘But can one coin prove anything?’ she said hesitantly.
‘A very special coin.
It hadn't lain loose in the soil for centuries, or even for weeks.
It's virtually mint-new.
That means it's been kept carefully and put away securely, and certainly not alone.
In a pottery jar, well sealed.
During the slip falling bricks inside the flue may have broken the jar, and rolling earth carried one coin down the slope, for Gerry to find.
Not a dull bit of corroded bronze, but fire-new gold.
No wonder he went back to look for more.’
‘But if someone knew all about it before, this treasure, why hadn't he removed it earlier?’
‘It was safe enough where it was, until the river took a bite out of the hypocaust.
It's possible the hoard was actually found somewhere else on the site — say the cellar of one of the houses — and put in the flue for safe-keeping, to be drained away gradually.
A whole thicket of broom bushes came down in that slip, as you saw.
I think there was a way into the flue all along, under cover of those bushes.
Possibly the slip, while it exposed it, also partially filled it in.
I think, too, that the find was not merely of coins, but also of small pieces of jewellery and other articles.
The indications are that this site may have been exploited for at least a year.
You can't dispose of such pieces wholesale.
You take one or two, having studied the collectors of the world, and the highly professional fences of the antique market, and place them where they'll bring you in the best and safest return.
You lie low for a while, and you disperse a handful of coins, singly, perhaps not to the best advantage, but still it's all clear profit.
And when you hit a passionate collector who takes care to ask no questions, then you venture the big deal.
But it means dedicated study, exact judgement, and above all, time.’
He could sense, even in the darkness, the enormous wonder of her eyes, fixed unwaveringly upon his face though they saw him only as a bulk solid and still between her and the sky.
‘But how do you know all this?’ she said.
‘About a whole year's robberies from here?’
‘I don't yet — not to say know.
But for about a year certain pieces of late Roman coinage and art have been cropping up in unexpected places in the international market.
Obviously genuine pieces, but of very dubious provenance.
Only a few, of course.
Collectors are queer fish, you know, liable to banditry without any qualms.
But four instances have come to light within the year, through dealers or buyers who did have qualms.
And four coming to light argues forty or more in the dark, most likely for good.’
‘And there's something to connect these cases with Aurae Phiala?’
‘Not until now, not specifically.
But period and style are right.
You've seen the ones in the museum here, the curvilinear trumpets and dragons, those un-Roman Roman antiquities?
Let's say, there was plenty to connect our cases  with four or five border sites, of which Aurae Phiala is one.
And one such gold coin here, and a cold-blooded killing, are fairly eloquent argument.’
She was shivering slightly but perceptibly, not from cold and not from fear, but with the vibration of some personal and secret tension about which he had, as yet, no right to ask.
She might, if he waited, confide in him, but not now; there was no time, if she was to retain her immaculate position in this household.
He put a hand upon her shoulder, which was firm and slender, and turned her towards the gate.
‘Keep your lips closed and your eyes open, and think about it.
And if you want me, I won't be far away.’
‘But you won't be here,’ she said, not complaining, merely making the position clear to herself, and well aware that her utterance had its ambiguities.
‘Not all the time.’
‘You won't be entirely unprotected here,’ he assured her, ‘even when I'm not around.
Better get back now, before they come out to look for you.’
She sensed that he was smiling again.
It wasn't an amused smile, but it was one that sent her away at a brisk and confident walk towards the house, and with a gratifying sense of being respected and appreciated.
The Roman city of Aurae Phiala remained closed to the public next day, and for several days following, an apologetic notice on the gate making known the fact to a largely indifferent general public.
The enclosure was never exactly crowded, even in the height of the summer.
On the riverside, where the pathway could not be closed, a uniformed policeman paced imperturbably, and occasionally moved people along if they tended to congregate and linger too long.
The natives, markedly, did not.
They passed, apparently oblivious, intent only on their own business; but  hardly a soul in the village failed to pass at some time during that day, and not one missed a detail of what was there to be seen.
Operations had begun early.
Breakfast was not yet over at the curator's house when Orrie came to announce that the police were in occupation, and beginning to stake out the ground.
Paviour left his coffee without a word, and went rushing away to protect his beloved site, and the two girls followed in slightly apprehensive curiosity.
Three uniformed men were there with spades and sieves, and three or four more in plain clothes, with George Felse at the head of operations.
More surprising, and to Paviour more confounding and conciliating at the same time, was the presence of Gus Hambro, busy with a large clip-board, charting on squared paper the patch of ground to be taken up, and sketching a hurried but accurately proportioned elevation of the exposed vault of the flue.
He had a coloured pencil behind either ear, and a couple more in his breast pocket.
‘I knew you wouldn't mind,’ said Bill Lawrence, hurrying to account for the phenomenon, a sheaf of plastic sacks and fine brushes under his arm.
‘He came along to copy some lettering in the museum, not expecting the place to be closed, of course.
When he heard why, naturally he was interested.
It was my idea, asking him if he'd like to lend a hand on doing what recording can be done on a job like this.
He knows his stuff, you know.
He jumped at the chance.
We shan't be able to do a thorough coverage, I know, but it's a relatively small area, and we may as well keep it under what control we can manage between us.
There might be some useful finds.’
‘Naturally,’ said Gus diplomatically, ‘I regard myself as under your orders, sir.
If there's any possibility of anything to be gained from this operation — and in the absence of the  kind of labour you'd prefer to have on a job like this — I thought an extra pair of hands might be welcome.’
A faint look of baffled pleasure crossed Paviour's harried face and vanished again instantly.
However carefully and reverently the job was going to be handled, obviously he expected nothing but disaster.
He hovered about the site restlessly, like one barefoot on thorns, all the while they were removing the debris of sagging, uprooted broom bushes, which Orrie phlegmatically loaded into a handcart and wheeled away along the riverside path to be unloaded and burned as far as possible from the sacred precincts.
The care with which they examined and photographed those bushes before allowing them to be removed brought Paviour quivering to the spot.
With straining eyes he watched small fragments, meaningless to the lay eye, delicately extricated from the tangle of earth about the roots and the soft turf beneath them, cased in plastic, and labelled.
‘Not your relics, I'm afraid,’ said George, meeting the baffled and frantic gaze.
‘Ours.’
He dared not ask, and was not told more.
But he could not tear himself away.
The operation proceeded methodically once the bushes had been cleared, though the spots where the mysterious fragments had been found were carefully tagged and covered with plastic.
The broken fringes of grass were lifted off and stacked well out of the way, the spades began to clear the ground downwards from the arc of russet brickwork, warily because of sinister little trickles of loose earth that drifted down the slope at every movement.
Layer by layer the narrow strata of brick and rubble were laid bare.
Bill Lawrence, his eyes gleaming with the hunting passion, pounced on the fragments of encrusted ceramic and bone that were left behind in the police sieves, and Gus industriously entered their location in his  graph, and sketched in each layer of masonry as it emerged.
Detective-Constable Barnes, large, rustic, intelligent and benign, put down his spade and went to work lovingly with a soft brush on the exposed uprights of the flue, whisking away loose, moist soil that abandoned its hold with revealing readiness.
‘Look at that, now!
That stuff's only been dropped here a few days.
Watch that brickwork dry off in the sun, it'll be as pale as the arch, here, in ten minutes.
I reckon there was eighteen inches or so of this passage open till the bank gave way.’
They had just passed that level now, and the darkness that yawned within the flue was black and inviting.
Barnes reached a long arm over the ridge of fallen soil that remained in the mouth of the hole, and groped experimentally around within.
‘Dropsafoot, inside there.
The bushes covered it.
Nobody walks on a slope like this for choice, only sheep, and they don't let sheep graze this lot.
Reasonable folks walk on the level — either up top, or down below.’
‘What's it feel like, as far as you can reach?’
George asked.
‘Still silted over, or any traces of flooring?
Tiles?
Stone-work?’
‘No, rubble.
But still dropping.
I'd say you'd get clear flooring a yard or two inside there.’
Lesley, watching in fascination from the sidelines, said with conviction: ‘You've done this before!
I know the signs.’
‘Only once, miss.’
Detective-Constable Barnes turned his benevolent gaze upon her with pleasure.
He liked a pretty girl.
‘I went on a dig with a bunch from Birmingham University.
They had me brushing out post-holes on some rubbish dump they said was a castle.
Not my idea of a castle.
We never turned up nothing like this.
My dad was a mason — I reckon he'd have been right interested in these bricks.
There's a colour for you!
Spot-on what you mean when you say ‘brick’.’
‘What's it like above?
Never mind further in, how about the first couple of feet?’
‘Feels sound as rock.
Arched — shallow, like.’
His stretched knuckles tapped as far as they could reach.
‘Barrel-vaulted, but low.
Could be brick, could be stone.
But I'd say brick.
I can feel the courses.
'He withdrew a hand like a shovel, and spread fingers black with the fine dust of centuries and a mere veiling of cobweb.
‘Not much for seventeen hundred years, is it?’
The opening loomed before them, sliced into the bank, brushed relatively clean, a narrow, erect oblong of darkness with a rounded roof and pale, red and amber jambs rooted in deep green turf.
And within was empty darkness, fenced off by no more than a ridge of soil.
George looked round his team, and they were all massive countrymen, well in advance of the minimum police requirements.
The slightest person present, leaving out the girls, was Gus Hambro, busy pricking in on his diagram the latest minor find.
‘Care to take a look inside for us?
You're the ratling.’
‘Loan me a torch, and I'll have a go,’ said Gus.
‘What am I looking for?’
‘Whatever you see.
Structure, condition — and anything that looks out of place.’
‘Right!
Hang on to this,’ he said to Bill Lawrence, and thrust the clip-board and its records at him.
He shed his array of colour pencils, dropping them haphazard into the grass, hesitated whether to shed his tweed jacket, too, and then, considering its worn condition, buttoned it closely for protection instead.
The dank darkness had a chill and jagged look.
‘Don't go beyond where we can reach you,’ George warned him.
‘Six feet inside is enough.
Just look it over, and memorise whatever there is to be memorised.’
‘I'll do my endeavour.
Right, give us that floodlight of yours.’
He dropped to his knees in the turf, now trampled into glistening, half-dried mud, and plunged head and shoulders under the ochre-tinted lintel.
Torso, slim flanks and thighs, thrusting legs, vanished by silent heaves into the hollow under the slope.
He was now nothing more than the neatly tapered ends of corduroy slacks, and a pair of well-worn Canadian hide moccasins.
And these hung still, though alertly braced, for more than a minute, while the torch he carried ranged round the interior of the passage, and leaked little sparks of muted light into the outer day.
He heaved himself six inches forward, and George laid an arresting hand on the remaining available ankle, and held fast.
‘All right, you inside there!
Leave it at that!’
Indistinct sounds emerged from within the earth, deprived of sense by the complicated acoustics of the soil.
There was an interlude of silence, absorbed and intent.
Then, without previous movement or sound, only with a sudden gush of closed and graveyard air, the rotten surface above buckled and dimpled, lolling in sagging bubbles of turf, and sending its under-levels of soil cascading down on top of the ancient arc of bricks that upheld it.
Those without heard the ceiling yield, with a muffled, sickening grinding of brick against brick and stone upon stone, and the dull, filtering trickle of soil busily winding its way between.
A hollow yell was forced out with the jettisoned air.
And George Felse dived forward at the jerking ankles under the archway, felt his way forward towards the knees, and hauled strongly backwards as the roof sagged slowly and ponderously inwards on top of Gus Hambro.