

SEVENTEEN
Harry took his leave of Ernie Love the following morning and presented himself at the Jubilee Clock twenty minutes early for his rendezvous with Nigel Mossop.
The promenade was empty of people at such an hour on a Sunday.
The gulls were in good voice, however, soaring and shrieking overhead in a fickle, shifting breeze, and Harry was surprised how contented if not downright happy he felt, sitting in the shelter nearest the clock and gazing out at the white horses in the bay.
His mood was one of puzzlement mixed with hope.
Resisted and resented though he had been at every turn, he nonetheless detected a direction to his enquiries that promised to become an unwavering course.
Nor was the thought that he alone might hold the key to the mystery the sole component in his strangely elated state.
Two nights under the same roof as Ernie Love had, he suspected, sealed his condition, for Ernie represented the squalor and futility to which his own life could so easily have led but for the sense of purpose looking for Heather had brought to it.
Though whether purpose was the correct description of his motivation he rather doubted.
Something more stubbornly personal, something closer to the rot within him he was determined to stop, lay perhaps rather nearer the mark.
Suddenly, a car horn sounded from close by.
When Harry looked round, it was to see that Mossop too was early for their appointment.
‘Didn't…didn't sleep very well,’ Mossop confessed, as soon as Harry had climbed into the car.
‘W-Worried.’
‘What about?’
‘Not…sure.’
He smiled nervously.
That made it worse.’
On the back seat was a waterproof coat, a sandwich box, an ornithological guidebook and a pair of binoculars.
Evidently Mossop had done his best to deceive his mother, though Harry suspected his blinking, stammering parade of insecurity was bound to have betrayed him.
‘Where…where to, then?’
‘Wherever you went on Sunday the twenty-eighth of August, Nige.
I'm in your hands.’
As confirmation of the significance Harry had detected in Heather's photographs, Mossop's retraced route of three months before could not have made a better start.
He had collected Heather from the Portesham turn-off on the Bridport road, not from Sabre Rise itself, which smacked of subterfuge from the very start.
They had then returned to Weymouth and diverted to the crematorium, where Heather had left the car just long enough to take a photograph.
The site of the second photograph on the film was thus their first port of call.
Leaving Mossop sitting in his car, Harry took a slow, considered circuit of the red-brick chapel set amidst tended lawns and flowerbeds on a summit above the town.
Hereabouts, Beryl Love's ashes must have been scattered beneath a rose bush, though he knew better than to think Ernie might have invested in a memorial plaque.
Clare Mallender's commemoration was, however, a different story.
Down the third row of stones he tried in the garden of remembrance, he found the spot where Heather had raised the camera to her eye and captured the second image in the sequence he was seeking to follow.
CLARE THOMASINA MALLENDER, 1959–1987.
It was a natural subject for a grieving sister, a fitting start to her journey — and for Harry's.
Back on the road, they headed east in silence, Harry's mind registering with calm intensity every mile and vista of their route, as if this process alone would bring him closer to what Heather had been thinking.
It was noon by the time they reached Beaulieu, a smug little New Forest village at the head of the Beaulieu estuary, but Harry was too eager for progress to permit the halt for lunch that Mossop had enjoyed with Heather.
Instead, they drove south, down the western side of the estuary, to a pull-in at the end of a lane, whence Mossop and Heather had walked down to the river's edge and taken the third photograph.
The scene had been altered only by the season.
The trees were bare now, the reeds forlorn, the sky a disgruntled grey.
Otherwise, with Mossop standing by the river's edge, ill-at-ease and chattering furiously, Harry could envisage the previous occasion without difficulty.
Tyler's Hard stood out even more clearly on the opposite bank now the trees were no longer in leaf: the jetty, the lane-end, the white-walled cottage where Dysart spent his constituency weekends.
Heather had borrowed his binoculars, Mossop said, and studied the cottage through them for some time.
Perhaps, Harry thought, she had been checking to see if Dysart were in residence, looking for his car or some such sign of his presence.
Presumably she had seen nothing to deter her from taking a closer look.
But she had not, Mossop revealed, gone straight to Tyler's Hard.
Instead, they had driven on eastwards, beyond the last heath of the New Forest as far as the housing estates fringing Fawley Oil Refinery, on one of which lived Molly Diamond, Dysart's cleaning lady.
Mossop could not remember the address and it required several false starts and wrong turnings before they located the right house, one grey-dashed end-of-terrace dwelling among the featureless many that spread like silt round the fenced-off acres of pipelines and flares.
Mossop, faithful both to preference and history, remained in the car whilst Harry walked up the front path, trying to ignore the ravenous alsatian growling and tearing at the neighbour's fence.
A grease-smeared youth answered the door, accompanied by a gust of rock music and an aroma of gravy.
When Harry asked if ‘Mrs Molly Diamond’ was at home, the youth slouched back along the passage, shouted ‘Ma’once at the top of his voice, then carried on without change of pace towards a dismantled motorcycle Harry could see beyond the back door.
In response to the call, an aproned figure peered at Harry from the kitchen, then bustled towards him, wiping her hands in a towel as she came.
She looked like a once proud young woman waging an unequal struggle against slatternly middle age, her hands red from labour and her face grey with exhaustion, but her eyes preserving some yet-to-be extinguished sparkle of ambition.
She seemed inclined to give Harry short shrift, but at his mention of Heather's name, she relented and showed him into the front room, where a meagre measure of calm and quiet prevailed.
‘I read about 'er disappearance, o' course nce,’ she began.
‘It proper upset me, I can tell you, when they said she was probably dead.
Such a nice, polite, well-bred young woman.
Are you related?’
‘Er, no.
A friend.
The name's Barn —’ Harry hesitated, then decided to risk a lie.
‘Barnes.
Horace Barnes.’
‘What can I do for you, Mr Barnes?’
‘Well, all Heather's friends and relatives have racked their brains for clues as to what might have become of her, as you can imagine, and I remembered her mentioning visiting you here a few months ago.’
‘She told you 'bout that?’
A doubtful look crossed Mrs Diamond's face.
‘Er, yes.
Yes, she did.’
‘You do surprise me.’
‘Really?
Why?’
‘I got the impression she'd not 'ave wanted anyone to know about  it.
She told me….’
Hesitation slowly became determined silence; the line of her mouth tightened.
‘Told you what?’
‘I don't know as I can say.’
Harry tried to assume an appealing expression.
‘Your discretion does you credit, Mrs Diamond.
In normal circumstances, I wouldn't ask you to break a confidence.
But these aren't normal circumstances, are they?’
A moment of frowning consideration preceded the grudging reply.
‘Reckon they're not, no.’
‘And doesn't it reassure you to know she told me about coming here when she kept it from her family?’
By now, however, Mrs Diamond was ready with a challenge of her own.
‘What did she tell you, then?
Why did she say she came, ere?’
‘To see where her sister had died and to speak to those who'd witnessed her death.’
‘And that's all she said?’
‘Yes.
Do you mean there was some other reason?’
‘No….’
A little encouragement seemed in order.
‘If it helps you make up your mind, Mrs Diamond, I should tell you that I'm a friend of Heather's rather than a friend of her family…if you see what I mean.’
‘It's not them I'm —’ She broke off, stared at him intently for a moment, then said: ‘What do you know about me, Mr…
Mr Barnes?’
‘Nothing, beyond the fact that you do some housekeeping for Alan Dysart at Tyler's —’
‘Did some 'ousekeeping.
I don't anymore.’
‘Oh, I didn't realize.
Why, er…?’
‘Not since June of last year.’
‘You mean not since Clare Mallender's death?’
She nodded in confirmation, but showed no inclination to expand on the fact.
‘It was very upsetting, I suppose.’
That weren't the reason,’ she snapped.
All of this, it seemed to Harry, was beside the point.
He was about to make an attempt to steer the conversation back to Heather's visit in August when, in a sudden rush, Mrs Diamond reached the limit of her reticence and revealed what he did not doubt she had also revealed to Heather.
‘Mr Dysart paid over the odds for charring, and my Wilfrid thought I was mad to give it up, but I was glad to go, believe you me, glad to be out of that house for good and all.
What 'appened there on the first of June last year weren't just a tragedy, oh no.
It were also wrong, plain wrong.
It weren't the way everyone said an’ thought it was, you see, not by a long chalk.
An' I should know, 'cos I was there.
D'you remember what the papers and TV said about it, Mr Barnes?’
‘Well, not exactly.
I understood —’
‘Beautiful Miss Clare Mallender blown up by the IRA in mistake for Mr Dysart. 'ighly thought of.
Much admired.
The model secretary.
Well, that's not 'ow I remember 'er.
'ard little bitch she was, take my word for it.
'ard as nails an' cunning as a vixen.
As for Mr Dysart finding 'er  indispensable , well that's not my recollection.
They 'ated each other: I could see it in their eyes.
And they fought like cat and dog at times.
Even that last morning.
There was a terrible row between em just before she went out to the boat an got blown up, God rest 'er soul.
But did any of that come out at the inquest?
No, it did not.
Was I called as a witness?
No, I was not.
So, what do you make of that, Mr Barnes, eh?
What do you make of that?’
‘I don't know, Mrs Diamond.
I suppose nobody wants to speak ill of the dead.’
‘Huh!
That's all you know.
That Morpurgo, for one, 'e never did anything else.’
‘Morpurgo?’
‘Mr Dysart's caretaker, 'andyman, call 'im what you like.
Lives in a room over the garage at Tyler's 'ard. 'as the place to 'imself when Mr Dysart's not there, o' course, which is most o' the time.’
Harry had never heard of the man, but his status and circumstances sounded disturbingly similar to his own.
‘Was Morpurgo present when Clare Mallender was killed?’
‘'Course 'e was.
Never stirred far from Tyler's 'ard in my experience.
Me and Mr Dysart were in the kitchen and Morpurgo was in the garden when it 'appened.
I'd seen Miss Mallender walking out along the pontoon to the boat and I'd turned away from the window over the sink to 'and Mr Dysart 'is coffee when there was this great whoomph outside.
All the windows that side o' the 'ouse shattered and then there was just silence for 'alf a minute or so.
Next thing you could 'ear bits of wood and such — bits of the boat, like — falling into the river.
An' a crackling of flames, 'cos the pontoon 'ad caught fire and some o' the wreckage was ablaze as well.
An' I looked at Mr Dysart an' 'e looked at me and we both knew what 'ad 'appened without going to see.
A bit o' glass 'ad caught him on the fore'ead, but otherwise we 'adn't a scratch to show for it between us.
Yet we knew, right enough — knew by instinct, I s'pose — that Miss Mallender was dead.’
‘It must have been dreadful,’ Harry said lamely.
‘But what has this to do with —’
‘We ran out there, o' course, but it was obvious she was beyond 'elp.
There was nothing left of the boat, let alone Miss Mallender — which was a mercy in its way, I s'pose.
Still, Mr Dysart went to see  what 'e could do, while I went back to phone for the police.
I passed Morpurgo on the way.
'E'd come running from the back garden and we nearly bumped into each other coming round the corner of the 'ouse.
That's 'ow I can be so sure, you see.
That's 'ow I can be so certain about the expression on 'is face.
'e was smiling, Mr Barnes, smiling like a cat who's got the cream, smiling like 'e was pleased by what 'ad 'appened.
That shook me, I can tell you.
That chilled me in a way I can't properly describe.
I 'aven't been back to Tyler's 'ard from that day to this — I couldn't bear to.
It's not because of the explosion: it's not delayed shock, or anything like that.
It's because the whole thing was off kilter in some way, not what it seemed, not what people thought it was, not…well, just not right.’
Quite what Mrs Diamond meant to convey by the phrase ‘not right’ was as impenetrable as it was incontrovertible.
Harry would have felt inclined to dismiss it as the invention of a hysterical mind but for the fact that Mrs Diamond's mind was clearly anything but hysterical.
She was neither rich enough nor impressionable enough to have walked out on a well-paid job simply in order to indulge a vapourish mood.
Even to Harry, then, her reaction to Clare Mallender's death seemed too sincere to be ignored.
As to its effect on Heather, struggling to shake off nervous depression and come to terms with her sister's loss, that could only be imagined.
‘I said a few words to Miss Mallender — Miss Heather Mallender, that is — at her sister's funeral, last year.
I thought at the time she made nought of it, but back last summer, like you say, round August bank 'oliday, she came to see me and asked me to tell 'er everything I remembered 'bout the day of the explosion.
Surprised me, it did, 'ow little I'd forgotten.
It was all still lodged there, every moment of it, in me mind.
The noise the bomb made.
That 'ollow, sickening whoomph.
And the flames all round the pontoon.
And, later, the wailing of the police sirens, the flashing of their blue lights, the crackle of their radios.
But all that s nothing, really, compared with Morpurgo's smile.’
‘Why do you think he was smiling?’
‘Why?
Well, if I knew that, Mr Barnes, I'd know what it was that wasn't right that day, wouldn't I?’
‘Couldn't you just have asked him?’
‘I see you don't know the man.
Well, as it 'appens, I did ask 'im, in a roundabout way, later that day.’
‘What did he say?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Nothing at all?’
‘He just smiled, Mr Barnes.
Smiled like 'e did before, like 'e was pleased as punch about something.
That's what got to me: Miss Mallender only a few hours dead — and Morpurgo smiling.’
There was no need to ask Mossop where he and Heather had gone after leaving Fawley.
She must have been seized, thought Harry, by the same curiosity that gripped him now.
Who was Morpurgo?
Why had he smiled?
What had not been right that day?
They drove cautiously, navigating from Mossop's memory, down the narrow lanes towards the Beaulieu estuary, past fringes of forest, paddocks, pasture and mellow creamy-red cottages.
‘You're very q-quiet,’ Mossop said, after they had driven in silence for a mile or so.
Harry did not reply.
He hoped the young man would relapse into muteness and leave him to read the privilege and privacy imbedded in this landscape, to note the pampered thoroughbreds grazing beyond the fences and glimpse their owners' residences tucked down driveways discreetly screened by firs.
There was something in the train of his thoughts, he sensed, that pointed to the answer he sought.
‘It's odd…really, I remember Heather was…quite chatty…over lunch.
But, after we'd been to see Mrs Diamond, she was like you….
Well, like you are now.’
Harry tried to shut Mossop's stumbling remarks out of his head, to concentrate instead on Heather's words, the last words, in fact, that she had ever spoken to him.
‘I can't turn back now, can I?’
Was this the moment, he wondered, on this dank pine-shuttered road to Tyler's Hard, that she had realized, for the first time, that there truly was no turning back, that the momentum of her progress towards whatever awaited her on Profitis Ilias had become irresistible?
A Range Rover pulling a horsebox sped towards them round the next bend, straddling the middle of the lane and causing Mossop to swerve through a muddy ditch at the roadside.
The splash of the water against the wheel and the splatter of it across the windscreen recalled to Harry's mind the sound of falling water that had drawn him in a dream up the stairs of the Villa ton Navarkhon: a dream of statues made flesh, of messages concealed in images, of meetings both expected and located, amounting to what all logic suggests they cannot be: rendezvous to which one has already unconsciously agreed.
Suddenly, they were there.
A single-track lane had taken them down through a straggling copse to a brackish meander of the Beaulieu river and Mossop had stopped the car just short of the cottage so they could see the building, the garden, the overgrown jetty which had given it its name and the shadowed finger of the pontoon reaching out into deeper water, without themselves being seen at all.
‘Did you go in with her, Nige?’
‘N-No.
I waited here.
She didn't…didn't want company.’
‘I daresay she didn't.’
Harry climbed from the car, closed the door as quietly as he could and began to walk along the lane.
He felt a measure of guilt for visiting Tyler's Hard without Dysart's knowledge, but the impetus of his curiosity more than overcame it.
Coming to the gate, he looked in at the cottage and instantly recognized the fourth photograph in Heather's collection.
It could have been taken, he reckoned, from the very spot where he was standing, capturing the scene much as it now was, altered only by the onset of winter.
Double gates to his right led to the garage, a modern construction complete with first-floor flat served by an external staircase and styled to resemble the cottage itself, which lay straight ahead of him, evidently well cared-for in the absence of its owner.
To Harry's left, the lane petered out in a gravel track curving round past the garden hedge to serve the jetty.
Peering out along the pontoon, he could see the contrasting starkness of new wood at its farther end, the only trace in all this orderly solitude of what had occurred there eighteen months before.
Harry pushed open the gate and walked in.
Then he hesitated, uncertain whether to try the cottage, the garage flat or the rear garden.
A curl of smoke from a bonfire behind the house clinched the issue.
As he followed the path that led towards it between bare-branched shrubs and sturdy evergreens, he fancied for a moment that he would come upon Morpurgo and find him a replica of himself, some doppelgänger of Dysart's devising planted here in England whilst he had been banished to Rhodes.
When he passed through an ivy-clad trellis arch and saw the man he sought, however, raking dead leaves and twigs into an incinerator, he realized how absurd the idea was that they could somehow be twin actors of the same part who had never met on stage till this unscripted moment.
Between them, he discerned at once, there could flourish no hint of fellowship.
Morpurgo — Harry did not doubt that it was Morpurgo — was a tall, awkward-looking figure in beret, muddied boiler suit and galoshes, feeding the incinerator with needless energy, forcing the rake-held bundles down into its smoking contents with disquieting relish, with an intensity, indeed, which warned Harry from the first that something was amiss.
He did not look up as Harry approached, but went on working with the zeal and single-mindedness of one who is totally absorbed.
The smoke from the incinerator made Harry blink and cough, but Morpurgo, who was stooped over the very top of it, seemed unaffected and still he paid his visitor no heed.
‘Excuse me….
Mr Morpurgo?’
There was no response.
‘Mr Morpurgo?’
At last, there was a reaction.
Holding down the latest addition to the incinerator with the prongs of his rake, Morpurgo slowly turned his head to look at Harry over his left shoulder.
Harry nearly jumped  back in surprise and flushed instantly in  embarrassment at the distaste his flinching movement had signalled.
Where Morpurgo's left eye should have been was only a sickening fold of flesh.
The cheekbone too, and much of the left side of his face, had vanished into this ill-defined cleft, leaving the nose twisted and the mouth distorted.
An area which was presumably more hideous still, in the vicinity of the ear and temple, was obscured by the tugged-down band of his beret.
As for his right eye, this was a perfect startling blue, gazing out blankly from beneath a solitary tuft of eyebrow.
‘Good…good afternoon.’
With a sudden lunging wrench, Morpurgo swung the rake free of the incinerator.
For an instant, Harry thought he might be about to attack.
Some snatch of verse from a Jacobean tragedy flashed through his mind: ‘When I look into the fishponds in my garden, methinks I see a thing, armed with a rake, that seems to strike at me.’
Then his misapprehension was explained.
Morpurgo slammed the instrument down on the pathway and leaned against it, breathing heavily and fixing Harry with his cyclopean stare.
There was clearly some disability to add to his disfigurement, as physical as it might well be mental.
‘My name's….
Well, it doesn't matter.’
An obvious lie occurred to him.
‘I'm looking for Alan Dysart.’
Morpurgo's mouth had begun to twitch in painful preparation to speak.
When the words came, they were hissed and halting, each of them separately delivered and stressed and they were in answer to Harry's first remark as if those that had followed had not yet been absorbed.
‘I-am-Morpurgo.’
‘Ah, splendid.’
Cursing himself for sounding so patronizing, Harry felt a wave of pity wash over him.
Morpurgo was some harmless retarded constituent for whom Dysart had provided employment and accommodation.
Or perhaps some Falklands veteran crippled in mind and body while serving on Dysart's ship.
Either way, the smile Mrs Diamond had complained about was no more than a grim legacy of drastic surgery.
What was ‘not right’ was no more sinister than the inarticulacy of a maimed human.
‘Good-afternoon.’
‘Good afternoon to you.’
Harry grinned fatuously.
‘Alan-is-not-here.’
‘Oh, I see.
Another time perhaps.’
‘Yes.
-Another-time.’
Harry made some weak farewell gesture with his arm, then turned to go.
There was no point, he felt sure, in prolonging the conversation.
It would prove as anti-climactic as Heather must herself have found it.
He walked back along the path, rebuking himself for entertaining Mrs Diamond's lurid notions.
Perhaps she had allowed a horror of Morpurgo's appearance to bias her judgement.
Perhaps….
Abruptly, Harry pulled up.
It was when he had pictured Morpurgo in his mind's eye that it had occurred to him: such a trivial matter, yet nonetheless not right, not right at all— surely he must be mistaken.
He turned round to find that Morpurgo had not moved.
He was still leaning on the rake, gazing along the path towards him and, even at a distance of several yards, Harry could see that he was not mistaken.
Beneath the boiler suit Morpurgo wore a shirt and tie.
The shirt looked frayed and stained.
But the tie was what seized his attention.
Its pattern was a simple one: wide equal diagonal stripes of pink and white.
Cerise and silver, Heather had corrected him.
Cerise and silver, like the scarf she had lost on Profitis Ilias.
‘It belonged to my sister actually.’
That phrase of Heather's, snatched from a context he could not recall, alighted in his memory.
‘Was-there-something-else?’ asked Morpurgo.
‘No.
That is….
Your tie: I couldn't help noticing it.’
‘My-tie?’
‘Yes.
It's very…distinctive.’
Morpurgo pulled the end of the tie out from the boiler suit and stared down at it, frowning in puzzlement.
‘Where did you get it?
Was it a gift from somebody?’
Morpurgo looked up.
‘No,’ he said with heavy emphasis.
‘You know: a present?’
‘Not-a-present. -It's-mine. -I-earned-it.’
‘You earned it?’
‘Yes.
At-uni-’ He paused, then tried again.
‘At-university.’
‘Which university was that?’
‘Oxford.’
Connections flashed through Harry's mind.
The scarf had belonged to Clare Mallender.
It had the look of a college scarf.
She had been to Oxford.
She had met Jonathan Minter there.
Perhaps they had attended the same college: the college whose colours were cerise and silver.
And Morpurgo had been there too.
And Morpurgo had smiled the day Clare was killed.
As he was smiling now.
Some flood of childish pride as he pushed the tie back into the boiler suit and fondled the knot made Morpurgo grin at Harry: a chilling grin of fathomless delight; the same grin, beyond question, that had frightened Mrs Diamond.
‘Goodbye,’ he called, as Harry hurried away.
By the time Harry reached the gate into the lane, he was certain.
The lure had been too compelling for Heather to resist and he had the photographs to prove it.
Morpurgo must have been wearing the same tie the day she came to Tyler's Hard.
Perhaps he always wore it.
At all events, there could be no doubt that the courtyard pictured in the next photograph, the fifth on the film, belonged to the Oxford college whose colours were cerise and silver and whose past bound three people to their parallel fates.
According to Mossop, Heather had been tight-lipped during the drive back to Weymouth.
She had told him nothing of what her interviews with Mrs Diamond and Morpurgo had yielded and he had not pressed her to do so.
Instead, he had dropped her outside the Half Moon in Portesham, exchanged with her a few platitudes about the working week to come, then driven home to Radipole in time for tea with his mother.
He had thought no more about their excursion until Heather's disappearance had recalled it to his mind — and been followed by Harry's visit.
None of this surprised Harry.
Heather would have been as disinclined to confide in Mossop as he was himself.
The young man was merely a means to an end and, in both cases, that end had now been served.
Harry had Mossop drop him off at Brockenhurst station, where he commenced the journey back to Swindon, happy to find himself alone among anonymous travellers, able to concentrate at last on all the implications of what he had learned.
Morpurgo was too old to be a contemporary of Clare Mallender's: he was closer to Dysart in age.
Since Dysart too had been to Oxford, it was possible that by taking Morpurgo on at Tyler's Hard he had merely been doing an old chum a favour.
War service of some kind would account both for Morpurgo's disabilities and for Dysart's generosity.
If theirs was the same college attended by Clare Mallender, that might be explained by Dysart recommending it to her at her father's request.
So far so inconsequential, but Heather would have been quite capable of deducing as much herself.
Yet the photographs proved it had not stopped her pursuing her curiosity to Oxford.
The rail journey to Swindon involved no fewer than three changes, at Southampton, Basingstoke and Reading.
During the trudging to and fro along echoing subways and draughty platforms that this necessitated, Harry began to notice, for all his preoccupation, that a man who had boarded the train with him at Brockenhurst was making the same complicated series of connections.
At first, he thought little of it, assuming that their parallel paths, like those of all travellers, would eventually diverge.
Joining not only the same train as him but the same carriage twice could be dismissed as a coincidence.
When it happened for a third time, it became remarkable enough to distract him from a rapt analysis of Heather's reasoning.
At Reading, however, he felt sure that the coincidence would snap.
It did not.
Less than ten yards away from Harry as he waited for the Swindon train, the same man stood examining paperbacks on a bookstall.
Thin, slope-shouldered, raincoated and thoroughly inconspicuous, he could easily have been an innocent Sunday evening wayfarer, but for the fact that Harry was now convinced he was not.
The Swindon train arrived.
Harry boarded it and the man followed, selecting a seat several rows distant but facing Harry down the open carriage.
He seemed to make no use of this position for the purposes of observation, keeping his eyes trained instead on the pages of the paperback be had bought at Reading.
It was soft-core pornography, to judge by the girl in black underwear featured on the cover, and it appeared to have riveted the man's attention.
His salacious choice of reading matter somehow reassured Harry, who, deeming his nerves to be in need of calming, made his way to the buffet and bought two drinks: a scotch, which he downed at the counter, and a beer, which he bore back to his seat.
As he moved past the man's shoulder on his way back, Harry could not help glancing down at the book.
The man was in the act of turning a page, and, in so doing, he momentarily exposed its front cover, which Harry had, till now, only seen at a distance.
With a start, he saw that the girl in black underwear was slumped, dead, across a couch and that she had been strangled with a scarf, which was still knotted around her neck.
Harry stumbled to his seat.
Why did it have to be a scarf? he wondered.
Why did this man he had just begun to believe had no interest in him have to have chosen that book among the dozens of others?
The coincidence was as incredible as its alternative, for if….
Suddenly, Harry realized that the train was slowing.
Glancing out of the window, he saw they were drawing into Didcot station, the only stop before Swindon.
A way out of his dilemma at once presented itself to his mind.
Yielding to the impulse, he rose and hurried towards the door.
The man did not follow.
As Harry stood on the platform a minute or so later, watching the train pull out, he could see him through the brightly lit window, still immersed in his paperback, oblivious, it seemed, to Harry's departure.
It was foolish, he told himself, ever to have supposed anybody might be following him, yet the hour he was destined to spend on a chill damp station, awaiting the next Swindon train, was not entirely wasted.
At least it proved that his suspicions were groundless.
It proved it almost beyond question.
EIGHTEEN
Sooner than he had expected, Harry found himself back in Swindon Central Library, this time perusing the national newspapers for 2 June 1987 in the hope of gleaning from them some clue as to what had eluded him on his visit to Tyler's Hard.
Their reports of the attempt on Alan Dysart's life were, however, as similar as they were familiar.
Harry felt as if he had heard or read them all before, in one form or another, and none of them shed any light on what had struck Mrs Diamond as ‘not right’:
The IRA yesterday claimed responsibility for the bomb outrage at the New Forest cottage owned by Alan Dysart, parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for….
The IRA admitted yesterday that it had mistakenly killed secretary Clare Mallender instead of their intended victim, Alan Dysart, the junior Defence minister, by planting a bomb aboard Mr Dysart's yacht….
The peace of a New Forest riverside was shattered yesterday by another addition to the sorry record of IRA terrorism on the British mainland….
Alan Dysart, the outspoken junior Defence minister, yesterday insisted that attempts on his life would not deter him from denouncing those seeking to overthrow democracy in Northern Ireland….
On inner pages, there were tributes from friends and relatives to ‘Clare Mallender, the beautiful and talented girl who lost her life in an explosion meant for her employer….’
‘It's hard to believe  such a vivacious personality is lost to us’,’ Dysart was quoted as saying 'and harder still to accept that the stand I have taken against terrorism may have brought about her death.’’
But Charlie Mallender, fighting back tears according to one reporter, had flown to Dysart's aid: ‘Grief-stricken though we are, we take comfort from the fact that Clare had always wholeheartedly supported Alan Dysart's campaign….’’
And the editorials were unanimous: ‘This appalling act will deflect neither the government in general nor, we suspect, Mr Dysart in particular from their principled rejection of the objectives of its perpetrators….’
There was no mention anywhere of Morpurgo or Mrs Diamond by name, nor hint in anything Harry read that all was not as it appeared to be.
A night's sleep and this blank trawl of the news columns had considerably undermined Harry's confidence in what he was doing.
The photographs might represent a wild goose chase after the random neuroses of an insecure young woman.
He had only known Heather for a few weeks, after all, and may well have been deceived by the impression she had created in Rhodes' alien environment.
Suppositions built on postcards and photographs might be as ill-founded as his short-lived suspicions of being followed the night before.
It was thus in a disillusioned, self-reproachful mood that Harry walked back to Falmouth Street.
Absorbed in his own thoughts, he paid no attention to the purple saloon car parked at the roadside just short of number thirty-seven until, as he made his way past it, the driver's door was pushed abruptly open to block his path.
A hard-faced young man stepped out and engaged him with a fixed stare.
‘Harry Barnett?’
‘Er, yes.’
‘Police.’
A warrant card was briefly flourished.
‘Get in the back, please, sir.’
‘Well, I —’
‘Get in!’
Harry obeyed.
The seat he climbed into was the only empty one in the car.
To his left was a heavily built grey-haired man, who looked straight ahead.
The driver did the same.
The man in the front passenger seat turned round, however, and grinned at Harry with cold-eyed hostility.
‘Lovely weather for the time of year, eh?’ he said, disregarding the fact that it was depressingly grey and damp.
‘What's this all —’
‘You've just got back from Rhodes, we hear.’
‘Yes, but —’
‘Bring back anything you shouldn't?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Drugs, that kind of thing.’
‘Of course not.’
‘We wouldn't find any suspicious substances, then, if we turned over your mother's house?’
‘Of course you wouldn't.
What makes you —’
‘Shut up!’
The grey-haired man beside Harry had spoken and now he turned his jowled and pitted face towards him.
‘Listen to me, Barnett.
The Greek police couldn't nail you for anything, but we're not quite so fussy over technicalities.
On the other hand, we're not unreasonable.
We won't feel obliged to put you under the microscope unless you force us to, but, if we do, we'll find something nasty, take if from me.
So, my advice is: don't force us to.’
‘How am I —’
‘Shut up!’
He glared at Harry for a moment in silence, then resumed.
‘If the Mallender family hear from you just once more, directly or indirectly, by telephone, letter or in person, by any means whatsoever, we'll come down on you so hard you'll think a giant had stamped on your head.
Drugs are only one way.
Your old ma might take up shoplifting.
You might try it on with a girl in the park who turns out to be a policewoman in disguise.
Either way, you'll find yourself in it right up to your neck, get my drift?
If so, just nod.’
Harry knew he should have felt indignation at this crude evidence of Charlie and Roy Mallender pulling strings, not to mention a certain satisfaction that they thought they needed to pull them, but all he could detect within himself was a sickening clutch of fear.
Hard-nosed policemen in unmarked cars belonged to a world of violence and intimidation he had no wish to enter.
In his stomach there churned a disabling sense of his own vulnerability.
He nodded dumbly.
‘On your way, then, sir,’ said the grinning occupant of the front passenger seat.
Harry climbed out onto the pavement.
The door slammed behind him and the car moved off.
Harry watched it until it had turned into Emlyn Square, then began walking unsteadily in the same direction.
He did not turn in at the door of number thirty-seven, however.
After what had happened, quite a different destination seemed appropriate.
Two hours later, full of beer and bravado, Harry contemplated a reflection of himself in the mirror behind the bar of the Glue pot Inn and calculated that, even when sobriety had returned to drain away his courage, he would not change his mind.
If Roy and Charlie Mallender had hoped to frighten him, they had succeeded.
But they had also demonstrated, by their eagerness to deflect him from it, that his was no fool's errand.
As a result, fear was no longer enough.
It had come too late to be effective.
Wherever Heather's photographs led, he was determined now to follow.
NINETEEN
Though Oxford was less than thirty miles from Swindon, Harry had been there only twice before.
A school visit to the Ashmolean and a business trip to Morris Motors comprised his entire experience of the city.
His unfamiliarity with it was not, however, the result of indifference.
He had, in fact, long cherished a secret fantasy in which he had joined the privileged ranks of Oxford undergraduates, racketed through three glorious years of academic and sexual triumphs, then gone on to lead the kind of effortlessly successful life from which working-class origins and a foreshortened education had in reality excluded him.
Alan Dysart was the model for what Harry imagined he could have been, given the advantages bestowed by an Oxford career.
He too, it seemed in his more envious moments, could easily have become an officer and a gentleman, if only his father had been as wealthy as Dysart's, if only he had applied himself to his studies at Commonweal, if only….
But life, as Harry had learned, did not function according to the principles of wish-fulfilment.
It insisted that irrevocable decisions be made before their consequences could be appreciated.
It ensured there was no turning back, no switching to alternative paths, no way of avoiding the future it had prepared.
And no possibility of resisting the force which drew him on, through Oxford's Christmas-lit streets, beneath the gilded spires and haughty cupolas of a world which had denied him, towards the next link in the chain.
The window of a tailor's shop halfway along the High Street was where he found it, in an ample display of college scarves, ties and blazer crests.
Harry went in, enquired and was given, with no more  than an eyebrow-twitch of puzzlement, a comprehensive catalogue of Shepherd & Woodward's university wares.
He did not turn to the centre-spread of college colours until he was outside again, guessing that he would need the privacy of a crowded pavement in which to confront a discovery that was as chilling as it was unsurprising.
Cerise and silver in four equal stripes, vertical for the scarf and diagonal for the tie, were the colours of Breakspear College, Oxford.
Dysart's old college.
And Clare Mallender's.
And Minter's.
And Morpurgo's.
The connection was made, forged beyond the power of pure chance to explain.
Dysart had referred to it often enough while working in Swindon.
‘I'm at Breakspear.
Why don't you look in some time during term, Harry?’
Harry never had, of course.
The contrast between Dysart's carefree existence and his own would have been too much to bear.
But he had remembered — the name and all that went with it.
Heather had been this way before him, had seen and understood what he would shortly see and might yet understand.
There was not a doubt in his mind as to where she had taken the fifth picture on the film.
Breakspear was both more venerable and less ostentatious than most colleges.
Its low-arched entrance off one of the narrow lanes linking High Street and Broad Street could easily have been overlooked had Harry not been intent on locating it.
Founded 1259, open to visitors during daylight hours, it proclaimed itself with the modesty of an institution whose confidence in its purposes was rock-solid.
And there, in its first and oldest quadrangle, Harry found what he sought.
Worn flagstones and an oblong of sodden grass surrounded by grey-stoned walls, leaded windows and the lower treads of spiral stairs glimpsed through open doorways was all that some would have seen.
But Harry saw far more.
He saw evidence and proof.
He saw confirmation and encouragement.
He retreated to the porters' lodge and tapped on the window.
A mottle-faced man with slicked-down hair slid back the glass panel and looked out at him enquiringly.
He reminded Harry, in his build, expression and asthmatic wheeze, of a bulldog peering ill-humouredly from his kennel.
To his apparent relief, he was able to direct Harry elsewhere.
‘You'd best see the College Secretary, sir.
Mrs Notley.
Her office is at the bottom of K staircase.’
There followed an elaborate consultation of a gold fob-watch.
‘You should find her in.’
Mrs Notley was indeed at her post, tapping at the keys of a word processor which appeared to represent Breakspear's one concession to modernity.
Harry swiftly discovered that she was impervious to charm, but a sense of duty evidently compelled her to answer his questions.
‘Sixty-five to sixty-eight, you say?’
(Harry had quoted Dysart's years as a starting point.)
‘Morpurgo is an unusual name, so there should  be no difficulty.
Let me see.’
She pulled down a bulky volume from the shelf beside her and thumbed through it.
‘Yes, here we are.
Morpurgo, W.V. Resident for the period you named.
He took an unclassified degree in Modern Languages.’
‘Why unclassified?’
‘There could be many reasons.
Illness, perhaps.’
Illness, yes: Harry supposed it could be called that.
‘I wonder if you could look up somebody else.
Clare Mallender, late seventies.’
Mrs Notley obliged.
‘Miss C.T.
Mallender.
Resident 1977 to 1980.
First-class degree in Philosophy, politics and Economics.’
The name began to stir her memory.
‘Don't I know that —’
‘And another,’ Harry interrupted.
‘Jonathan Minter.
Same period.’
But here his deductions encountered their first contradiction.
Minter had not been at Breakspear, exactly or even approximately contemporary with Clare Mallender.
It was an insignificant point in its way, for Harry knew from Marjorie Mallender that Clare had met Minter whilst at Oxford — he must simply have been at another college — yet somehow his faith in his own reasoning was undermined.
He returned to the quad, glumly debating with himself what to do next.
There were at least the photographs to fall back on.
Drawing the wallet from his pocket, he separated the one of Breakspear from the rest and studied for a moment the view of the college it presented.
Gazing about at the walls flanking the quad, it was possible to calculate the exact position where Heather had been standing when she took it: the extreme south-western corner.
He walked across to it, turned and surveyed the scene.
The angles and perspectives of what he saw were identical with those in the photograph.
Yet still, stare about him as he might, they refused to yield their meaning.
As Harry stood there, lost in thought, the porter he had spoken to earlier appeared from the direction of the lodge, rattling a Punch of keys in his hand.
At sight of Harry, he pulled up, frowned, then walked slowly across to him.
‘Mrs Notley tell you what you wanted to know, sir?’
‘Er, yes thanks.’
‘You interested in the history of the college, then?’
‘In a sense, yes.’
‘We produce an informative guidebook on the subject.’
He rattled the keys again.
‘Very reasonably priced.’
‘I'm sure it is, but I don't suppose it would contain the sort of history I'm interested in.’
‘What sort might that be, then?’
He sounded more amiable than before, more inclined to be helpful.
Perhaps, it occurred to Harry, he was hoping for a tip.
‘Well, tell me, how long have you worked here?’
‘Twenty-six years, sir.
Ever since I left the Marines.’
Harry's hopes rose: twenty-six years were sufficient for his purposes.
‘In that case, you'll remember the government minister, Alan Dysart, when he was a student here.’
‘Of course I do, sir.
A most likeable young gentleman.’
‘And a contemporary of his named Morpurgo?’
‘Morpurgo.
Oh yes.
Quite a friend of Mr Dysart's as I recall.’
He shook his head.
‘A sad case though, was Mr Morpurgo.
Badly injured in a car accident in his final year.’
Then he tapped his temple significantly.
‘Never right afterwards, I'm afraid.’
‘A car accident, you say?’
‘Yes, sir.
You know how these young gentlemen are when they get behind the wheel.’
He sighed heavily.
‘And in his final year?’
‘Final term, as a matter of fact.
Just a few weeks before the examinations.
Trinity term of sixty-eight, it would have been.
A sad time at Breakspear, that was.’
‘Because of the car accident, you mean?’
‘Not just because of the car accident, no, sir.’
Then…what else?’
‘Well, it's strange you should stand there and ask that question, sir, very strange indeed.’
‘Why?’
‘Because it was the same term — Trinity sixty-eight — when Mr Everett met his death in this very corner of the quad.
Fell from a second-floor window smack down on the flagstones not a yard from where you're standing.
He was in the same year as Mr Morpurgo — and Mr Dysart.
That's why I say it was a sad time.’
But Harry was far from saddened by the porter's recollections.
Heather had not chosen this corner of the quad at random.
She had deliberately recorded on film the link her mind had established between her sister's death and that of a fellow-student of Morpurgo's twenty years before.
Had he smiled that day too?
Harry wondered.
‘Which came first?’ he asked, exerting himself not to sound too eager for the answer.
‘The fall or the car crash?’
‘Oh the fall, sir.’
‘How did it happen?’
‘Nobody every really knew.
He was drunk, the window was open, he leant out for a breath of air, he fell: that was the general opinion.’
‘And the car crash?’
‘Oh, that was in a country lane somewhere.
Mr Morpurgo was driving two other students back from a pub.
Drunk, of course, and going like the clappers as they all do.’
‘Was Mr Dysart one of the passengers?’
‘Not as I recall, sir, no.
They were….
Well, I'm pretty sure Dr Ockleton was one of them.
Yes, I'm certain he was.
As for the other —’
‘Dr Ockleton?’
Something in the porter's voice had suggested to Harry that the good doctor was particularly memorable.
‘Yes, sir.
He doesn't often speak of it these days, but —’
‘You mean he's still here?’
‘Oh yes.
He was an undergraduate then, of course, but he stayed on for his doctorate, then became a fellow.
A charming gentleman is Dr Ockleton.
Very considerate to the staff.’
‘And approachable?’
The porter smiled.
‘Approachable?’ he said, with a wheezing hint of ambiguity in his voice.
‘Oh yes, sir.
Dr Ockleton is very approachable.’
TWENTY
Early that afternoon, Harry returned to Breakspear College.
He had been disappointed to find Dr Ockleton absent from his rooms in the morning, but a pretty girl in jogging kit, who had come loping down the stairs whilst he was knocking at Ockleton's door, had run on the spot long enough to tell him that the doctor lectured on Tuesday mornings and that Harry would probably have better luck after lunch.
Harry had adjourned to a small low-ceilinged pub in Broad Street to pass the interval, installed himself by the window, supped beer and watched the customers come and go: down-at-heel old soaks somewhat beyond his own position on the scale of decline; and garrulous little knots of students with faces as downily naïve as their opinions were falsely wise.
Uncertain whether it was their extreme youth or their budding self-confidence which he envied more, Harry had recognized but not restrained his decline into drunken self-pity.
Where was Heather?
Why had she not returned?
What would he not give to have her by his side, supplanting with her company all the resentment he felt now at the friendship of others?
The truth, he had been morbidly inclined to conclude, was as remote as ever.
But the mood had passed by the time Harry walked once more into Breakspear College, sucking at an extra-strong mint and glad to see that a different porter was manning the lodge.
He traversed the first quad, its flagstones dented by seven centuries of learning, entered the slightly less ancient quad that lay beyond and ascended to Dr Ockleton's rooms.
The outer door was open this time and a sonorous voice responded to his knock.
Cyril D.G.Ockleton, MA, PhD, looked even younger for his known age, circa forty, then Alan Dysart.
Whereas Dysart had the bearing and features of an accomplished thirty-year-old, Ockleton lacked only short trousers and a  catapult to pass for a skylarking schoolboy.
It was as if , Harry reflected, Breakspear were some kind of Shangri-La, brief exposure to which ensured a stubborn youthfulness, prolonged exposure an accelerating regression to the cradle.
Ockleton's mop of jet black hair, his apple-cheeked face and the spectacles which had slid to the end of his nose combined with a tattered gown and a skew-knotted tie to create an impression of immaturity entirely at odds with his voice.
Visually, he was a blinking caricature of arrested development, an owlish, overgrown nursling sheltered from the world.
Vocally, however, he inhabited a different plane, some Olympian plateau of detached and perfect judgement whence the most trivial phrase descended as a profound statement of intellectual certitude.
‘Can I help you?
I don't believe we've met.’
The limpid tones were those of a bishop addressing a beggar.
Harry could have listened to this man for hours on end simply reading the telephone directory, yet one glance at his absurd and dishevelled appearance would instantly have broken the trance.
‘My name's Harry Barnett.’
Ockleton grinned toothily.
‘Regrettably, I am none the wiser.’
But Harry knew better.
Wisdom was to this man as boredom was to others.
And all attempts at deception would therefore be wasted.
‘I'm a friend of Alan Dysart.’
Ockleton sprang from his chair, steered an unerring course through the piles of books and papers that littered his apartment and shook Harry clammily by the hand.
‘Any friend of Alan's, Mr Barnett, etcetera, etcetera.
What brings you to Oxford?’
‘Heather Mallender.’
Once more, I fear you have the advantage of me.’
‘She disappeared last month, while staying in Alan's villa on Rhodes.’
‘Ah, that Heather Mallender.’
The incident had been a breakfast-time talking point in hall, his manner suggested.
Without the incidental involvement of an old Breakspearean, it would not even have been that.
Perhaps they did not take The Courier in the senior common room.
‘I believe you know Heather.’
‘Do you now?’
Ockleton described a sweeping circuit of the room, missing all the many obstacles in his path without apparently noticing them, and finished by the window, where he peered out for a full minute or so at the view it commanded of a blank gable-end and half the dome of the Radcliffe Camera.
Then he turned back and stared intently at Harry, his eyes gleaming like those of an aged eagle in  his bizarrely fledgling face.
‘You, of course, are Alan's caretaker on Rhodes.’
‘Correct.’
The last person to see Miss Mallender prior to her disappearance.’
‘Yes.’
‘She…mentioned me to you?’
‘No.’
‘Then —’
‘She visited you here about three months ago.
Late August or early September, I should guess.
You told her something — something significant.’
Ockleton paused to consider a point that had apparently baffled him, then said: ‘If Miss Mallender never referred to visiting me, Mr
Barnett, what is there to make you think she did visit me?’
‘I know she came to Oxford and I'm certain in my own mind that she came to Breakspear College.
If she did, she won't have left without seeing you.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because you were a contemporary of a student named Morpurgo and were with him when he was injured in a car crash in the Trinity term of 1968.
Because you were also a contemporary of a student named Everett who fell to his death from a window in the next quad a few weeks before the car crash.
And because those two incidents are in some way related to the death of Heather's sister in June of last year.’
Ockleton frowned.
‘Extraordinary.’
Then he smiled.
‘I congratulate you, Mr Barnett, on teasing out this line of reasoning.
It defeats me, I must confess, but clearly there is some strand in it that you are determined to follow.
As was Miss Mallender.’
‘You admit she came here, then?’
‘I never denied it.’
He crossed to a disorderly desk, tugged out a diary from amongst the academic detritus and began leafing through it.
‘Here we are.
Saturday the third of September.
Yes, indeed.
A showery day, as I recall.
Miss Mallender called at eleven.
She wanted to talk to me about her sister.
Clare was a student of mine, you know, and I was naturally distressed by the circumstances of her death, so I offered Heather what sympathy I could.
It struck me that she was less brilliant than her sister, both mentally and physically, but also, perhaps as a consequence, less conceited.
Clare had evidently mentioned my name to her.
At first, especially when she divulged that she was recovering from a nervous breakdown, I assumed that she merely desired a consoling chat with her sister's old tutor.’
‘But she wanted more than that?’
‘You already seem to know what she wanted, Mr Barnett: information about Willy Morpurgo.’
‘You know Morpurgo works for Alan Dysart?’
‘I do now.
Heather told me.
As a matter of fact, I think I can claim unwitting credit for Alan taking Willy on.’
‘Why?’
‘Willy's been more or less gaga since the crash.
Brain damage, as you're probably aware.
Such a pity, in view of the quality of his brain.
But there it is: poor Willy left his intellect spattered across a dry-stone wall in the Cotswolds and, like Humpty Dumpty, can't be put back together again.
They let him have his degree, of course, out of pure charity.
Then I rather think his parents looked after him until they died.
Left alone in the world, Willy gravitated back to Oxford, for which, be assured, I who have never been away am unlikely to blame him.
He became one of the more notorious tramps of the city, begging and bawling on every street corner.
I used to give him a pound whenever I met him: let no-one call me ungenerous.
About five years ago, when Alan was campaigning to get into parliament, he accepted an invitation to take part in a student debate here at Breakspear.
The academic equivalent of kissing babies, I suppose.
I daresay he wouldn't bother with such gestures now.
At all events, I dined with him when he came up and happened to mention poor Willy's plight.
Alan never said anything at the time, but Willy vanished from Oxford shortly afterwards.
I concluded from what Heather told me that Alan had taken him on for old time's sake.’
There was something about Ockleton that Harry was beginning to dislike.
Informative and amiable as he seemed, he yet possessed a cold inhumanity that seeped through his every witty remark.
The contrast between his treatment of Morpurgo — the occasional condescending coin — and Dysart's — a roof over his head and some honest employment — was obviously lost on him.
Logic he could no doubt purvey in abundance, but of true feeling he was entirely bereft.
‘There you are, Mr Barnett: the life of Willy Morpurgo in a nutshell.
So much I laid before Heather Mallender and so much I lay before you.
The question is: what does it signify?
Something — or nothing?’
The saving grace of Ockleton's cloistered and analytical mind was that he had no use for deception.
Unlike Heather's family, he had nothing to hide.
On his openness Harry now sought to trade.
‘Is that all you told Heather?’
‘Not quite.
She seemed more interested in Willy's student days than his subsequent misfortunes.
She wanted to know all about the Tyrrell Society, of which Willy, Alan and I were members.’
The what?’
‘The Tyrrell Society.
A dining, drinking and debating club for Breakspeareans of similar persuasions, prejudices and pretensions.
I believe I quote from the minutes of our inaugural meeting.
The original idea was Alan's, embellished by others.
It represented our  rebellion against the prevailing student culture of the day.
Meditation and Maoism were very much not for us.
We preferred to stimulate the sensibilities with something a little more baroque, a little more aesthetically traditional.
By your expression, I judge that you suspect me of pseudo-intellectual flim-flam and it is undeniable that our deliberations tended more towards the sybaritic than the Socratic.
Nevertheless —’
‘Who was Tyrrell?’
‘Tyrrell?’
Ockleton looked peeved to have his reminiscences directed along such practical lines.
‘Dear me, Mr Barnett, do you not know?’
‘Why should I?’
‘Because you, like all of us, were a schoolboy once.
Walter Tyrrell was the man alleged to have slain King William Rufus with an arrow’ either deliberately or accidentally, in the New Forest on the second of August in the year 1100.’
Ockleton smiled at Harry's frown of puzzlement.
‘perhaps the allusion was a trifle abstruse.
The point of the episode, so far as we were concerned, was that the truth of it has never been established.
Tyrrell remains an enigma.
Was he an assassin or an innocent?
A daring and devious regicide or merely a clumsy archer?
We shall never know.
It was on such ultimately unanswerable questions about the past — and, indeed, the present — that we chose to dwell.
The name was Alan's suggestion, and an apt one we all thought it.
Apt, as it turned out, in a way none of us could have anticipated.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘You referred earlier to the death of Ramsey Everett and there you have my meaning, for the exact circumstances of his death remain elusive in a truly Tyrrellian fashion.’
‘I gathered he fell from a window whilst drunk.’
‘Quite so.
It would be absurd if it were not so unlikely.
As I told Heather — But wait: you should see something that will add piquancy to a bald recital of what few facts are known.’
It was necessary for Ockleton to push an armchair out of the way to reach the cupboard he sought, set low in a corner wall.
After crouching by it for several minutes, sifting through the contents, he uttered a triumphant ‘Aha!’ and pulled out a large framed photograph, from which he blew a cloud of dust before placing it on the desk and inviting Harry to look at it.
It showed a dozen or so young men casually grouped around a bench on a sunlit lawn, wearing knife-creased flannels and striped blazers: the very antithesis of student life in the sixties.
Harry recognized Dysart among the trio seated on the bench and Ockleton standing to the rear, clumsily clutching a champagne bottle.
‘You've spotted Alan and me, have you?’
Ockleton asked after a moment.
‘Yes.’
‘Willy's the one to my left.’
‘Good God.’
Harry could not at first believe that the tall and graceful youth beside Ockleton in the picture was the same man he had met at Tyler's Hard.
If only Morpurgo had been a less thoroughbred specimen the contrast with what had subsequently overtaken him would have been easier to accept.
‘What a falling-off was there, eh?
That's Ramsey.’
Ockleton pointed to another member of the group.
Stockier than Morpurgo, with a less untroubled brow and a glare at the camera of barely bridled contempt, Ramsey Everett looked of the whole pack the one most prone to question their right to behave as they wished.
‘And they, you may care to note, are Jack Cornelius and Rex Cunningham.’
Ockleton pointed in turn at a broadly built man smiling conventionally towards the camera and a short, fleshy fellow beside him raising a glass as if to join in a toast.
‘Who are they?’
‘Patience, Mr Barnett, patience.
First I have some questions for you.
How did you come to meet Alan Dysart?
If you will forgive me for saying so, you scarcely seem his type.’
‘He worked for me during university holidays.’
‘He worked for you?’
‘Yes.
I ran a garage business then, in Swindon.’
‘Swindon?
Of course.
I might have known.
Thus the whirligig of time, etcetera, etcetera.’
‘What?’
‘Never mind, Mr Barnett.
I have not yet done with questioning you.
How did you come to be Alan's employee, when he was initially yours?’
‘Hard times.
Perhaps you've never known them.’
Ockleton smiled.
‘Alan is a universally charitable man, it seems.’
‘Yes.
I think he is.’
‘And what do you hope to accomplish by retracing Heather's movements in this way?’
‘I hope to find her.’
‘You think she is alive, then?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then your motive is a laudable one.
She seemed a charming girl to me.
So much more genuine than her sister.
Clare was a true Breakspearean. too subtle for her own good.
But Heather?
Fortunately, she had never fallen into our clutches.
She remained…unsullied.’
They stared at each other in silence for a moment, surprised to find that they shared some fragment of a common cause: the unsolved mysteries that troubled them both, though twenty years and half a world apart, were somehow one and the same.
‘Are you in a hurry to be be on your way, Mr Barnett?’
‘No.’
‘Then come for a drive, if you will.
I will take you where I took Heather.
And show you what I showed her.
Away from the ether of Breakspear and deprived of his occupational gown, Cyril Ockleton was transmuted into a more subdued and less boyish version of himself, as if sensing that his true persona required a measure of disguise in the wider world.
Piloting his tinny little car west out of Oxford with blithe disregard for the rules of the road, he declined to specify their destination — beyond the fact that it was where Morpurgo had met with his accident — and instead treated Harry to a detailed account of the death of Ramsey Everett, an account which he had previously given Heather, almost, it seemed, word for word.
The Tyrrell Society comprised, as you might imagine, good and ostentatious patriots.
St George's Day was thus red-lettered in our calendar.
On the twenty-third of April each year, we held a dinner, at which, in honour of the patron saint, over-indulgence was not simply customary but mandatory.
So it was on Tuesday the twenty-third of April, 1968, an occasion given a special fin de siècle luminosity by the knowledge that, for many of us, it was the last such event in our Oxford careers.
At some late and inebriated stage of the proceedings, Ramsey Everett made his way, alone so far as could be established, into an adjacent sitting-out room.
Both it and the Tyrrell Society meeting room, where the dinner was held, were on the second floor of Old Quad.
The night being unseasonably warm, most of the windows were wide open.
Ramsey presumably leant out for a breath of air.
There was a suggestion at the inquest that he sought to relieve himself out of the window rather than trudge down to the jakes in the basement, a distressing but not unprecedented recourse for chaps well gone in their cups.
However that may be, and for whatever reason, he lost his balance, the window being set hazardously close to the floor, and toppled out.
Unhappily, he landed on the flagstones, not the lawn, and head-first at that, fracturing his skull and snapping his spine.
Death, we were assured, was instantaneous.
‘This dreadful incident was, as you may imagine, a shattering blow to the society.
Ramsey, though a touch priggish at times, was well-liked.
The stupidity of his death made it somehow the harder to accept.
To make matters worse, the college authorities interpreted it as a reflection on the conduct and organization of the society, which they accordingly ordered to be disbanded with immediate effect.
‘Formally, the Tyrrell Society came to an end the day of Ramsey's funeral.
Alan, I recall, took it particularly hard.
Naturally, some of us continued to meet from time to time, constituting the Tyrrell Society in all but name.
It cannot be denied, however, that Ramsey's death  cast a shadow over all our activities.
Nothing seemed as carelessly enjoyable as before.
‘Some of us hoped that, once the inquest was past, our spirits would be revived.
It was scheduled to open on the twentieth of May.
As the date approached, those due to give evidence became increasingly nervous and depressed.
Willy exhibited these symptoms to the most marked degree, which I for one thought odd, since he and Ramsey had often clashed.
A few days beforehand, Jack Cornelius suggested a jaunt into the countryside to cheer us all up.
Alan's car was in dock, so Willy, the only other car owner, agreed to drive.
Mere were five takers originally, but only four could hope to squeeze into Willy's Mini, so Alan volunteered to drop out.
That left Willy, Jack, Rex Cunningham and me.
On Friday the seventeenth of May — mark the date — we set off.
It was a bright spring morning.
Our destination — then and now — was the village of Burford.’
They were speeding along the A40 trunk road now, the landscape growing ever more undulating as the Cotswolds drew near, the pale winter sunlight falling warmly on honey-stoned farmhouses and curving boundary walls.
Why Burford?
And why the seventeenth of May?
Harry did not even need to ask the questions before Ockleton supplied the answers.
‘How are you on seventeenth century history, Mr Barnett?
Rusty?
Or was the metal never applied in the first place?
I trust you have heard of the Levellers, our homegrown sans-culottes.
They were the most intelligent and least deferential members of the army raised by parliament to defeat the King in the Civil War, who believed, God help them, that victory would usher in a democratic state.
Needless to say, the generals, stolid landowners to a man, never had any intention of allowing such a thing to happen.
Such concessions as they made were mere delaying tactics.
When the time was ripe, they struck back, ordering the Leveller regiments to Ireland and withdrawing all their hard-won rights.
Those who resisted were denounced as mutineers and treated accordingly.
The last such mutiny was put down at Burford on the thirteenth of May, 1649, by Cromwell in person.
He confined 340 mutineers in Burford Church for the next three days under general sentence of death.
Then, on the seventeenth, he spared them, save for three ringleaders, whose execution in the churchyard the others were forced to watch.
So ended the Burford mutiny.
‘Of what interest, you may ask, was this incident to the Tyrrell Society?
The answer lies in its ambiguity.
Cromwell had thrown in his lot with the Levellers when it suited him two years before and so was regarded by them as no better than a mutineer himself when he turned against them.
Yet at Burford, within a matter of days, he converted all the rebel officers to his cause.
An air of double-dealing and deceit hangs over those negotiations, as if to suggest that the  record of them is in itself a distortion.
Who betrayed whom?
And why?
We shall never know.
For that reason Burford was a singularly appropriate destination for our excursion.
We were celebrating the anniversary of what we most adored: an enigma.’
At Burford, they left the main road and headed down the sloping High Street.
Harry glimpsed the typical slate-roofed tea rooms and cream-stoned antique shops of a well-to-do Cotswold town, primly battened, it struck him, against all suggestions of treachery.
Then Ockleton turned off along a narrow lane and, a few moments later, they pulled up by the church.
‘This was naturally our first port of call,’ Ockleton continued, climbing from the car and leading the way into the churchyard.
‘Willy rambled on about Norman archways and perpendicular naves, as if glad to have some arcane topic to take his mind off the inquest.
Rex mooched about the graves wondering when we were going to have lunch.
That left Jack and me to pay some attention to the history of the place.
Jack's Irish blood made him sympathize with the Levellers — the Irish have never forgiven Cromwell for the Drogheda massacre, you know.
I had a pretty open mind on the subject.
Still have, if it comes to that.
Couldn't have abided the Levellers’ politics, of course, but betrayal always leaves a nasty taste in the mouth, don't you agree?’
They entered the church: large, high-roofed and multi-chapelled, reflecting much of Burford's past and present wealth in its vaulted tombs and grandiloquent memorials.
Harry trailed along behind Ockleton, bemused as he always was by beeswaxed pews and glittering plate in what experience had taught him was an irreligious world.
They came to the font and halted.
Standing beside Ockleton, Harry could see centuries-old graffiti scratched on its leaden lip.
Ockleton pointed to one of them and read it aloud.
‘Anthony Sedley.
1649.
Prisoner.’
I wouldn't have noticed this if Jack hadn't drawn it to my attention.
One of the Levellers carved it, in desperation I suppose, during their confinement here.
Pity the poor blighter couldn't spell.
Moving, what?’
Ockleton had spoken sarcastically, but Harry was genuinely moved by what he saw.
Sedley had carved the Ns the wrong way round and omitted the O from ‘prisoner’, but these mistakes only heightened the poignancy of his message.
On their way out of the church, Harry took from the rack of postcards one reproducing Sedley's inscription.
He felt surprised by his own honesty in dropping the requested payment into the box and could not quite fathom his motive in lodging the card in the same envelope in his pocket where he kept those of Aphrodite and Silenus.
‘There's nothing like trudging round a cold church to raise an appetite, Mr Barnett.
Jack, Willy, Rex and I took ourselves off to the Lamb Inn for lunch and put away as much ale and steak and kidney  pie as four young men could desire.
I entertained Heather to lunch there as well.
Regrettably’— he glanced at his watch —‘it will not be open at this hour.
I therefore suggest —’
‘I'd like to see the pub where you took Heather though, if that's possible.’
Understandably, Ockleton was puzzled by Harry's request, but he raised no objection.
‘Very well.
We'll drive round that way.’
The Lamb Inn lay on the other side of Burford, down a side-turning off the High Street.
As soon as Harry saw it, he felt reassured.
It was unquestionably the subject of the sixth photograph, as Ockleton at once confirmed.
‘Strange you should want to take a look at this place.
As we were leaving, Heather took a snap of it.
Pretty enough, I suppose, but hardly photogenic, is it?’
‘Obviously Heather thought it was.’
Ockleton frowned.
‘You seem about as forthcoming as she was, Mr Barnett.
I bring each of you on a guided tour of my past and you each remain tight-lipped.
Why is it, then, that I have the impression you each perceive something here that I have overlooked?’
Harry did not reply and Ockleton did not press the point.
The truth was that Harry's only token of significance was the set of photographs which he had resolved to show as few people as possible.
He justified his secrecy to himself as a necessary precaution, but, lying somewhat deeper, there was a wish to preserve the intimacy of the link with Heather that they represented, a desire to conceal both his possession of them and his pursuit of what they meant.
They drove north out of Burford, down over the old packhorse-bridge across the river Windrush, then up into the hills beyond.
After a mile or so, Ockleton turned off the main Chipping Norton road and headed east up a narrow lane that breasted the downs above the Windrush valley.
‘When we came to leave the Lamb that afternoon, Mr Barnett, we were all in similar states of intoxication, but Jack had become as maudlin as only an Irishman in liquor can.
He insisted that he wanted to return to the church to sample some more of the atmosphere: commune with the spirit of the Levellers — that sort of nonsense.
The rest of us were all for starting back to Oxford and Jack suggested we go without him.
He said he'd prefer to visit the church alone anyway and that he'd catch a bus back to Oxford when he was good and ready.
Rex and I had annoyed him by belittling the Levellers over lunch and there was no reasoning with him when he got into one of his self-righteous moods, so we left him to it.
‘I stretched out in the back of the Mini and Rex travelled in the front with Willy at the wheel.
Willy was as drunk as any of us, if not more so.
He began by taking the wrong road out of Burford, then tried this lane to get back to the A40.
As you can see, it runs flat and  fairly straight along the crest of the hill until it dips down suddenly, in a quarter of a mile or so, towards the valley floor.
By this time, I for one was asleep.
Willy was driving too fast for safety, naturally, but that didn't become apparent until we started down the hill.’
Ockleton had slowed as the lane began a sharp and winding descent.
Round the next bend, Harry saw two things simultaneously: give-way lines at the foot of the hill, where the lane joined another road, and a scene with which he was already familiar — the subject of the seventh photograph.
Even as recognition flashed into his mind, Ockleton pulled in by the hedge and stopped the car.
Thirty yards ahead, an innocent rural road junction presented its prosaic features for inspection.
The hedges suggested that, in May, they could well have obstructed vision.
The dry-stone wall on the farther side looked solid and uncompromising.
Twenty years on, the ingredients of a predictable accident remained intact.
‘I was oblivious to the danger right up to the moment the crash happened.
According to Rex, we never had a chance of negotiating the bend, let alone stopping, given how fast we were travelling.
The car careered out diagonally across the lane, heading straight for the wall on the other side.
Instead of ploughing into it, however, it struck a tractor and trailer coming from the left.
The sound of the collision was what woke me up: a terrible grinding, smashing wrench.
‘I was the lucky one, Mr Barnett: a broken arm, a couple of broken ribs, assorted cuts and bruises.
The front of the car, and those in it, took the brunt of the impact.
Rex was trapped by his legs and had to be cut free.
Willy was propelled through the windscreen onto the wall: that's how he incurred such nasty head injuries.
The tractor driver walked away without a scratch.
As for the longer term consequences, Rex was paralysed from the waist down and Willy, as you know, was left with severe brain damage.
‘It was all our own fault, of course.
We were culpably self-indulgent and criminally irresponsible.
Yet what our little coterie suffered was, I believe, disproportionate to our vices.
Ramsey was dead, Willy and Rex were crippled.
The rest of us were left to reproach ourselves for what had happened.
Jack for one never forgave himself for encouraging the venture in the first place.
I daresay we have all tried to forget about it, but I don't suppose any of us has succeeded — except Willy.
And maybe not even he.’
The frail winter sunlight had faded and dusk was advancing across the silent fields to either side.
Harry shivered — but not because he was cold.
Here, it seemed, twenty years ago, the mystery of what had befallen Heather Mallender had begun to unfold.
Its nature remained unknown, but now at least it had a name.
Ockleton had unwittingly supplied it and Harry sensed that he would find, in the mark it had left on both its victims and its practitioners, the indelible trace of what he sought.
Betrayal had become the name of his quarry.
TWENTY-ONE
Harry woke the following morning in a guest room of Breakspear College which Ockleton had generously made available to him.
They had found too much to discuss for the last train to Swindon to remain a realistic option and Harry had gladly accepted the offer of overnight hospitality.
Only when his first movement unleashed the pounding headache bequeathed to him by half a bottle of the college's specially shipped port did he begin to regret the decision.
They had returned to Oxford from Burford in the early evening.
At an alcove table of the Eagle and Child, Ockleton's favourite pub, they had then debated the circumstances of Heather's disappearance on Rhodes and how they might relate to her visit to Oxford more than two months before.
Ockleton, true to his academic training, had been disposed to dismiss the very idea of such a connection.
Yet he had been unable to deny, especially when alcohol had begun to leech the starch from his scholarly brain, that her avid interest in the distant doings of Everett, Morpurgo and the Tyrrell Society was inexplicable, unless it constituted a cause corresponding in some way to the effect of her disappearance.
Pressed by Harry to tell what he knew of his fellow Tyrrellians' subsequent careers, Ockleton had covered familiar ground where Dysart and Morpurgo were concerned.
As to Jack Cornelius, it seemed that he had returned to his roots in Ireland and become a teacher.
Lately, Ockleton had heard it mentioned that he was on the staff of a Roman Catholic boarding school in the West Country.
Despite confinement to a wheelchair, Rex Cunningham had evidently prospered and was now the proprietor of a country house hotel-cum-restaurant in Surrey.
‘Strangely enough,’ Ockleton had said, Harry having to strain to hear him amidst the noise and smoke as closing time drew near, ‘Rex was the one who seemed to interest Heather the most.
When I referred to this restaurant of his, the Skein of Geese, her ears pricked up.
The Master dined there last term and told us all about it.
He said it was done out like a brothel and that the food wasn't fit for a rabbit.
But the Master, it must be said, is a man of plebeian tastes.
At all events, when I mentioned it to Heather, she asked me to repeat the name of the restaurant.
When I confirmed that it was called the Skein of Geese, she pulled out one of those little books of matches they give away in such places and said: ‘The same as this, you mean?’
And there it was: an artist's impression of three geese in flight and the name and address of the restaurant, all clearly shown on the flap.
Naturally, I assumed she had eaten there herself, but she denied it.
Somebody had apparently given her the matchbook and she had been carrying it around with her ever since.’
Why Cunningham?
Harry wondered as he climbed from the narrow guest-room bed and began to dress.
Why this trail of lapsed tragedies and tantalizing trifles?
Heather must have had some compelling reason to follow in the direction they led, yet what that reason might be he was no nearer discovering.
To visit Tyler's Hard, even Oxford, in mourning for her sister made a kind of sense, yet the photographs proved she had not stopped there.
She had gone further, far further, than bereavement alone could justify.
And, along the way, Harry had chanced upon a minor mystery that impinged on his own past.
Back in Ockleton's rooms at Breakspear, seated by a roaring fire and sipping finer port than he could ever recall tasting, he had asked Ockleton to explain his reaction earlier to Harry's revelation that Alan Dysart had once worked for him in Swindon.
‘It's simply that we all thought it so unnecessary, Mr Barnett.
Alan's father died during his first year at Breakspear, leaving him a very wealthy young man.
A fortune from nuts, bolts and screws, as I expect you know.
That being so, vacation employment was scarcely something he needed to seek.
If he were simply bored, I should have thought, begging your pardon, that he could have found an occupation rather more civilized than grease-monkeying in Swindon —’
‘It wasn't grease-monkeying!’
Ockleton had raised his hands in a placatory gesture.
‘Forgive me, Mr Barnett, for trampling on your entrepreneurial sensibilities.
You will agree, nonetheless, that it was more than a tittle odd.
Many of us speculated as to his reasons.
I personally favoured a psychological explanation.
The whole arrangement seemed to me irresistibly reminiscent of T. E. Lawrence retreating from fame as an army officer to obscurity in the ranks, or of Anthony Asquith, the film director, spending his weekends behind the counter of a transport café in Yorkshire.
Put bluntly: slumming.
Expressed more sympathetically: hiding behind the anonymity of the common working man from a more celebrated but also more demanding life.
Alan was well aware of his own gifts and of what they might lead him to become, but I am not sure he entirely welcomed his role as a leader of lesser men.
I think his ‘Swindon vacations’ were a way of forgetting what his future held.’
Harry had derided Ockleton's theory at the time.
Now, as he stumbled towards the window of his room, he recognized that resentment lay behind his disbelief: resentment that his friendship with Dysart might have an origin he had never dreamed of; that, in lending him a helping hand whenever he could, Dysart had merely been slumming.
Harry tugged back the curtains and squinted out at the painful brightness of a frosty morning.
Condensation was streaming down the windowpanes, so he wiped one dry with his shirt-cuff to gain a sight of the day.
His room was on the first floor of the college, looking down into a narrow street that ran beside it.
Straight ahead soared the blank rear wall of another college.
Suddenly, as he peered out through the moisture-smeared pane, something near the base of the wall seized his attention: letters spray-painted in white on its blackened surface, forming words he could not, in that instant of recognition, quite believe.
Wrenching up the sash, he leaned out for a clearer view.
.
The unique and unmistakeable characters roared their silent greeting up at him.
PROFITIS ILIAS. in Greek.
In Oxford.
Lying in wait for him.
Placed there to confront and confound him.
Profitis Ilias.
Where neither chance nor accident could deflect its meaning.
He was followed.
Or foreseen.
Tracked.
Or forestalled.
Profitis Ilias had stretched out its hand to find him.
A few minutes later, Harry was standing on the pavement below, staring across the road at the crudely wrought message.
He could ransack his brain a dozen times, he realized, and still he would be unable to explain it.
Nobody but Ockleton knew who he was or why he was in Oxford.
Yet somebody had sprayed those two words on the wall, somebody who knew what they would mean to him and to no other occupant of Breakspear College.
A weary-looking man in overalls appeared from the college entrance to his right, carrying a scrubbing brush and a bucket full of acrid-smelling liquid.
Catching Harry's eye, he tossed his head and said ruefully: ‘These bloody students!’
‘You think students wrote that?’
‘Who else?’
‘It's Greek, you know.’
‘Oh yes?
Well that proves it was students, doesn't it?’
‘Why?’
‘Who else do you know who can write flaming Greek?’
Who else indeed?
As the man crossed the street and started work, Harry headed back into the college.
He could believe some drunken classics student had run amok with a spray-can, but not that he had chanced to write two words of no classical significance beneath the window of the room where Harry happened to be staying.
Nor could he believe he had been followed to Oxford by somebody determined to leave this macabre calling-card for him to see, for to believe that opened up possibilities too sinister to be endured.
There thus remained only one explanation consistent with logic and the sooner he tested its validity the calmer he would feel.
Harry found Ockleton eating breakfast in hall with three or four other fellows of the college, spaced round a vast high table beneath drab oil paintings of half a dozen dead masters.
They all looked suitably taken aback by his entrance, muttering disapproval whilst he insisted that Ockleton step outside.
Eventually, his face crimson with irritation and embarrassment, Ockleton agreed, only to repeat as they crossed the quad what he had maintained throughout their whispered altercation in hall.
‘I suggest you pull yourself together, Mr Barnett.
In the first place, I am no classicist.
In the second place, if you think I crept out into the street last night and daubed some portentous graffito on the wall opposite your room, you are very much mistaken.
In the third place, you may recall that I escorted you to your room at half-past twelve; but the college gates are locked at midnight, from which it follows that I would have had to rouse the duty porter in order both to be let out and to be let in again, something he will most certainly confirm I did not do.
In the fourth place, I consider the levelling of groundless allegations to be a shameful response to the hospitality I have extended to you.
And in the fifth place….’
They had emerged into the street and looked across at the overalled figure and the patch of wall on which he was working.
The cleaning fluid he was using had been remarkably effective.
The letters were becoming blurred and faint.
Soon, they would be erased altogether.
Some of them had already run and spread in such a way as to lose their identity.
now more nearly resembled an M and  a Q. The evidence was disappearing before their very eyes and, once it was gone, Harry was not sure he could convince even himself that it had ever been there.
Half an hour later, Harry left Breakspear College with scarcely a glance at what was now only a faint stain on the opposite wall.
He walked swiftly westwards, eager to leave behind the scene of his humiliation.
Message or mirage?
From beneath the caves of ancient colleges flanking his route, gargoyles grinned down to torment him — with the knowledge of his own uncertainty.
Atop their pillars round the Sheldonian Theatre, the busts of Roman emperors cast classically guarded looks at his retreating figure.
But Harry hurried on, consoling himself with the thought that he still retained one secret advantage over those who thought they had the better of him.
At the comer of Broad Street and Magdalen Street, he walked into a bookshop.
Among the welter of aids to discerning travellers, he found exactly what he was looking for: a comprehensive guide to British hotels and restaurants, each entry accompanied by a brief description of the establishment and a small photograph.
He flicked quickly through to the section covering Surrey, then proceeded a page at a time until he reached his goal.
Skein of Geese, Haslemere, Surrey.
Proprietor: Mr R. Cunningham.
Rating 72%.
Standing in its own attractive grounds, this haven of civilized living combines old-fashioned comfort with captivating individuality in that rarest of double acts: princely accommodation and memorable cuisine.
All bedrooms are equipped with….
But its picture spoke louder to Harry than any drooling prose.
The small scale marred definition and the angle was not the same, but there was no doubt at all about what he was looking at.
The Skein of Geese was the subject of Heather's eighth photograph.
TWENTY-TWO
Resolution carried Harry only so far.
He reached Haslemere in early afternoon, hired a taxi and discharged it fifteen minutes later on the other side of the road from the Skein of Geese Hotel and Restaurant a few miles south-east of the town.
And there the momentum of his pursuit faltered for the first time.
It was not as if what he saw fell short of his expectations.
On the contrary, the Skein of Geese was exactly as Heather had photographed it, save only that the trees behind it had been stripped of their leaves and the croquet hoops put away for the winter.
A black-and-white Tudor manor house, separated by a gravelled car park from a modern two-storey extension mocked up to resemble stables; lawns behind sloping away towards the wooded flanks of the Surrey hills; the colours of St. George hanging limply from a flagstaff; three geese in flight across a swash-lettered nameboard; and smoke pluming vertically from slender chimney stacks.
The cold and windless afternoon made of the mellow brick and pastel grass a perfect conspiracy of pretension and nature, an exact depiction of everything Harry most loved and loathed in his homeland.
But this, he knew, was not the reason for his hesitation.
Profitis Ilias was the reason.
His memories of Heather, bolstered by his possession of her photographs, had given him courage and hope, emotions to which he had been a stranger for more years than he cared to remember.
Yet Profitis Ilias, whether recollected in repose or recorded in the teeth of logic on an Oxford wall, remained his undoing.
There he had come to Heather's aid too late.
And there, some plunging sense of his own inadequacy assured him, he would find the bitter end of his search.
He crossed the road, willing himself to suppress the significance of what he had already accepted: there was no turning back.
With every step he took, innocent as it might seem, trivial though it was in itself, he made retreat the more impossible.
The reception desk was located in the modern part of the hotel.
Here muted lights, soft leather, stained wood and anaesthetic chamber music prevailed.
Somewhat to his own surprise, Harry found himself booking a single room, despite the exorbitant tariff, and following the prim receptionist as she led him to the door.
The room was comfortable, though scarcely as ‘princely’ as the guidebook had led him to expect.
The view from its ground-floor window was of an empty reach of the car park.
An equine print after the style of Stubbs adorned the longest wall.
The key-fob was decorated with the hotel's logo, as was the complimentary book of matches to be found in an ashtray on top of the television.
Harry slipped the book into his pocket, wondering as he did so which previous patron of the Skein of Geese had handed such a thing on to Heather.
Then, as much in guilty reaction to the receptionist's parting look of disapproval as in the hope of ordering his thoughts, he took himself off to the bath.
An hour later, bathed, shaved and refreshed, Harry was lying on the bed, wearing nothing but a hotel dressing gown, across the breast pocket of which three ubiquitous geese were in embroidered flight.
Refreshment had not brought inspiration, however, and he was beginning to despair of ever deciding what to do next when the crunching of car tyres on the gravel by his windows was followed by an exchange that instantly resolved his difficulty.
‘Good meeting, Mr Cunningham?’
‘Bloody awful, Ted, since you ask.’
‘Back to your office, is it?’
‘How did you guess?’
Harry was instantly upright.
Through the net curtain he could see a porter assisting the driver of the car into a wheelchair.
Rex Cunningham was living disproof of the youth-preserving powers Harry had imputed to Breakspear College.
He looked to belong to a different generation from that of Dysart and Ockleton, his face flushed and lined beneath a mane of grey hair, his chest heaving desperately as he lowered himself into the wheelchair.
It was clear that the events of 17 May 1968 had left their mark on him as indelibly as they had on Willy Morpurgo.
Harry tore the dressing gown off and flung on some clothes.
Another squint through the net curtains showed Cunningham being pushed up a ramp in the direction of the reception area.
Grabbing his key, Harry hurried from the room and followed the corridors round to intercept.
By the time he arrived, however, the pair were nowhere to  be seen.
He glanced down one passage to no avail, then tried the next, just soon enough to catch the porter emerging from the third door along.
‘Mr Cunningham in?’ he enquired casually as they crossed.
‘Yes, sir.
Is he expecting you?’
‘Hard to say.’
He knocked and went in without waiting for an answer.
‘Yes?’
Cunningham looked up from his desk with a frown of irritation.
At close quarters, he appeared less decrepit than dissolute, blotched and bloated like the least repentant of debauchees.
This might have seemed merely the occupational hazard of the self-indulgent restaurateur, but for a manic edge contributed by the tightly-curled crop of hair, the thin cigar drooping from his wide mouth and the garishness of a turquoise tie standing out against a black suit and matching shirt.
‘Hello.
My name's Harry Barnett.
I'm staying here tonight.
You're the proprietor, I take it: Rex Cunningham?’
‘Yes, but —’
‘You don't know me, but we have a mutual friend: Alan Dysart.
I expect you read about the girl who disappeared while staying in his villa in Rhodes.
I was his caretaker there.’
Cunningham slowly removed the cigar from his mouth and propped it carefully in an ashtray.
His lips were too large for his face, Harry noticed.
When eating, they would make him look as if he were gobbling.
Even now, they were irresistibly suggestive of greed.
‘Was his caretaker?’
‘I'm not anymore.’
‘Then what are you?’
Harry ignored the question.
‘You know Heather Mallender, I believe.’
‘Know ?
Don't you mean knew , Mr….’
‘Barnett.
You don't deny it, then?’
‘Why do you ask?’
‘I'm trying to find her.
I think you might be able to help.’
‘How?’
‘She came here about three months ago and made your acquaintance, didn't she?’
Cunningham backed his wheelchair away from the desk and stared at Harry quizzically, though whether because he was reluctant to answer or because the mere asking of the question puzzled him it was impossible to tell.
‘Perhaps,’ he said.
‘On whose behalf are you making these enquiries, Mr Barnett?’
‘My own.’
‘Not Alan Dysart's?’
‘No.
Not Alan Dysart's.’
‘And what precisely do you want to know?’
‘What happened when she came here.’
‘I haven't said she did.’
‘You don't have to.
I know she did.’
How?’
‘By putting two and two together.’
‘Then you must be a better mathematician than you look.’
Cunningham moved his chair round to Harry's side of the desk, stopped in front of him and stared up into his face.
Suspicion was apparent in every doubt-ridden defile of his expression, perhaps, it suddenly struck Harry, too apparent, as if blazoned there to conceal something else.
‘Heather Mallender did dine here about three months ago, Mr Barnett, it's true, but so what?
I have fifty different diners every night.
The Skein of Geese is justly famed for its cuisine.
I didn't even remember her until I read about her in the papers.’
‘But she came here specifically to see you?’
‘How should I know?
I always take a turn in the restaurant to see there are no complaints.
I may have had a few words with her, but that's all.’
‘Was she alone?’
‘No.
There was an admirer in tow.’
‘Who was he?’
‘I've absolutely no idea.’
Cunningham smiled a broad slow smile of undisguised provocation.
It left Harry in no doubt that he would learn nothing from this man without offering him something in return.
‘Did they stay overnight?’
‘I don't think so.’
‘Then why did they come so far?
Haslemere's hardly an evening's drive from Weymouth.’
‘Weymouth?’
Cunningham's ignorance was now patently assumed.
‘Where she lived, Mr Cunningham, as I think you know.’
‘Do I?’
‘She wanted to speak to you about her sister, didn't she?
The late Clare Mallender.’
It was a guess, though scarcely a wild one, and Cunningham's reaction confirmed it had hit the mark.
‘Offhand, I can't think of a single good reason why I should tell you anything that passed between us, Mr Barnett.’
‘How about this?’
Harry tapped the foot plate of Cunningham's wheelchair with the toe of his shoe.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean the car crash twenty years ago in which you lost the use of your legs and Willy Morpurgo the use of his brain.’
Cunningham's jaw sagged.
He was clearly surprised.
Perhaps, thought Harry, Heather had not told him of her visit to Oxford — or what she had learned there.
‘Your old chum Cyril Ockleton was most —’
‘Ockleton?’
It was true, then: for reasons of her own, Heather had kept Cunningham in the dark.
‘Yes.
I've spoken to Ockleton, just as Heather did, and what he told me has led me here, just as it led her.’
Something akin to sudden understanding crossed Cunningham's face.
Then he said in a voice to which composure had been restored: ‘Perhaps, after all, there's some merit in discussing the matter.
Why don't you join me for dinner, Mr Barnett?
I'll be less busy then, better able to recollect the details of Miss Mallender's visit.’
‘All right.’
‘Shall we say seven-thirty — in the bar?’
He smiled charmlessly.
‘Seven-thirty it is.’
Harry turned to go.
‘Oh, Mr Barnett….’
‘Yes?’
‘Our restaurant's very select.
Do you think you could spruce yourself up a little?
The way you look at present, my maître d t y ’ may well refuse you admittance.’
TWENTY-THREE
The bar of the Skein of Geese was the kind of drinking establishment Harry detested: fiddly little bowls of cashew nuts and olives littering every surface; an effeminate barman who looked as if he would not know a handpump from a cocktail umbrella; lighting so subdued a fellow could not see to count his change; and a tape of Glenn Miller standards that made him positively nostalgic for the reception area's bastardized Vivaldi.
Harry had arrived early for his appointment with Cunningham and was already regretting it.
The tie he had unearthed from the neglected depths of his jacket pocket was badly creased and stained with what he strongly suspected to be taramosalata.
What was worse, wearing it had obliged him to fasten the top button of his shirt, an exercise which had drawn his attention to an extra half inch of fat his neck had gained since the last such occasion.
This, followed by a pint of the Skein of Geese's execrable ale and an overheard conversation between two gin-guzzling county ladies concerning the merits of shorter hemlines, had plunged him into abject misery.
He had just glanced at his wristwatch, to discover that Cunningham's arrival still lay approximately two replays of Little Brown Jug in the future, when a woman slid onto the next bar-stool to his and said: ‘Hello, Harry,’ in a tone of husky confidence which suggested they had been lifelong friends.
‘I don't think I —’
‘Nadine Cunningham.
You met my husband earlier.’
She was at least ten years Cunningham's junior, Harry judged, blonde-haired and bright-eyed with a sparkling smile; all pert vivacity and curvaceous promise in a black woollen dress that fitted where it touched, as  Barry Chipchase would undoubtedly have phrased it.
What the pair of county ladies thought of its mid-thigh hemline Harry could not imagine, but he for one was not about to object to the brush of her black-stockinged knees against his drab-trousered legs.
‘My usual, please, Vince,’ she said to the barman, ‘and another of whatever Mr Barnett is drinking.
Do you have a light, Harry?’
‘Er, yes.’
He pulled out the Skein of Geese matchbook and clumsily lit her cigarette.
‘Rex might be a few minutes late.
He asked me to keep you amused.’
The way she smiled as she exhaled a first lungful of smoke suggested she fully intended her remark to be ambiguous.
‘I gather you're trying to find Heather Mallender.’
Preliminaries, it seemed clear, were not something she cared for.
‘Well, yes, but —’
‘My husband tells me everything, Harry.
Well, almost everything.’
‘Then you'll know Heather came here about three months ago.
Cheers.’
He started on the drink she had bought him.
‘She dined here on Saturday the tenth of September.
I checked our records, you see.’
This time her smile was in open acknowledgement of her own efficiency.
‘The booking was made in her name, but the bill was paid by her escort: a P.R.
Kingdom, according to the credit card receipt.’
September 10th was the Saturday following Heather's visit to Oxford and thus just when Harry would have expected her to proceed to the Skein of Geese.
The date did not surprise him, but the identity of her companion certainly did.
‘I'm grateful, Mrs Cunningham, but what —’
‘Nadine, please.’
‘All right: Nadine.
What made you dig this information out?’
‘To be honest….’
She leaned towards him and lowered her voice.
‘I'm worried, Harry.’
‘What about?’
‘I can't explain here.
Perhaps we could meet…later.’
‘All right.’
‘What room are you in?’
Harry had to take the key from his pocket to remind himself.
Rooms at the Skein of Geese were given infuriatingly anserine names rather than mere utilitarian numbers.
His was Covey.
Nadine nodded and he put the key away again.
Why he felt as if they had just agreed to an illicit liaison he did not know, unless it was the air of sexual invitation this woman wore as other women wore perfume, the practised composition of glance and gesture that she used to imply everything whilst proposing nothing.
‘Rex tells me you used to work for Alan Dysart.’
She had swayed back into an upright position and reverted to a tone of easy confidence.
‘I've met him a couple of times.
He seems just as  charming in the flesh as on television.
Did you find him a good employer?’
‘Actually, he wasn't strictly my employer on Rhodes.’
‘No?’
‘No.
In fact, we only know each other because he worked for me — when he was a student.’
‘Really?’
She seemed suddenly attentive.
‘In Oxford, you mean?’
‘No.
Swindon.
I ran a garage business there.
I'm afraid it went bust all of….’
He heard his own words peter into silence.
Nadine was staring at him with a fascination entirely disproportionate to his remark, a fascination, indeed, bordering on transfixion.
‘What's wrong?’
‘Nothing….
Nothing at all….’
She shook her head in unconvincing denial.
That he had in some way taken her aback was as obvious to him as the reason was obscure.
‘Ah!’
Her eyes focused gratefully on the door.
‘Here's Rex — sooner than I expected.
I'll leave you to it.’
Before Harry could say another word, Nadine had slipped from the stool and moved past him to greet her husband.
He could not catch what she said as she touched Cunningham's shoulder and she did not look back as she walked swiftly from the bar.
Harry was still gazing after her, struggling to make sense of what had happened, when Cunningham, who had positioned himself next to him, said: ‘Like a gazelle, eh?’
‘Sorry?’
‘My wife, Barnett.
She moves well, doesn't she?’
‘Er…yes.
‘Don't worry.’
He smiled.
‘I'm not the jealous type.’
Quite what type Rex Cunningham was did not become clear to Harry in the course of their meal together that evening.
Generosity, affability and an overwhelming fondness for the sound of his own voice: these characteristics, founded on a ready wit and a gargantuan appetite, created a superficial impression of warmth and worldliness which Harry took to be typical of an upper crust Home Counties hotelier.
He steered a middle course between intimacy and aloofness which would have endeared him to the most demanding of guests.
But not to Harry.
Cunningham's chummy dropping of the ‘Mr’ from his name did not fool him for a moment: the withdrawn and irascible figure he had encountered in mid-afternoon was nearer the soul of this man than mine accommodating and smiling host of the Skein of Geese's oak-panelled restaurant.
Through three rich courses and as many fine wines, by candlelight and hectic reminiscence, he entertained Harry to a highly plausible account of himself which yet failed to convey one ounce of conviction.
‘So Ockleton's told you all about the Tyrrell Society, has he?
Truth is, Barnett, we just liked our food and drink.
All the rest — philosophy, history, politics — was pure hogwash.
Well, perhaps not the politics.
We were Tory when it was out of fashion.
Not like these bumptious young boys today.
‘Fraid we overstepped the mark, though.
Everett taking a dive in Old Quad.
Morpurgo precious near writing us both off in that bloody car crash.
Symptoms of the same problem, I daresay: headstrong but brain-weak.
Know what I mean?
Probably not.
Don't take this the wrong way, Barnett, but unless you're a ‘varsity man — proper ‘varsity, that is, not these red-brick hell-holes — you can't imagine what it means to know you're truly and deservedly special.
Elitism they call it now, but that doesn't capture the half of it.
No, not the half.
Have some more wine, Barnett.
Like blood, isn't it?
Blood for the brain — in an anaemic world.
‘What did Ockleton say about the car crash, then?
Whatever it was, it's unreliable.
Nil powers of observation, that man: always did have.
Besides, he was dead to the wide on the back seat when it happened.
I was pretty far gone myself, if it comes to that, Morpurgo likewise.
Six or seven too many, you know how it is.
If you've been to Burford and seen the spot, there's nothing more to be said.
We went straight out into the road and bang!
Christ, the pain I was in while they cut me free!
That's what I most remember about it: pain like you wouldn't believe.’
As a demonstration, he held his fingers in the candle-flame between them.
‘It makes you immune, you see: it makes you special all over again.’
Everything about Cunningham was pretence, Harry began to suspect.
The whole glad-handed garrulous exhibition was intended to divert and deceive.
But why?
Either he had perfected the performance over the years to ward off sympathy from the able-bodied, or he was hiding something far worse than a self-destructive youth.
Whichever was the case, the subject of Heather's visit to the Skein of Geese on 10 September held no terrors for him.
Over the stilton and port, without need of prompting, he came to what Harry most wanted to hear.
‘If you think the Mallender girl was interested in all that twenty-year-old nonsense, Barnett, you're much mistaken.
Never so much as mentioned it.
I went round the tables that night as usual, making everybody feel welcome, and she introduced herself as Clare's sister.
I knew Clare quite well, as it happens.
She used to come down here from London, sometimes just for a meal, sometimes to unwind for a few days, sometimes with some young swain or other, sometimes on her own.
Pretty girl, intelligent to boot.
A real asset for Dysart.
Ideal for entertaining boring bigwigs on his behalf.
I admired her — a lot.
Can't tell you how cut up I was last year to hear those Irish madmen had killed her.
‘Anyway, for some reason Heather wanted to know all about the last time Clare had been here, which, as it happened, I remembered  very well, not just because it turned out to be the last I ever saw of her, but on account of something odd that had occurred.
Saturday the sixteenth of May, 1987, it was.
You can thank my wife for the date.
She's a dab-hand at that kind of thing.
The sixteenth of May’ or course, was only about a fortnight before Clare's death.
She was heavily involved in the election campaign at the time and Dysart brought her down here for dinner.
A few hours of relaxation away from the whirl of London for both of them, I suppose.
‘I used to wonder about Dysart and that girl, Barnett, don't mind telling you.
Nobody could have blamed him for trying it on, could they?
Not with that frigid bitch of a wife.
Clare was, well, desirable to say the bloody least, and they must have spent a lot of time together writing speeches, or whatever it is politicians do.
I always got the impression she wouldn't have minded slipping between the sheets with him, but I can't claim there was ever any real evidence she did.
Matter of fact, as I told Heather, I stumbled on something that last evening which suggested I had completely the wrong end of the stick.
‘Dysart had to take a telephone call halfway through their meal.
You know these politicians — always on the hop.
You'd sometimes think they stage such incidents to persuade us poor bloody electors that they work hard.
Anyway, off he went to the phone, asking me en route to make sure Clare didn't get too bored waiting, because it might be a long call.
Always keen to spend time with the gorgeous creature, I obliged.
‘Clare didn't see or hear me coming.
Wheels are quieter than feet, you know, which is about all I can say for them.
She was sitting at the table with her back to me as I approached, concentrating on something in her hand.
As I came up behind her, I saw what it was.
Must say, it gave me a shock.
Inconsequential in its way, but not to me.
A photograph, that's all.
Small, black-and-white, crumpled at one corner.
Head and shoulders picture of a man.
Smiling and informal, you understand, not some passport mug-shot.
More the sort of snap a relative or friend might carry.
Or a lover.
‘That was my first thought.
She had her handbag open on the table and had taken out a small leather wallet with several plastic pockets in it, for cheque cards and the like.
I had the impression — fleeting, I grant you — that the photo had come from one of the pockets.
That she'd removed it to look at, I mean.
Just as some moonstruck Juliet would if it were a picture of her other-side-of-the-world Romeo.
To be reminded of the distant object of her affections.
Well, what's so remarkable in that?
A mystery man in her life would have explained a lot.
Her chastity where Dysart was concerned for a start.
But that's not the point, Barnett, not the bloody point at all.
I was just silently congratulating myself on tumbling her secret at last when I realized who the man in the photograph was.
I recognized him, you see, and  his identity took me properly aback, I don't mind admitting.
Surprise isn't the word for it.’
Cunningham drew on his cigar and paused for eye-twinkling effect, but already Harry had foreseen what he would say next.
Heather's film would have led him there even if intuition had not, for the next picture on it was of some kind of school or college and there was one member of the Tyrrell Society's inner circle, the circle in which Heather had been vitally interested whatever Cunningham might believe to the contrary, still unaccounted for.
He was neither dead nor crippled.
He had proposed the visit to Burford on 17 May 1968 but had dropped out of the ill-fated return journey.
And he had been lately reported, according to Ockleton, teaching in the West Country.
‘The photograph was of somebody you seem to have heard of already, Barnett.
A fellow Old bloody Breakspearean of mine.
Jack Cornelius.’
TWENTY-FOUR
Harry returned to his room shortly before midnight, feeling less drunk than he had latterly behaved.
Rex Cunningham, it had transpired, was a toper of the old school, who believed in polishing off a bottle where lesser men would merely finish a glass.
Harry had realized at an early stage, however, that he would need to keep a clear head if he was to remember all he was told.
Accordingly, he had restrained his own consumption just as Cunningham's had begun to accelerate out of control.
Cunningham had now been wheeled away to bed by an obliging porter, having reached that maudlin stage of inebriation which is most painful for others to bear.
Harry, by contrast, had no intention of subsiding into forgetful slumber: he had far too much to occupy his mind for sleep to seem attractive.
Cunningham had strengthened his belief that if he could only follow the clues for which Heather's photographs were somehow emblems he would find the truth — and Heather with it.
The next step along the road was therefore all he could think of.
At first, the difficulty he had in opening the door of his room seemed no more than an irritating trifle.
Forced to devote his attention to the problem, he found he had succeeded in locking it when he had thought he was unlocking it, the reason being that it had been open all the time.
Only when he trawled his memory of leaving the room earlier, and found there a distinct recollection of checking that he had locked the door behind him, did irritation turn to anxiety.
But it was short-lived.
When he switched on the light and went in, he found everything in order.
No drawers gaped open, no cupboard doors swung free.
The bed had been turned down, however, and he  assumed the maid who had done that had also been responsible for leaving the room unsecured.
He fetched himself a scotch from the mini-bar and dismissed the matter from his thoughts.
By the time the telephone rang a few minutes later, he had forgotten it altogether.
‘Nadine here, Harry.
Rex is sleeping like a babe.
Could we have that chat you promised me?’
‘Er, yes, or course.’
‘I'll come to your room straightaway.’
She was still wearing the clinging black dress and seemed to have passed a stressful evening, to judge by the dark smudges beneath her eyes and the odd loose strand in her previously immaculate hair.
Somehow these hints of vulnerability seemed to make her more attractive still, more likely to accept and understand the needs and fallibilities of others.
Harry poured her a drink and noticed that her hand was shaking as she accepted a light for her cigarette.
‘How did you find Rex?’
‘Generous, amiable: the perfect host.’
‘Really?’
She shot him a wild, almost desperate look.
A smile was overdue, but showed no sign of coming.
‘You don't have to mince your words for my benefit, Harry.’
‘I wasn't.’
‘It's one huge act.
You must have noticed.’
‘Must I?’
‘You of all people.’
‘Why me — of all people?’
‘Because of what you are.
Because of what you know.’
‘Which is?’
She did not answer.
Instead, she began to pace around the room, casting cryptic glances at the Stubbs and nervous puffs of smoke towards the ceiling.
Why she should have discarded her confident pose of earlier in the evening he could not understand.
He had said nothing to disturb her, nothing, that is, that should have disturbed her.
He found himself following the line of marks left in the carpet by the sharp heels of her shoes, caught himself watching the alternate bracing of her calf muscles as she moved to and fro.
She had said she was worried and now he believed her.
This, he felt certain, could be no act.
‘I'm a nobody, Nadine, who knows next to nothing.
That's the truth, take it from me.’
‘It can't be.’
‘Why not?’
She turned to face him, her eyes blazing where before they had sparkled.
‘Why did you come here, Harry?’
‘You know why.
I told you.
I thought your husband might be able to help me find Heather.’
‘There's more to it than that, though, isn't there?’
‘No, there isn't.’
‘There has to be.’
‘Why?’
Again there was no answer.
She stubbed out her cigarette with an air of decision and sat down on the bed, leaning back against the plumped pillows.
‘When I told you earlier that Alan Dysart had once worked for me, you seemed…surprised.
Why was that?’
‘Because I was surprised.’
Nadine's voice was calmer now, subdued and contemplative as she gazed up at the ceiling.
‘Alan Dysart works for no man — except himself.’
‘I thought you hardly knew him.’
‘You thought right.
But Rex knows him — from way back.
Which means I know him.
Him and his like.
Rex has told me all about the Tyrrell Society and their activities a dozen times if he's told me once.
He still lives it, you see, all that lost frothy fecklessness of his youth.
He calls it the ‘varsity spirit.
Says nobody who hasn't experienced it can understand it.
Least of all a woman.
Co-education was unheard of in his day, of course.
I think he was crippled by his upbringing just as badly as he was by the car crash.
I can't get near him, you know, not within touching distance.
I don't mean physically, I mean…mentally.
He's a closed book.
A locked door.
I've tried to fathom him, God knows.
I thought I was too clever to be kept at bay by his all-pals-together manliness, but I was wrong, Harry, so wrong it's almost laughable.’
But she did not laugh.
Instead, she seemed close to tears.
‘How long have you been married to him?’
‘Seven years.
I was a waitress in his previous hotel.
A smaller place, in Godalming.
Altogether less grand.
He wanted to expand.
Hence the Skein of Geese.
Hence our marriage.
He needed a wife for professional reasons and I was it.
It got me out of clearing tables for a living, but I thought it meant more than that.
Some mistake, eh?’
She paused to sip her whisky.
‘The truth is, Harry, Rex is obsessed by that car crash twenty years ago and what led up to it.
Understandable, you might think, but the tragedy of the accident isn't what concerns him, oh no.
It's the weeks beforehand.
The weeks following a St George's Night dinner when —’
‘Ramsey Everett was killed.’
She looked at him in mild surprise.
‘You know about that?
I was right then.
There is a connection.’
‘A connection with what?’
‘Did you tell Rex that Alan Dysart worked for you in Swindon during university vacations?’
‘No.
The subject didn't crop up.’
Nadine clicked her tongue and smiled for the first time.
‘Then that's one up to me.
You see, Harry, Rex adored the Tyrrell Society  and everything it stood for.
He says now he was only interested in the food and drink, but that's a lie.
Maybe he never was on the same intellectual plane as some of the others, but he still believed in their picture of the world.
The Tyrrell Society was everything to him.
Body and soul.
Its suppression after Everett's death was a shattering blow.
That comes out clearly when he's drunk enough to let it.
‘It's typical of Rex really that he should blame the poor man who died for all his troubles.
Ramsey Everett was never quite one of them, it seems, never quite convinced that the world did owe them all a living.
He was the weevil in the fruit, according to Rex, the canker in their midst.
His death was the beginning of the end, the ultimate cause, as Rex sees it, of his own injuries.
Don t ask me to justify it for him, because I can't, but that's what he believes.
He even has a name for it.
He calls it the Defenestration of Ramsey Everett.
His grand undoing.
I had to look the word up, you know, look the word up in a dictionary to find out what it meant.
He wouldn't have told me.
No, not him.
Do you know what it means, Harry?’
‘Defenestration?’
Somewhere, buried deep in his memory, Harry sensed that he had once known the word.
Into his mind came a sudden vision of a classroom at Commonweal School, with motes of chalk-dust swirling in shafts of sunlight.
He seemed to hear the gravelly voice of Cameron-Hyde the one-eyed history master discoursing on the origins of the Thirty Years' War.
The Defenestration of Prague (yes, that was it).
as significant in its way as the assassination of Franz Ferdinand at Sarajevo.
But it was no good.
At the vital moment of explanation, Harry must have been selecting the England cricket team on the back of his exercise book.
Cameron-Hyde had discoursed in vain.
‘It's beyond me, Nadine.
What does it mean?’
‘Defenestration is to be thrown from a window, Harry.
Not to fall or slip, not even to throw oneself, but to be thrown.
Or pushed.
Like Ramsey Everett was.
Ramsey Everett had been murdered?
Cameron-Hyde's lesson at once recurred to him.
For some reason quite beyond Harry's comprehension, somebody had been thrown from a window in Prague in the year of grace 1618 and this had provoked thirty years of bloody conflict all over Europe.
A tiny spark for a vast conflagration.
And so it was with Ramsey Everett.
Somebody had pushed him to his death from a window in Oxford in 1968 and, twenty years later, Harry was pursuing the consequences.
This was the starting point, the origin of the mystery, and the end was whatever had befallen Heather on Profitis Ilias.
The photographs were markers on her path to the answer.
And the answer was where he would find her.
‘Could you fetch me another drink, Harry?’
Nadine spoke consolingly, as if she had read his thoughts.
‘Sure.’
He carried her glass across to the mini-bar, re-filled it and  walked back with it to the bed.
Their fingers brushed as she took it from him.
Then he picked up his own glass and sat down on the edge of the bed beside her.
‘Are you in love with her, Harry?’
‘Who?’
‘Heather.’
Was he?
Surely not.
His principal objective was to clear his name of the suspicion attached to it.
Friendship finished a poor second and love….
But as soon as he had reminded himself of his motive, it rang as hollow to him as he felt sure it must to others.
He smiled ruefully.
‘I don't know,’ he murmured.
‘I'm not sure.’
‘Did you ever make love to her?’
‘No.’
‘Did you ever try?’
‘No.’
‘Not even when you felt lonely?’
‘Not even.’
‘Then you don't have to be loyal to her, do you?’
He turned to look at her.
Made the more appealing, perhaps, by alcohol and half-light, she was nonetheless beautiful, her elfin face crossed by a touching sadness, her brow furrowed by some longing she could not define.
She cradled the whisky glass between her breasts, the amber surface of its contents trembling faintly in time to her breathing.
‘Why do you ask?’ said Harry, his voice thick with sudden loneliness.
‘Because I don't have to be loyal either.’
What would happen if he took the glass from her hand and kissed her parted lips Harry glimpsed in that instant, prefigured in the alluring darkness of her dress, darker, it seemed, than even the deepest of the shadows around them.
He saw himself, as in a mirror, lifting the black cloth from her white flesh, felt, as if it had already happened, the softness of her body closing around him.
Night had fallen and with it his defences.
He had been alone too long.
It was Nadine, in fact, who took the glass from Harry's hand, and placed it with her own on the bedside cabinet.
She smiled nervously as she looked back at him and seemed about to say something, then, instead, leaned forward to kiss him.
As their lips met, the urgency of their mutual need declared itself.
They were suddenly breathless, falling together onto the pillows.
Her hand was loosening his tie, his was sliding up the tingling curve of her thigh.
She rolled onto her side to let him pull down the zip of her dress.
He opened his eyes and reached round to find the fastener.
Then he stopped.
For an instant, his gaze had shifted to the bedside cabinet, where their whisky glasses stood beneath the lamp.
From this angle he could see what he had not noticed before: the drawer of the cabinet, open by a few inches, and, inside, picked out clearly  in the lamplight, an envelope with two words written on it in Greek.
.
Harry Barnett.
‘What's wrong?’ said Nadine.
But Harry did not hear her.
He reached across and pulled the drawer fully open.
It was a Skein of Geese envelope, with three of the wretched birds embossed in brown on heavy cream vellum.
And Harry's name, written in black anonymous ink.
. Nothing else.
Just his name.
In Greek.
In England.
A violent shudder ran through him.
He grabbed the envelope, felt the thickness of at least one page inside, ripped the flap open and plucked out the contents.
A single sheet of hotel writing paper, blank save for the pre-printed address.
No message.
No other words, in Greek or any other language.
No greeting but his own accursed name and empty ‘watermarked derision.
‘What is it, Harry?
What's the matter?’
Nadine was sitting upright beside him, staring at the envelope.
She was a party to his deception, he felt certain.
She had to be.
The unlocked door.
The timely phone-call.
The expert seduction.
Was it meant to end when it did?
Had she judged the precise moment when he would make his chilling discovery?
‘Who put you up to this?’ he demanded.
‘I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘This!’
He thrust the envelope towards her.
‘What is it?’
Her mixture of alarm and bafflement would have been utterly convincing, had Harry not already passed beyond the reach of any appeal she might care to make.
‘My name.
In Greek.’
‘I don't understand.’
‘Was it your husband, Nadine?
Did he tell you to plant this here while he wined and dined me?
Did he send you here tonight to make an utter bloody fool of me?’
‘This is —’
‘Did he?’
She made to rise, but Harry grabbed her by the wrists and she subsided back onto the bed with a sharp cry of pain.
‘Let go of me!’
‘Not until you tell me the truth.’
‘What truth?
This is insane!’
‘When I came back here tonight, I found the door unlocked.
I thought the maid must have left it that way.
But it wasn't the maid, was it?
It was you, Nadine, come here to leave this letter where you knew I'd be bound to see it.
Bound to see it because you planned every move — every touch — in this tender little scene.’
‘You're mad!’
‘No.
That's what you want me to be.
But it's not going to work.
Because you're going to tell me who planned this.
And why.’
‘Nobody planned anything.’
‘Yes they did.
You know they did.’
Nadine's mouth set in a firm, determined line.
She was breathing heavily and, in some clinical compartment of his brain Harry pondered how that same panting note could signify three completely different emotions: the passion she had simulated, the fear she was struggling to control, the anger that bubbled beneath the surface.
‘Listen to me, Harry,’ she said with icy composure.
‘If you don't stop this now, you'll regret it.
They think you murdered Heather, don't they?
They think you raped her and killed her.
I don ‘t, but they do.
What happens if there's an assault on me to be taken into the reckoning?
What happens then, eh?
Do you think anyone will believe it wasn't just more of the same?’
Silence, and with it a circle of bewildering calm, closed about them.
Nadine was right.
Nobody would believe him.
The Mallenders.
The police.
The newspapers.
They would all be vindicated.
Nadine ‘s defiant glare told him what he should have realized already.
She was stronger than him in every respect save the purely physical.
Only greater humiliation could result from an attempt to wrench the truth from her.
His grip slackened.
His hands fell away from her wrists.
‘Get out,’ he murmured.
And she was gone.
Without another word.
There was a click of the door as it closed behind her.
And Harry was alone.
He stared at the envelope again but found there no clue to what had been enacted.
A wall in Oxford.
A locked room in Surrey.
They were drawing closer, ever closer, whoever they were, but their purpose remained obscure.
To stop him?
To unnerve him?
Either way, they would not succeed.
He rose from the bed and walked across to the chair where he had slung his jacket.
He took the Skein of Geese matchbox from its pocket, lit one of the matches and held it to the envelope until the flame had caught.
As his own name shrivelled in the heat, he dropped the envelope into the ashtray and watched it burn to a husk, then prodded it into tiny fragments with the extinguished match.
With the evidence destroyed, there was some hope of pretending it had never existed.
Not that it really mattered.
Harry knew his own nature if he knew nothing else.
He could not be deflected now.
TWENTY-FIVE
‘Not having breakfast?’ the receptionist responded brightly.
‘No.’
‘Very well, sir.’
Harry could see the realization dawning on her that small talk would be wasted on this guest.
‘Have you made any telephone calls this morning?’
‘No.’
‘Or used the mini-bar?’
‘No.’
(Harry had decided that to pay for entertaining Nadine Cunningham would be to add insult to injury.)
‘That'll be seventy-four pounds and seventy-five pence then, sir.’
Harry winced.
‘I thought the room was sixty-five a night.’
‘It is, sir.
But there's VAT to be added.’
He sighed, took out another ten pound note and slid the money across the counter, calculating as he did so that he could have eaten adequately and drunk excessively for a fortnight in Lindos for what a night at the Skein of Geese had cost him.
Not that he would have felt nearly so hard done by had only his wallet suffered by it.
He pocketed his change and turned to go.
‘Oh Mr Barnett —’
‘Yes?’
‘Mr Cunningham asked if you could spare him a few minutes before leaving the hotel.
You'll find him in his office.’
Harry's first inclination was to ignore the request.
All he really wanted to do was walk away from the Skein of Geese and never return.
He had no taste for further encounters with either Cunningham or his wife.
Then curiosity got the better of him.
At  the very least, he might leave them with a few choice phrases to remember him by.
‘Ah, Barnett!
An early riser, I see.’
Cunningham was leafing through a copy of the Financial Times at his desk amidst a cloud of cigar-smoke, beaming like some genial movie mogul, altogether unaffected, it seemed, by the events of the previous night.
Amongst the papers before him stood an empty breakfast cup and an egg-smeared plate, suggesting that his digestion was as robust as his nerve.
‘What do you want?’ said Harry.
‘Ah!
The acid tone confirms my worst suspicions.
‘Fraid I disgraced myself last night.
Should know better.
Inexcusable, really.
Thought I'd make my peace with you before you left.’
Harry was taken aback.
Surely Cunningham did not mean to pretend nothing had happened.
‘Is that all?’ he snapped.
‘More than enough, I'd have said.
Can't apologize too much.
just hope I didn't say anything to offend you.’
Was it possible, Harry wondered, was it remotely conceivable that Cunningham was an even bigger dupe than he was himself?
Surely not.
Yet perhaps it was at least a contingency worth testing.
‘You said nothing to offend me, Mr Cunningham.’
‘You mean it?
That's a load off my mind, believe me.’
‘But you did puzzle me.
Do you remember mentioning the defenestration of Ramsey Everett?’
‘Oh God.’
Cunningham put a hand to his forehead.
‘I treated you to that, did I?’
‘You really think he was murdered?’
‘Probably not, Barnett, probably not.
It's just a hare-brained theory of mine.
I'm given to them, you know.
My wife thinks I'm paranoid.
Perhaps she has a point.
Somebody could have murdered Everett, of course— in the circumstances, nothing simpler — but I expect it was just an accident, don't you?’
‘I don't know.
You were there.’
‘So were we all.
Ockleton, Morpurgo, Cornelius, Dysart and half a dozen others too drunk to mention.
But there was so much coming and going that any one of us could have slipped out, pushed Everett through the window and slipped back again without being noticed.
Damn it all, we didn't even notice Everett was missing until a porter tripped over him in the quad, so anything's theoretically possible.
Motive, means, opportunity: the classic combination, isn't it?’
‘The means and opportunity you've established.
But what would have been the motive?’
‘Well, I daresay it's just me flying a kite, but the fact is Everett was too bloody inquisitive for his own good.
Planned to be a criminologist after Oxford, you know, and started applying the craft to friends and acquaintances at Breakspear.
He'd think nothing of checking up on  a fellow's credentials.
Did he do as well at school as he claimed?
Was his father really a war hero?
That kind of thing.
Embarrassed several of us with his discoveries, I can tell you.
It struck me he might have come up with something one day that wasn't just embarrassing but downright scandalous.
He was enough of a prig to revel in disgracing any poor sod he dug up some real dirt about.
That could have made him a candidate for murder, couldn't it?’
‘Yes, I suppose it could.’
‘And it raises all sorts of questions about the car crash, doesn't it?’
Cunningham was warming to this theme now.
There was a feverish blush to his cheeks, as if he had seldom found so receptive an audience for his speculations.
‘Perhaps that wasn't an accident either.
Three days before the inquest on Everett's death makes it a suggestive coincidence, don't you think?’
‘But it was an accident.
You were all drunk.
Morpurgo was driving too fast.
You said so yourself.’
‘Oh, Morpurgo was speeding, not a doubt of it, and he was pie-eyed, I don't deny.
But he might still have been able to stop in time if he'd braked hard enough.
Ockleton and I were both asleep, so neither of us can be sure he didn't slam on the brakes — only to find they weren't working.
Morpurgo knows, of course, but he's incapable of telling us.
And the car was such a mess nobody would have been looking for a sawn brake cable.’
‘You're suggesting the car was sabotaged?’
‘I'm suggesting it may have been, yes.’
‘But why?
‘Suppression of evidence, Barnett.
Suppression of evidence.’
He sat back in his wheelchair with the self-satisfied grin of a man proud of his own ingenuity.
Then he laughed and took a puff at his cigar.
‘Or it could be just the over-ripe fruit of my suspicious mind.
Thanks to this contraption’— he slapped the arm rest —‘I've had plenty of time to cook up an outlandish conspiracy theory.
It could easily be nothing more than my way of coping with the consequences of a senseless accident.
That's what my wife thinks it is.
You can take your bloody pick.’
It was no accident.
Half an hour later, walking slowly along the road into Haslemere through the mild grey morning, Harry described in his mind another circuit of all the barely linked half-chances that persuaded him Cunningham was right and concluded, not for the first time, that logic and probability were irrelevant.
He believed Everett had been murdered for the same reason Cunningham did.
He needed to.
Think it through again, he told himself: sift every grain of what you know until you find the answer.
Suppose Everett was murdered to prevent him blackening the name of a fellow Breakspearean.
Suppose  one or more of those who visited Burford three weeks later had witnessed the murder or knew what Everett had discovered.
Suppose the car crash was a botched attempt to kill them.
If that were so, the answer lay with one of the occupants of Morpurgo's car.
The likeliest was Morpurgo himself, because, though not killed, he had been silenced, whereas both Cunningham and Ockleton could have spoken out afterwards — unless they were too frightened to do so.
That left Cornelius.
Was his withdrawal from the return journey good luck or self-preservation?
Harry's own half-formed suspicions tended to focus on him because Clare Mallender had been seen mooning over his photograph at the Skein of Geese two weeks before her death.
But an alternative explanation had also come to him which he knew he should not ignore.
What if Everett's putative murderer had been the intended victim of sabotage rather than its practitioner?
What if revenge had been the motive rather than the silencing of a witness?
If that were so….
A sleek blue BMW purred past him and halted about ten yards ahead.
As Harry approached, the nearside front window wound automatically down.
He glanced in to find Nadine Cunningham smiling at him from the driver's seat.
‘Want a lift, Harry?’
‘No thanks.’
‘Where are you going?’
‘The station.’
‘It's a long walk.’
‘I know.’
‘Then jump in.’
She was wearing a dark tracksuit and was smiling warmly, as if she had simply stopped on her way to the solarium to pick up a neighbour.
‘There's something I want to tell you.’
Pride, Harry reminded himself, was a luxury he could not afford.
He climbed in and they started off.
‘Well?’ he said neutrally.
‘I owe you an apology.’
‘True, but I don't expect one.’
‘I can see why you reacted the way you did last night.
It must have been a shock.
The letter, I mean, addressed to you in Greek.’
‘It was.
As you intended.’
‘No, I didn't.
That's what I wanted you to understand.
It was no doing of mine.
I even questioned the maid.
She's a reliable girl.
She's sure she locked the door after her.
Somebody must have picked it.
If they'd had a key, they wouldn't have been so careless as to leave it open, would they?’
‘You're wasting your breath.’
‘But don't you see, Harry?
It was nothing to do with me, or anybody else on the staff.
It must have been an outsider.’
‘You really don't have to make all this up on my account.’
They turned off sharply to the left and headed up a straight, sloping  road between sombre stands of oak and beech.
This was not the route Harry recalled from his taxi ride, but, for the moment, he did not protest.
‘I spoke to your husband this morning.
He pretended to know nothing about what happened between us.’
‘He wasn't pretending, Harry.
That was genuine.
I wanted to thank you — for not enlightening him.’
‘You expect me to believe that?’
‘Yes.
But I don't expect you to believe I was simply looking for a good time.
There was an ulterior motive.’
‘Which you're about to volunteer?’
‘Yes.
It's the least I owe you in the circumstances.
You see, I've been offered a great deal of money for information which might discredit Alan Dysart: anything scandalous from his past or present.
I knew from Rex that his work in Swindon had mystified his contemporaries, so, when you turned up, the one man who might know all about it, it seemed an opportunity too good to miss.’
She cast a brief and dazzling smile towards him, declaring without a hint of shame her duplicity as well as her frankness.
Why he did not feel angrier than he did he could not understand.
Perhaps it was the sheer blatancy of her  confession .
Perhaps it was the nagging awareness that he too had hoped to gain more than mere gratification from their acquaintance.
‘Don't look so worried, Harry.
I'm not going to try again.
If things are so serious that people start picking locks and planting letters, I don't want to know anymore.
That's strictly out of my league.
The money would have —’
‘How much money were you offered?’
‘The figure was negotiable, depending on what I discovered.’
‘And who made the offer?’
‘Are you sure you want to know?’
‘I, m sure.’
‘He's a reporter from one of the Sunday scandal-sheets.’
Harry might have guessed.
‘Jonathan Minter?’
‘Yes.
How did you know?’
So that was Minter's true objective: character assassination of a popular politician — the modern journalist's stock-in-trade.
It explained his interest in Heather's disappearance as well as his offer of money to Harry if he could give him a story.
Perhaps it even explained his relationship with Virginia Dysart.
‘He first contacted us last year, shortly after Clare Mallender's death.
Apparently he knew the girl.
He said he was researching a piece on Alan Dysart and wanted to ask Rex some questions about their Oxford days.
Rex refused to cooperate when he realized that what Minter was really looking for was a scandal — any scandal.
Rex worships this government, you see, more than he worships  money, which is saying something.
So Minter went away with a flea in his ear.
He came back a couple of weeks ago and this time approached me rather than Rex.
I told him about the defenestration of Ramsey Everett and he gave me five hundred pounds.
He called it a down-payment and said there could be a hundred times that sum on offer for the right kind of information about Alan Dysart.
The trouble was I didn't have any — until you arrived.’
They topped a rise and began a slow descent towards the town.
The woodland was thinner hereabouts, with the roofs of secluded residences dotted amongst the trees in a landscape of tamed nature and Home Counties opulence.
It came as a surprise to Harry that even here cheque-book journalism could make its inroads.
‘I expect you're thinking: is she really that desperate for fifty thousand pounds?
The answer is yes.
I have no money of my own, Harry.
Everything belongs to Rex.
So, if I'm to leave him, I need capital.
You might think it's a sordid way to raise it, but at least it's quick.’
‘That's what you want to do, is it — leave him?’
‘On my own terms, yes.’
‘Why?’
‘The usual reasons.
I've never loved him, but now I've started to hate him — for making me the mercenary bitch I am.
It's no excuse, but you may as well know anyway: in Rex's case, paralysis below the waist really does mean what it says.’
They had reached the centre of Haslemere now and their progress had slowed amidst a tangle of straying pedestrians and lumbering delivery vans.
The electronic strains of a synthesized choir could be heard above the rumbling exhausts and Harry, gazing out at the tinsel-hung shopfronts, wondered if it was this jangling ubiquity of Christmas spirit which made his fellow men and women seem so dismally ignoble.
‘It's not a pretty story, is it, Harry?
I'm sorry about it, really I am.
Don't think too badly of me.
A girl's got to look to the future, you know.’
‘As a matter of fact, Nadine, you were wasting your time all along.
Minter wouldn't have paid you a penny for what you might have got out of me.
You see, Alan Dysart doesn't have a secret to hide.’
‘I thought everybody had at least one.’
‘Well, he's the exception that proves the rule.’
For a second, it crossed Harry's mind that he could be wrong.
just because he knew and liked Dysart, the man was not necessarily above suspicion.
On the other hand, Minter had evidently found no skeleton in his cupboard, for all his efforts to do so.
With Virginia Dysart as either his ally or his dupe, only sheer desperation could have made him offer bribes to the likes of Nadine Cunningham.
‘Tell me,’ Harry said as they neared the station, ‘if I hadn't found  that letter last night and thrown you out, would you have told me all this?’
‘No, I wouldn't.’
Then why now?
‘Because I'm hoping you'll agree to pass on a message for me to Minter.
You will be seeing him, won't you?’
‘Yes, but —’
‘I thought you would.
I want you to tell him I can't assist him any further and there's no point him contacting me again.
Will you do that for me?’
‘All right.
But why so adamant?’
‘Because that letter was a warning, Harry, one I don't intend to ignore — even if you do.’
They pulled up in the station car park.
Nadine kept the engine idling but Harry made no move to climb out.
‘You're frightened?’ he said incredulously.
‘Yes, I am.
Aren't you?’
‘No.
Why should I be?’
‘Isn't it obvious?
Heather Mallender started asking the same sort of questions you're asking — and look what happened to her.
I didn't take the idea seriously until last night, but, believe me, I don't need fifty thousand pounds that badly.
To put it bluntly, Harry, I don't want to disappear.
Do you?’
Watching the BMW ease out into the traffic a few minutes later and accelerate away along the road, Harry turned Nadine's words over in his mind.
The point she had made was an obvious one, but, till now, he had succeeded in overlooking it.
In searching for Heather, he was faithfully reproducing her movements — and quite possibly her mistakes as well.
In following the same clues as her, he might well be heading for the same destination.
TWENTY-SIX
Harry thought well on trains.
He found their steady, rhythmic progress an aid to concentration and the oddly oblique views of the world they offered — weed-choked farmland at the feet of embankments, gnome-dotted gardens on the edges of towns — ran somehow parallel with his own.
He supposed it was due to the railways' air of resentful obsolescence, combined with their persistent insights into what was so often ignored: abandoned pastures, neglected buildings, all that was overgrown and outmoded, all that was best forgotten.
Like Harry himself.
That, of course, was the source of the affinity.
He was, in his way, as redundant as the steam engines whose numbers he had avidly collected as a boy in Swindon.
All those roaring blurs of hissing steam and belching smoke were gone now to the breaker's yard.
The very sheds where their boilers were forged had been levelled to the ground.
Compared with them, however, Harry possessed one crucial advantage: the right to decide that he would not go quietly.
He should have felt as tired and inadequate as his age and circumstances dictated, but he did not.
He should have been cowed and compromised by fear and debt, but he was not.
Instead, halfway between Guildford and Woking, he experienced a curious surge of elation.
He was gaining ground on all of them, he had the beating of them yet.
From Waterloo station, he phoned the offices of The Courier and somewhat to his surprise, found himself put straight through to Jonathan Minter.
Still suffused with a sense of equality to the challenge that confronted him, he slipped deftly into the image he believed the other man would have of him.
‘Is that…er, Jonathan Minter?’
‘Speaking.’
‘Ah….
It's, er, Harry Barnett here.’
‘Hi, Harry Barnett there.
What can I do for you?’
‘Well, er, you said when we met on Rhodes —’
That where you are now?’
(So: Minter did not even know he had left Rhodes, far less all he had discovered since then — notably about Minter himself.)
‘No.
That is…
I'm in London.’
‘Really?
How long have you been here?’
(His curiosity on the point was transparent: he wanted to know if Harry was likely to have seen the article in which Minter had traduced him.)
‘Oh, only a few days.’
‘And you've got something for me?’
‘I might have.’
(Pause long enough to whet his appetite, Harry instructed himself, then resume — hesitantly.)
‘Er, that, um, link in the chain…you mentioned.’
‘Oh yes?’
(Minter's voice was suddenly more alert.)
‘Concerning Alan Dy —’
‘No need to spell it out over the phone, Harry.
Why don't we meet and talk about it?’
(He was nervous now, as well as interested.)
‘OK.
But…where?’
‘Can you get out here?’
‘Yes, I should think so.’
‘Great.
Let's say noon.
At the Grapes.
It's that pub in Limehouse, down by the river.
Think you can find it?’
‘Yes.’
Then I'll meet you there.
Don't be late.’
‘I won't be.’
Next, Harry phoned Dr Kingdom's consulting rooms in Marylebone.
Quite apart from the fact that Heather's psychiatrist might know more of what was in her mind than anyone, Kingdom had accompanied Heather to the Skein of Geese on 10 September.
Was that, Harry had begun to wonder, a purely professional act?
‘Dr Kingdom's surgery.
May I help you?’
(The secretary's faintly accented voice was instantly recognizable.)
‘Miss Labrooy, this is Harry Barnett.
I called —’
‘Ah, Mr Barnett!
I remember your visit.’
‘I was wondering —’
‘Dr Kingdom returned on Monday and I explained the nature of your enquiry.
In view of the exceptional circumstances, he is prepared to see you.’
(Miss Labrooy had obviously pleaded eloquently on Harry's behalf.)
‘That's great.
When could —’
‘He is fully committed for several weeks ahead, but he could spare you a few minutes at the end of his list one day.’
‘What about today?’
‘A moment please.’
(There was a rustling of an appointments book.)
‘His last patient is at four o'clock.
If you called at five —’
‘I'll be there.’
(Minter and Kingdom within hours of each other: at last Harry was making progress.)
A little over an hour later, Harry felt more in control of events than he had at any time since Heather's disappearance.
He and Minter were huddled at a table in the narrow bay window of the Grapes public bar, overlooked and unattended as the lunchtime rush gathered pace and noise, cocooned from the gossip and laughter that swirled about them.
Twenty minutes before, Minter had arrived full of a swaggering blend of confidence and contempt.
Now, as he eyed Harry warily and started his third cigarette, he had more the look of a hound on whom the fox had turned.
‘If you've nothing for me, why the hell did you imply you had?
This is just a waste of time.
If you think you're going to persuade me to retract what I said in that article, you're a bigger —’
‘I'm not asking you to retract anything.’
Then what?’
‘All I want to know is what you did with the information Nadine sold you.’
‘Nothing.
It wasn't worth anything.’
‘Supposing that 's the case, what led you to the Skein of Geese in the first place?’
‘Intuition.’
Minter tossed the word back like a dart.
‘And what took you back there after your visit to Rhodes?’
I liked the menu.’
The young man glared at Harry with something close to resentment.
The role of the biter bit was clearly not one he cared for.
He leaned across the table and lowered his voice.
‘Listen to me, Barnett.
If you really are the Mr Persil in all this, that's fine by me.
I took you for a bit of a rogue, but maybe you're just a fool.
Either way, I buy information, but I don't sell it.’
‘I'm not offering to pay you for it.’
‘Or give it away.’
Harry was beginning to enjoy himself.
There was genuine pleasure to be had from pinning Minter to the ropes.
He too lowered his voice.
‘An exchange is more what I had in mind.
Your answers to a few questions — in exchange for my silence.’
‘Your silence about what?’
‘The relationship between you and Virginia Dysart.’
For a fraction of a second, Minter's eyes widened.
Then he drew on his cigarette in an attempt to mask what Harry had already glimpsed: the shock of one who perceives a threat too late to evade it.
‘You were the man she answered the door to,’ he said glumly.
‘Yes.’
‘That doesn't prove a thing, of course.’
‘It doesn't need to.
Alan Dysart trusts me.
If I told him what I suspect and why, do you think he'd ask for proof?’
‘No.
He probably wouldn't.’
Minter smiled faintly, as if the irony of the situation had suddenly struck him.
‘What do you want to know?’
‘Everything you've found out.’
‘If I tell you, what guarantee do I have you won't blow the gaff to Dysart anyway?’
‘You have my word.’
The smile broadened.
‘Is that meant to reassure me?’
Minter leaned back in his chair for a moment, regarding Harry as if he were a specimen of endangered wildlife.
Then his expression altered to something less decipherable.
‘Well, maybe some home truths about Alan Dysart, public servant and national hero, will make you reckon he deserves the marriage he's got.
I surrender.
Ask away.’
‘You and Clare Mallender were contemporaries at Oxford?
‘Yes.
She was at Breakspear, I was at Queen's.
We studied the same subject.’
‘And became lovers?’
‘I loved her.
Clare, as I recall, was rather more indiscriminate with her affections.’
‘But you did become engaged?’
‘At my insistence, yes.
But I knew it wouldn't last.
She had her eyes set on a bigger catch than me.’
‘Meaning?’
‘A politician.
Nobody specific, you understand.
Anybody sufficiently powerful and influential would have done.
She was a single-minded girl, our Clare.
She thought an MP's bed was the quickest route into politics for a woman.
She was probably right.
Dysart just happened to be the one she chose.
She already knew him, of course, as a friend of her father.
It was he who recommended her to apply to Breakspear College when it started admitting women.
When he left the Navy with a suitably heroic reputation, she must have reckoned he was her dream come true.’
‘You're implying she became his mistress?’
‘What do you think?’
‘I think you're wrong.’
‘Only a man who offers his word as a guarantee could be so naïve.
All right, Clare never admitted it and I can't prove it, but it still seems a betting certainty.’
‘Is that what prompted you to enquire into Dysart's past — jealousy?’
‘No.
If it had been, I'd have started digging for dirt before Clare died, wouldn't I?’
‘Then what did?’
‘Clare herself, strangely enough.
Two days before she was killed, she phoned me out of the blue.
We hadn't spoken in months.
She asked if we could meet.
I was surprised she could spare the time in the middle of an election campaign and concluded it was genuinely urgent.
We met that evening and she asked me straight out if I'd be interested in an exclusive story: a scandal affecting a government minister.
With the election less than a fortnight away, I could hardly believe my luck.
Clare wouldn't name names there and then.
She wanted me to clear her fee with my editor.
She was asking a quarter of a million.
It may seem a lot to you, but for a cast-iron story that might bring down a government, it's cheap at the price, believe me.
We arranged to meet again three days later and agree terms.
I don't deny I hoped it was Dysart she was planning to ruin — I wondered if there'd been a lovers’ tiff — but she let nothing slip.
Chapter and verse were to be forthcoming when the deal was settled.
Well, I scurried off and did my bit, but, the day before we were to meet again, she was killed — and the story with her.’
Minter fell silent, letting his next, unspoken implication declare itself.
‘You're not suggesting,’ said Harry, ‘that Clare was murdered to stop her selling you this story?’
The possibility crossed my mind, yes.
He smiled at Harry s confusion.
‘But the facts rule it out.
The bombing of the yacht was definitely the work of the IRA.
Dysart was an obvious target: ex-Navy, Ministry of Defence, outspoken in support of the Union.
And the eve of the election was an obvious time to strike.
Much as I was inclined to suspect otherwise, Clare was simply the victim of bad luck.’
He leaned still further across the table, his shoulders hunched, his voice scarcely rising above a whisper.
‘But I didn't leave it there, because Dysart had had one lucky escape too many for my liking.
You could argue it wasn't his fault that Clare was killed — or that she didn't love me as much as I loved her — and I'd have to agree.
What I'm not prepared to accept is that he's entitled to lead a charmed life while others struggle and falter and fail.
Partly for Clare's sake, but mostly for my own satisfaction, I decided to do my level best to break that man.
I reckoned he was the minister Clare was planning to denounce and I set about trying to discover his secret for myself.’
‘But you've failed?’
‘Only as far as proof goes.
I'm on to him, take it from me.’
Envy was written clearly on Minter's face: envy of another man's success.
It was not a pleasant emotion, but it was a powerful enough one to have sustained him in the search when evidence was lacking.
‘How much do you know about Alan Dysart, Harry?’
‘As much as you, I expect.’
‘That I doubt.
I've made a special study of him, you see.
I've assembled his biography brick by brick, just so I can have the pleasure of taking it apart.
He was born in Birmingham forty-one years ago.
His father had migrated from Scotland and set up business there.
Dysart  Engineering was one of the success stories of West Midlands industry after the Depression and, as Gordon Dysart's only son, young Alan was a dozen rungs above the likes of you and me on the ladder of life before he'd so much as lost his milk teeth.
Off he went to Oundle, destined already for Oxford and probable greatness.
By then the Dysarts had moved into the countryside.
The old man had a house built for him in a pretty little Warwickshire village a few miles from Stratford, with the Avon flowing through the garden.
Not a good move, as it turned out, because Mrs Dysart drowned in that stretch of river in 1963 and Gordon, never the same man again, died two years later, during Alan's first year at Oxford, making him a wealthy man overnight.
Strangely enough, though, when he left Oxford he wound up the business and joined the Navy, despite the fact that he could have lived handsomely off his investments.
Perhaps he thought a Naval commission was the right way to start his career.
I've certainly always had the impression that he planned every detail of his life.
It's like a glowing curriculum vitae was the first thing he produced when he learned how to write.
Anyway, at Dartmouth he met Virginia —’
‘I wondered when we'd come to her,’ Harry put in.
‘Was it she who told you all this?’
‘No, as a matter of fact it wasn't.
Dysart reveals little about himself, even to those close to him.
What I've learned, I've learned the hard way.’
‘Seducing the man's wife was the hard way, was it?’
Minter smiled.
‘It was more a case of her seducing me.
Dysart's no fun to be married to, you know.
He's been looking elsewhere for years.’
‘You know that for a fact, do you?’
‘Virginia does.
According to her it's not unusual in Naval marriages.
The husbands become used to male company.
They think of women in one light only.
So, what's sauce for the goose….
You know how it is.’
‘Do I?’
The truth was that Harry understood Minter better than he cared to admit.
But for the generosity Dysart had shown him over the years, he might even have approved of his actions.
Yet he had no intention of revealing as much.
What he most disliked in Minter — a suspicious temperament channelled into a grudge against the world — was what he most disliked in himself.
‘Listen to me, Barnett,’ said Minter, anger seeping into his voice.
‘It's only because it might hamper my investigations that I don't invite you to tell Dysart about his wife's in fidelity tomorrow.
Don't think the morality of it troubles me for an instant.
Now, have you heard all you want to hear?’
‘Not quite.
Why did you contact the Cunninghams last year?’
‘Because Clare had mentioned dining at the Skein of Geese and  Cunningham's an Old Breakspearean.
He seemed a useful source where Dysart's Oxford days were concerned.
But it was a waste of time.
The man's too bowled over by Dysart's politics to be of the slightest —’
‘Yet you went back there recently.’
‘Yes, and got what he'd refused to tell me from his wife.
Lurid nonsense about somebody being pushed out of a window twenty years ago.
I only paid her five hundred in the hope she'd come up with something better.’
‘But why did you go back?’
‘Because, three months ago, Heather telephoned me and asked if I'd taken Clare to the Skein of Geese a couple of weeks before her death.
I couldn't work out why she should be so interested, but the answer was no: I'd never taken her there.
According to the pneumatic Nadine, Dysart was Clare's escort on that occasion, which was no surprise to me.
When Heather disappeared, I thought it was a lead worth following, but it led nowhere.
The Tyrrell Society and all that pining after defunct Oxford cabals — it's irrelevant, Harry, don't you see?
Dysart's secret — the chink in his armour — is rooted in the here and now, not the lost and gone.
It was Virginia who gave me the clue.
Naval husbands, she said, were loyal to their shipmates ahead of kith, kin or country.
And Charlie Mallender is exactly that: an old shipmate.
Dysart's commanding officer on his very first ship to be precise.
So I started enquiring into Mallender s little business enterprise — and guess what I found?’
‘Well?’
‘Mallender Marine sailed into troubled waters in the early eighties: failure to win orders, bad debts, profits turning into losses.
Their recovery since then stems from winning several lucrative long-term Defence contracts.
And it coincides almost exactly with Dysart's appointment to the Ministry of Defence three years ago.
I'll tell you what I think, shall I?
I think Dysart is feeding commercial secrets to his old skipper, Charlie Mallender, and that Clare found out about it.
As Dysart's employee and Mallender's daughter, who could be better placed to smell a rat?’
Harry leaned back from the table and considered Minter's theory.
It seemed to him quite possible that Dysart should exploit his official position to save an old friend from bankruptcy.
All it confirmed was the value he placed on friendship, which Harry well knew already.
The world would denounce him for it unmercifully.
No mitigation would be allowed for the fact that loyalty, not financial gain, was his motive.
But Harry could not bring himself to condemn him.
He doubted if Dysart deserved to be ruined by the ruthless young woman Clare Mallender seemed to have been, any more Man he deserved to be hounded by the unscrupulous journalist Jonathan Minter undoubtedly was.
Besides, as Minter was in the process  of admitting, he had so far assembled not a shred of evidence to support his claim.
‘When I found out you'd been sacked by Mallender Marine, I thought you might be able to supply the proof I need.
If you do know anything, my offer's still open, you know.
I should think you could use some money just now.
Am I right?’
Minter, had he but known it, was right as well as wrong: right that Harry was running short of cash, wrong if he believed that currently mattered to him a jot.
‘I can't help you,’ he replied.
And it was true.
Even if there was a case for Dysart to answer, it was not relevant to Heather's disappearance.
She had been following a trail Minter had turned his back on, but Harry had the photographs to keep him on course.
‘Please yourself.’
‘I will.
You see, I've no intention of helping you ruin a man I admire.’
‘Then why all these questions?’
‘I hoped you might tell me something that would lead me to Heather.’
Minter snorted derisively.
‘My answer's the same as yours.
I can't help you.
I don't know where she is — if she's alive at all— and I don't much care.
She was always just Clare's plain, timid little sister to me: inferior, inadequate and inconsequential.
She means nothing to me and nothing to Dysart either.
Neurotic enough to have vanished of her own accord — or even to have got herself murdered.
What difference does it make?
After drawing a blank on Rhodes, I had to write something that justified my travelling expenses, so I made you the villain of the piece.
Besides, I thought it might sting you into giving me something on the Mallenders.
You did work for them, after all.’
Ten years ago.
Nothing from that period supports your theory.’
‘Have it your own way.’
Minter glanced at his watch.
‘I've got to go.
I take it you've heard enough?’
‘Yes.
I think I have.’
Then hear one last thing.
If you should decide to tell Dysart about me and Virginia, bear in mind The Courier could make your life here in England very unpleasant for you.
Heather Mallender's murderer walks free — that sort of thing.
You get my drift?’
Harry did not reply.
When the door of the pub slammed shut behind Minter a few moments later, he sighed with relief and took a lengthy gulp at his beer.
It was at least gratifying to know that his initial dislike of the young man had been justified.
He doubted if his hatred of Dysart could even be honoured with the description of revenge.
His claim to have loved Clare Mallender and to have had her stolen from him somehow lacked conviction and, anyway, his conquest of Virginia Dysart could be said to have evened the score.
No, Minter was  motivated more by the unreasoning malice which individual achievement seemed often to inspire in others.
The irony was that, by dismissing as irrelevant all talk of the Tyrrell Society, he had closed his eyes to the vital clue Rex Cunningham could have given him: the identity of the man whose photograph Clare Mallender had carried about with her.
Armed with that information, he might have re-directed his enquiries long ago.
As Harry squeezed through the ruck to order another pint, he could not suppress a private smile at Minter's expense.
For all his zeal and determination, for all the trained wiles of the investigative journalist, he was wide of the mark.
The truth lay elsewhere.
And Harry knew where.
TWENTY-SEVEN
Confidence, that most fickle of emotions, had deserted Harry.
He did not know why and, in the absence of an obvious explanation, attributed it to his first ever professional encounter with a psychiatrist.
There was no archetypal couch in Dr Kingdom's consulting room, although a chair by the window looked as if it could be converted for the purpose.
But for the titles of the books on the shelves, however, Harry felt it would have served for the conduct of almost any other business than that of healing troubled minds.
Nevertheless, the chair he was sitting in was soft enough and the recorded harpsichord music sufficiently soporific to calm the anxieties and lower the defences of most people.
But not of Harry.
Was Kingdom himself, perhaps, the source of his unease?
This snappily dressed, half-smiling man with something of the looks of the young Cary Grant about him did not approximate to his vision of a psychiatrist.
Glancing through a file (which Harry took to be Heather's) with the pursed lips and darting eyes of an auditor perusing an unsatisfactory set of accounts, he conveyed none of the warmth or insight which Harry supposed successful psychoanalysis to require.
To make matters worse, there was a cast to his expression and a pitch to his voice which Harry found strangely familiar, as if , inconceivable though he knew it to be, they had met before.
A steadily worsening headache and a dry throat that was rapidly becoming sore compounded Harry's discomfort.
Perhaps he had drunk too much at the Grapes.
Perhaps he was sickening for a cold.
Either way, concentration seemed to require an enormous effort and forceful argument a better assembled set of thoughts than he currently possessed.
He had intended to sweep aside any  reservations Kingdom might have about revealing a patient's secrets by pointing out the overriding importance of finding Heather, but, instead, he had become meek and subdued, as if content to accept Kingdom's judgement unreservedly on how much or how little he could divulge.
‘I'd like to help you, Mr Barnett,’ Kingdom said after a lengthy silence, ‘but I can't.
Naturally, I hope Heather is alive, but, if she is, she has every right to expect that I will observe absolute confidentiality where her medical history is concerned.
My hands are tied.’
‘All I want to know —’
‘All you want to know is what I cannot tell you: whether her recent illness might in some way explain her disappearance.
To bare one's soul to a member of my profession, Mr Barnett, is no small hurdle to surmount.
If there was the slightest risk of what one revealed in the process becoming known to others….
Well, I trust you appreciate my position.’
‘Could I at least ask a few questions?’
‘Ask by all means, so long as you understand how limited my freedom may be to answer.’
Harry took a deep breath and struggled to shape some propositions that would not offend the doctor's code of ethics.
‘Heather had a breakdown last year, didn't she, following the death of her sister?’
This at least seemed to pass the test.
‘Yes,’ Kingdom replied cautiously.
‘And spent some time in an institution?’
‘She was a voluntary resident at one of the hospitals where I act as a consultant.’
‘She's been your patient since then?’
‘Yes.’
‘The circumstances of her sister's death must have been very upsetting, but was there anything else which —’
Kingdom held up his hand.
‘No good, Mr Barnett.
Facts I can supply.
Clinical details I cannot.’
Harry leaned back in the chair.
His headache was perceptibly worse.
‘There wasn't much point agreeing to see me, was there?’ he said wearily.
‘I wouldn't say that.
I was grateful for the information you conveyed regarding Heather's reading matter on Rhodes.
I wanted to thank you.
It may be highly significant.’
‘But you can't tell me how?’
‘I'm afraid not.’
‘Nor whether it might indicate she'd met somebody on Rhodes she was frightened of?’
The same objection applies.’
‘Then I'm wasting my breath.’
‘Not necessarily.’
The tone of Kingdom's voice had altered.
Harry was no longer looking at him, but felt sure he had leaned forward across his desk, as if their discussion were only now taking the desired direction.
‘After all, I am very worried about Heather.
And you were the last person to see her.
The Hippocratic oath doesn't apply to you, Mr Barnett.
You could be as frank as you wanted with be.’
‘Frank?
What about?’
‘Oh, your feelings about Heather.
Your assessment of her character.
What you hoped for from your friendship with her.’
‘Would that help?’
‘It might.’
When you did not see the scrupulous, disinterested face of Dr peter Kingdom, his words had a soothing, almost seductive quality.
Was this, Harry wondered, the key to psychoanalysis: not so much interrogation as mental massage?
‘It was obvious Heather had been unwell, but she seemed almost completely better.
Perhaps that was the effect of Rhodes as much as anything else.
I liked her from the start.’
‘In what way did you like her?’
How to answer?
Harry stared up at the ceiling and followed with his eye the pattern of the coving.
‘We just hit it off together,’ he replied lamely.
‘Allowing for the generation gap, we found we had a surprising amount in common.
Both of us are misfits, really, aren't we?’
‘Are you?’
‘Oh yes.
Coming home's taught me that.
I've no family apart from my mother, no job, no money, no property, no prospects.
As far as I can see, England doesn't welcome a prodigal son like me.’
‘That sounds rather like self-pity.’
‘It is, I suppose.
But when nobody else feels sorry for you, you tend to feel sorry for yourself, don't you?’
‘Excluded from society, you mean? passed over by change?
Starved of sympathy?’
The diagnosis was all too succinct.
‘Yes,’ Harry murmured.
‘Do you think Heather felt the same way?’
‘You tell me.’
‘You know I can't do that.’
The upper branches of a plane tree were visible through the window, swaying faintly in a gentle breeze.
They looked proud and mournful to Harry's eye, burdened with too much memory.
He wondered if Heather, sitting in the same chair and gazing at the same view, had somehow bequeathed to him this reaction, or if it were entirely his own, a product of the self-pity Kingdom had identified.
In the end, however, the sensation that Heather had been and felt this way before him was overriding.
When he spoke, it was almost as if she had put the words in his mouth.
‘It seemed to me  she'd been worn down by leading a life she wasn't fitted for.
She'd been required to be beautiful and talented and independent, but she hadn't wanted to be any of those things.
The result was a family who didn't understand her, a career that didn't satisfy her and a generation that didn't accept her.’
‘But you did?’
‘I think so, yes.
At least, I tried to.’
‘And did she let you?’
This was one question which Harry could not hope to answer truthfully.
His insights into Heather's character had followed, not preceded, her disappearance.
To admit as much would be to admit he had been as negligent of her difficulties as anyone else.
Therefore he lied.
‘I'm not sure what you mean.’
‘Then let us approach the subject from a different direction.
Heather was due to return to this country within days of your visit to Profitis Bias, wasn't she?’
‘Yes.’
‘Was she looking forward to leaving Rhodes?’
‘No, I don't think she was.’
Then why was she going to leave?’
‘All holidays have to end, don't they?
Besides, it was expected of her.’
‘By her unsympathetic family and friends in England, you mean?’
The drift of their exchanges had begun to disturb Harry.
He did not know where they were heading, but already it was clear the destination would not be of his choosing.
‘Er…yes,’ he replied hesitantly.
‘Did you want her to leave?’
‘No, certainly not.’
‘In fact, you wanted her to remain?’
‘Well…yes, of course.’
‘You both wanted her to stay on Rhodes, but neither of you felt able to admit it: is that what you're saying?’
It would have been more accurate to say he preferred that version of events to any other, but one lie had committed him now to several distortions.
‘Yes, I suppose it is.’
‘So, by preventing Heather from leaving, you would have been acting in her best interests as well as yours?’
‘I'm sorry?’
‘And the trip to Profitis Bias was your last chance to make her see reason, wasn't it?’
Heather's receding figure, dwindling as it climbed the pine-bound slope, twitched once more on the invisible line that trailed between them.
Harry felt stiflingly hot, choking almost, as he loosened his collar.
He knew he had done nothing, knew beyond suggestion's reach that he had been innocent of action as well as intention.
And yet, and yet….
Ever since his dream of Heather that last night in Lindos, ever since those images of Aphrodite and Silenus had been planted in his mind, knowledge, even certainty, had not been enough.
‘What went wrong, Harry?
Was there a misunderstanding?
A struggle?
A Panic?’
Turn and look.
You cannot run yet.
Where she has fallen.
Face averted, thank God, flaxen hair blown across the glimpse you might have had of her frozen expression.
Her white, goose-pimpled body.
Left leg straight, foot still braced against the ground, heel raised, toes gouged into the litter of leaves as if scrabbling for a hold.
Right leg bent double, knee red from impact, a scatter of dark soil across her calf, as if she had been trying to run even as she fell.
The image held, precise and petrified: the mound of her hip, the curve of her stomach, the arm resting, its unavailing fist closed around a handful of cold, cloying earth.
Harry could not move, could not speak, could not judge for this suspended moment whether what he saw was recollected or imagined.
‘What happened, Harry?
You can tell me.’
Kingdom's words were like harsh daylight flooding into a photographer's dark-room.
The Picture that had so nearly secured its hold faded from the refracting blankness in the instant it took Harry to realize what it was that Kingdom wanted from him.
Something most of his patients gave willingly: a confession.
But, in this case, a confession to murder.
‘You think I killed her?’ he said numbly.
‘Well, if you did —’
‘It won't go any further, is that it?’
Suddenly, Harry was angry.
How dare this wheedling, simpering doctor set out to trap him?
If you think I came here to ease my conscience, you're wrong.’
‘Am I?
Why did you come, then?’
‘I told you: I'm trying to find Heather.
And all everybody else seems to be doing is trying to stop me.’
‘I'm not trying to stop you.’
‘Aren't you?
Your professional reticence is a Pretty effective obstacle, isn't it?’
‘I've explained to you —’
‘Or is it your conscience that needs easing?’
Stung by his susceptibility to Kingdom's line of questioning, Harry fought back with the only weapon at his disposal: knowledge the other man could not be aware he possessed.
‘You took Heather to dinner at the Skein of Geese in Haslemere on the tenth of September, didn't you, Doctor?’
‘How did you —’
‘Were there any other candlelit evenings?
Any other discreet little out-of-town excursions?
You asked me in what way I liked her.
Well in what way did you like her, Doctor?’
‘I won't be spoken to like this.’
Kingdom jumped to his feet.
The  mask of professional reserve was down now, revealing the average short-tempered human beneath.
‘Or is that another question you think Heather might not want you to answer?’
Harry too rose from his chair, determined to allow Kingdom no further advantage.
‘I won't be interrogated by you, Mr Barnett.’
Kingdom brought the flat of his hand down heavily on the desktop.
‘I won't have it, do you hear?’
That was it.
The exact phrase, tied to the same blustering expression, the same explosion of unnecessary anger.
It sought and found in Harry's memory the niggling familiarity he had already sensed.
He dragged it to the surface of his thoughts.
And brought with it a precise and sharply-etched recollection that required no effort of the imagination to build or bolster.
For this was reality, as durable as it was crucial, as incontrovertible as it was incomprehensible.
Lindos: Sunday the sixth of November.
High blue skies above a fragment of one of Harry's last carefree days, when Profitis Ilias and Heather's disappearance lay in wait but unforeseen, nearly a week in the future.
It had been a day of rare pleasure for Harry, climaxed by lunch with Heather at the villa.
Now, having Passed the late afternoon imbibing gently at the Taverna Silenou, and feeling unusually tolerant of the rash of visitors the sabbath always brought to Lindos, he was picking a dawdling path back along one of the town's winding cobbled alleys, squinting against the strength of the sun.
As he ambled past Papaioannou's trinket shop, he was amused to hear an English tourist resisting the proprietor's notoriously persistent sales technique.
Glancing in, he saw a tall, flustered figure turning away in disgust from the counter.
He was, perhaps, a little too smartly dressed for a holidaymaker, but the Point he was making was clear enough.
‘I won't have it, do you hear?’
He brushed against Harry as he emerged from the shop, but uttered no apology, as if he was too irritated to have noticed.
Then he hurried away towards the main square.
Harry, for his part, exchanged a knowing smile with Papaioannou, then went on in the direction of the village.
Within twenty yards, he had forgotten the incident.
Nor would he ever have remembered it, had he not met the man again, a long way from Lindos.
‘I won't have it, do you hear?’
Kingdom had said much else besides that, and had concluded by asking Harry to leave the premises at once, but the echoes of one repeated phrase were all that filled Harry's head as he moved distractedly towards the door.
Dr Peter Kingdom was the man who had stormed past Harry out of Papaioannou's shop in Lindos five days before Heather's  disappearance.
Five short days.
‘A meeting at a particular place, which has been expected beforehand, amounts in fact to a rendezvous.’
It was a phrase from the very page she had been reading.
A meeting misinterpreted, a warning ignored, a danger defied.
He had thought it might be so and now he had the Proof.
Kingdom on Rhodes, where he had no reason to be, where he had no cause to fear he would be recognized, far less remembered.
But Harry had seen him.
He had been looking for the omen Heather might have nerved herself to disregard.
And now he had found it.
TWENTY-EIGHT
Two trains had come and gone on the northbound platform of the Bakerloo line at Marylebone tube station, but Harry had boarded neither.
The rush-hour crowds had thinned and he was alone now on the bench, but in no hurry to depart.
The black tunnel mouths, the stale warm air, the distant wail of a saxophone: these had become sensations that scarcely penetrated the borders of his awareness.
His mind was fixed elsewhere, struggling to piece together the fragments of an event he had participated in but not understood.
He knew it was a hopeless task — like assembling a jig-saw puzzle without the picture to serve as a guide — but still he could not abandon it.
The Heather he had known on Rhodes was an uncomplicated and instantly likeable young woman: a little gauche perhaps, a little unsure of herself, but essentially only what she might be expected to be.
Now he saw it had all been a sham.
Either he had been pitifully unobservant or she had been expertly deceitful.
There had been secrets, fears, dangers and delusions filling her every thought.
Her dead sister.
Her family.
Her psychiatrist.
The Tyrrell Society.
The bombing of Dysart's yacht.
The past.
The present.
The future.
And the ninth photograph she had taken was of a school.
Harry drew the wallet from his pocket and leafed through the pictures until he found it.
It was where Jack Cornelius taught.
Of that there could be no doubt.
It was where she had gone after visiting the Skein of Geese.
It was where he would have gone in her shoes.
It was the logical next step.
But the next step along a road leading where?
Profitis Ilias.
That was all he knew.
If only he had paid more attention when he had had the chance.
If only his head did not ache so badly that thought seemed driven out by the throbbing.
If only —
‘Mr Barnett!’ trilled a voice next to him.
‘What are you doing here?’
He thrust the photographs back into his pocket and jerked round.
Beside him on the bench sat Kingdom's secretary, clad in raincoat and headscarf.
She was smiling brightly, but her eyes retained a solemnity that was strangely intimidating.
In the instant before his failure to reply became conspicuous, it occurred to him that he had never met anybody whose natural gaze was so wide-eyed and unblinking, so direct yet unrevealing.
‘You left the surgery nearly an hour ago.
I'm surprised you're not well on your way.
Didn't you say you live in Swindon?’
‘Did I?
Well yes, I do, but —’
‘So you're making for Paddington?’
‘Er…yes.
‘Then we'll be travelling together for a couple of stops.
Here's the train.’
A train had indeed arrived.
It burst out of the tunnel in a gale of hot air and shuddered to a halt.
Harry obediently followed Miss Labrooy aboard and sat down opposite her.
A glance at some of their fellow-passengers suggested to his mind several reasons why she should be glad of a companion.
Every day, presumably, she journeyed through this worm-hole of noise and filth from one of the unlovely suburbs listed on the route plan above her head to type letters and answer the telephone for Dr peter Kingdom.
She must know as much of his patients' secrets as he did himself.
‘I couldn't help noticing,’ said Miss Labrooy as the train lurched into motion, ‘that Dr Kingdom seemed rather upset after you left.
I do hope there wasn't a disagreement.’
Harry forced a smile.
‘Let's say a difference of emphasis.
I think finding Heather is more  important than observing confidentiality.
Your boss doesn't.’
‘I thought that might be the problem.
Dr Kingdom really is in a difficult position, you know.’
‘So am I, as it happens.
I'm being accused of things I didn't do — and I'm missing a friend.’
‘You mean Heather?’
‘Yes, Miss Labrooy, I mean Heather.’
The train vibrated to a standstill at Edgware Road.
During the curious lull that followed, in which nobody seemed to get on or off, Miss Labrooy leaned forward in her seat and said: ‘Do you know why I decided to help you when you came to the surgery last week, Mr Barnett?
Because you spoke about Heather in the present tense, as if you genuinely believe she's still alive.’
‘I do.’
The train started.
‘I hope you're right.
Heather was — is — a friend of mine too.’
‘Really?’
‘She gave me some help when I badly needed it.
I'm not likely to forget her kindness to me, so if there's any way I can help her now….’
Hope flared in Harry.
The gratitude Miss Labrooy owed Heather might outweigh her loyalty to Kingdom.
‘Anything you can tell me might be helpful,’ he said cautiously.
‘For instance, how did Dr Kingdom react to the news of her disappearance?’
‘He was very concerned.
Of course, I didn't see him until some days afterwards, so I can't really —’
‘What do you mean —‘some days afterwards’?’
‘Well, he was in Switzerland at the time.
He didn't get back until…on, it must have been Tuesday of the following week.’
‘Switzerland?’
‘He's a special consultant at the Versorelli Institute in Geneva, which specializes in cases others have given up as hopeless.
His work often takes him there.’
‘How long did he spend there on that occasion?’
‘I'm not sure I can —’
‘You said you wanted to help.’
The train had stopped again.
They were at Paddington.
But Harry made no move.
‘This is your station, Mr Barnett.’
‘It doesn't matter.
I'll overrun.’
She leaned still further forward and lowered her voice.
‘I'm not sure Dr Kingdom would want me to discuss his work with you.
You must see how delicate my position is.’
‘What about Heather, Miss Labrooy?’
Harry sensed that very little pressure would be required to overcome her scruples.
‘Mightn't her position be even more delicate?’
The doors hissed shut and the train began to move.
‘It might be, yes.’
Miss Labrooy's struggle with her conscience was visible in her face.
‘What do you want to know?’
‘The duration of Dr Kingdom's visit to Geneva.’
There was a further moment of hesitation, then she said: 'He flew to Geneva on Friday the fourth of November and returned on Monday the fourteenth.’
Harry could scarcely suppress a smile.
It was the confirmation he needed.
‘Is that the normal length of time he goes for?’
‘It's usually less.’
‘And how do you know he went to Geneva?’
‘I booked the tickets for him.’
Miss Labrooy frowned in puzzlement.
‘And he telephoned me a couple of times that week from the Institute.’
It did not matter, of course.
Harry had never really expected to be told anything different.
Geneva on the fourth.
Rhodes on the sixth.
It was a demanding itinerary, but by no means an impossible one.
The crucial question was: where had he been on the eleventh?
‘Any idea as to the days on which he telephoned?’
‘Monday, I think…and Wednesday.’
So: there had been no contact on the day of their visit to Profitis Ilias.
Not that it would have proved anything if there had been.
A man could say he was telephoning from a clinic in Geneva and actually be in a hotel on Rhodes.
It was all feasible enough.
Only the purpose remained obscure.
They rattled to a halt and Miss Labrooy's brown, far-seeing eyes engaged Harry's in earnest scrutiny.
‘Why are you questioning me about Dr Kingdom's movements, Mr Barnett?’
‘Because my impression is that he's using the privacy of the consulting room to hide something.
And what's more’— he decided to risk a wild guess as the train started again —‘I think you know he is.’
Her stare would not release him.
It held him in an interval of assessment more potent than the silence that accompanied it.
What he was asking her to do required a degree of trust that he had too little time to earn.
The train pulled into Maida Vale.
And pulled out again.
And then she spoke.
‘Heather's problem was that she didn't feel she belonged, Mr Barnett.
Belonged, that is, in the family she was born to and the world she moved in.’
‘I see you really do know her.’
Miss Labrooy smiled.
‘Always that stubborn present tense.
Your optimism is admirable, Mr Barnett, the more so since pessimism is, I suspect, your natural mood.
An Englishman exiled in his homeland.
Is that not your  condition ?’
‘I suppose it is, yes.’
‘It is mine also, in a sense.
I am Sri Lankan by birth, but English by upbringing.
My mother was the daughter of an English officer in the Indian police, who fell in love with a humble clerk in Jaffna and had the temerity to marry him.
The offspring of such a union are never quite accepted — on either side of the racial divide.
So, you see, neither of us feels at home here — but it is our home nonetheless.
Perhaps that is why Heather felt more at ease with the likes of you and I than with her family and the friends they chose for her.’
The train stopped at Kilburn park and the last passenger within earshot disembarked.
Harry wondered what it was Heather had done for Miss Labrooy, but felt glad, on the whole, that he did not know.
It was enough to have discovered one true mutual friend whose testimony could be relied upon.
As the train accelerated out of the station, she said what he wanted to hear.
‘You are right, Mr Barnett.
Dr Kingdom is hiding something, though I am not sure he is aware that he is.
Certainly Heather did not realize what it was.
Only to me, who knew them both, was it  obvious.
Heather entered Challenbrooke Hospital near Maidenhead as a voluntary patient in November of last year.
Dr Kingdom was the consultant who took charge of her case.
When she was discharged in March of this year, he continued to see her regularly, in order to monitor her recovery.
As the months passed, it became clear to me, however, that he was doing something else as well.’
‘Which was?’
The train was running in the open now, the blackness beyond its windows relieved by distant amber lights which seemed to track their progress like the eyes of forest-dwelling creatures fixed on a lonely wayfarer.
‘He was falling in love with her, Mr Barnett.
Slowly but surely, he was becoming obsessed with her.
It is always a danger for doctors, I suppose.
Their relations with patients must be intimate yet impersonal, trusting yet guarded.
The balance is a difficult one to strike, the more so when a thorough knowledge of the patient's mind as well as her body is required.
I cannot say what it was in Heather that Dr Kingdom found so enthralling.
The mystery of what one person finds fascinating in another has, after all, defeated the finest philosophers.
But there is no doubt in my mind that his attitude to her became increasingly unprofessional in the course of the spring and summer.’
‘Is Dr Kingdom married?’
‘No.
He lives alone.
Many would regard him, I think, as an eligible bachelor.
Highly eligible, if it comes to that.
There would have been nothing improper in his paying court to Heather, had she not been his patient.
Indeed, the fact that he did not refer her to a different psychiatrist convinced me for a long time that I had misconstrued the situation.
I have worked for him for more than three years and have come to admire him both as a doctor and a man.
Ethically, he had always been above reproach.
That is why his conduct with regard to Heather was so difficult to understand and why, in the end, I concluded that he was in the grip of an obsession he was powerless to resist.’
Another stop.
Queen's Park.
A gangling youth with personal stereo and the thickest-soled baseball boots Harry had ever seen fell into the adjacent seat and began slapping his knee in time to the music only he could hear.
The train doors lingered open to the musty night air, encouraging Harry to sink his voice to a whisper as he said: ‘Do you have any real evidence for this, Miss Labrooy?’
‘I have the evidence of my own senses.
Dr Kingdom became increasingly preoccupied and distracted, brooding, I imagine, on the conflict between heart and duty.
Heather did not realize what was happening, but I did, and it saddened me to see it.’
‘It's only your opinion though, isn't it — only your subjective assessment?’
‘Not quite.’
The doors closed, re-opened, then closed again.
‘There  is rather more to it than that.’
With a plunging lurch, the train started.
‘My suspicions were confirmed when Dr Kingdom stopped giving me material for Heather's file.
I generally type all his notes, reports and correspondence, but, during the summer, he took to typing such items which related to Heather himself.’
‘What explanation did he give?’
‘None.
Nor did I feel able to ask for one.
Heather and I were on friendly terms by then.
We often lunched together after her weekly consultation.
Dr Kingdom could have cited that as justification for keeping the material back.
All the patients’ files are kept under lock and key in his office, so I only see what I am asked to type.’
‘But I don't understand.
What would have been the point of keeping the contents of Heather's file secret?’
‘You should know the answer to that, Mr Barnett.
You had a month to become acquainted with her on Rhodes.
Isn't it obvious?’
She glanced out of the window as they drew into Kensal Green station.
‘We've come to the parting of the ways.
This is my stop.’
‘But we can't leave it there.’
Miss Labrooy did not reply.
Instead, she rose smartly from her seat and stepped out through the doors as they opened.
Harry hurried out behind her, heard her shoes clicking with angry swiftness on the platform, wondered what he had done to annoy her — was he too obtuse, too inquisitive?— and was about to call after her when she pulled up abruptly and turned to face him.
In the dim light, he could see her lower lip trembling slightly, as if resolution had suddenly failed her.
‘What's wrong?’
‘I may have said too much.
I may have abused the trust Dr Kingdom placed in me.’
‘I didn't force you to say anything.’
‘No.
You didn't.’
‘But now you have….’
‘I can't just stop: is that it?
You're right, of course, but it all depends….’
‘On what?’
‘On what really happened at Profitis Ilias on the eleventh of November.
I know what the newspapers say — and I don't believe them.
But what do you say, Mr Barnett?
What's your version of events?’
‘I don't know what happened.
If I did —’
‘But you were there.
You were with her in the days and weeks that led up to it.
Only you can tell me what I need to know.
Only you can help me to be sure.
Will you?’
At last Harry understood what she wanted of him.
Since returning to England, he had searched in vain for somebody who was, like him, a true friend of Heather Mallender.
Little had he thought to find one where now he had.
Suspicion had been his watchword and perhaps  Miss Labrooy's as well.
Now they were obliged to abandon that in favour of something far riskier but potentially more rewarding.
For Heather's sake, they had to trust each other.
‘Tell me every detail, Harry.
Re-live every moment of those last days you spent with Heather.
Then maybe I'll know whether my fears have any substance.’
They walked slowly away from the station through a maze of dingy terraced streets.
Pounding music in thin-curtained rooms.
Cars propped up on bricks.
Cats and who knew what else scrabbling through piled rubbish in overgrown front gardens.
Boarded windows.
Blocked-up doorways.
Dereliction.
Decrepitude.
Decay.
Halfway along improbably named Foxglove Road, where darkness seemed a mercy and nobody, felt Harry, deserved to live, Zohra Labrooy turned a key in a wobbly lock and welcomed Harry to her home.
A narrow passage, flickeringly lit.
Dodgy wiring, thought Harry: typical of the neighbourhood, no doubt.
To their left, a door stood open by about six inches, revealing a cluttered sitting room.
In a vast and threadbare armchair, surrounded by brass and ivory knick-knacks, draped in a voluminous shawl, three-bar electric fire trained on her feet, sat an old woman, breathing wheezily and staring with obvious relief at Zohra.
She had the sad and deflated appearance of somebody who had once lived life to the full but now had only the memories of such times to sustain her — like a galleon whose sails sag limply round the masts where once they have billowed majestically.
‘It's me, Mrs Tandy,’ said Zohra, leaning into the room.
‘With a friend.’
‘So I see.’
The old lady smiled at Harry like a dowager duchess greeting her granddaughter's suitor.
After a few seconds of awkward introductions, Zohra excused herself with a promise to be down for cocoa at the usual time, then led Harry upstairs.
‘Mrs Tandy remembers Kensal Green when it was a desirable area,’ she explained as they reached her flat.
‘Apart from an occasional tendency to treat me like the ayah she had in India as a child, she's the perfect landlady.’
Harry was taken aback by Miss Labrooy's flat.
His prejudiced expectations of orientalism were confounded by restrained furnishings which could have been chosen by any Home Counties newly-wed and an offer not of tea but of gin.
Seated beneath a standard lamp, glass in hand, impressionist art on the wall and thick floor-length curtains closed against the night, he found it possible to believe he was almost anywhere but where he really was.
Profitis Ilias, for instance.
Zohra Labrooy was the ideal audience for reminiscence or confession.
Neither impatient nor inattentive, she had a positive gift for remaining still and alert, her large brown  eyes fixed upon him as he reconstructed those distant events, willing him to remember and recall every incident, however minor, every remark, however trivial.
He kept nothing back.
Nothing, that is, of what he could definitely state.
Only his sighting of Kingdom in Lindos five days before Heather's disappearance did he withhold: he did not yet want to test Zohra's loyalty too severely.
When he had finished, she said nothing for more than a minute, but continued to stare at him, as if still seeking the assurance she had hoped his account would supply.
‘Well?’ he said at last.
She sighed heavily.
‘It is as I feared.
Not so simple.
Not so simple at all.’
‘Did you think it would be?’
‘When I last saw Heather, anybody less in need of psychiatric treatment it would have been hard to imagine.
Calm, purposeful and entirely self-possessed: so she seemed to me.’
‘Yet she was still seeing Dr Kingdom.’
‘Yes.
I thought that was why he began to type his own notes, you see.
I even hinted at it to Heather.
Because she had recovered completely, I mean, so completely that she no longer required Dr Kingdom's services as a counsellor.
His part in her life was over, but I don't think he could accept that it was.
I believe he continued to treat her long after he needed to, that he misled her into believing such treatment was necessary and that he faked his file notes accordingly.’
Harry let out a long breath.
It could be true, of course, and there was more to support the idea than Zohra knew.
But if it was, and if Kingdom had come to Rhodes with some sinister intent — to lure Heather away, to abduct her, to seduce her — what of the photographs?
They became a wild goose chase after an obsession of Heather's very own, which, all else apart, cast doubt on Zohra's confidence in her mental stability.
Moreover, where — aside from Harry's unsubstantiated sighting — was the hard evidence to support such a contention?
And where, assuming it to be well-founded, was Heather?
‘I have said nothing because nobody would believe me if I did, because a doctor's word would always be taken against his secretary's, and because….’
‘Yes?’
‘Because I may be wrong.
Even if Dr Kingdom did feel more for Heather than a doctor should for his patient, it doesn't mean that had anything to do with her disappearance.’
‘But he was out of the country at the time.’
‘In Switzerland — a long way from Rhodes.’
Now was the time to tell her.
He would need her help if they were  to take the matter further.
She had to know.
‘Not so very far.
He left for Geneva, you said, on Friday the fourth of November.
I saw him in Lindos on Sunday the sixth.’
He read in her face the surprise and shock that a suspicion confirmed can sometimes bring.
‘A chance encounter, that's all.
Not one he'd remember.
Not one I'd have remembered, but for his losing his temper with me this afternoon.
He was angry that day, too, you see.
It was his anger I recognized.’
Zohra Labrooy sat quite still, her face a mask of frozen reaction.
She might be frightened, Harry supposed, by the discovery that her frail and hesitant theory had substance after all.
She reached out for her glass and swallowed most of the contents at a gulp.
‘If he told you he was in Geneva throughout his absence, he was lying.’
‘He did tell me that.’
Her voice sounded numb, as if she had only now abandoned the hope that her employer was more misjudged than misguided.
‘His phone calls to you may not even have been made from Geneva.’
‘They may not.’
‘He could have remained on Rhodes until the eleventh.
He could have met Heather on Profitis Ilias — by agreement or by surprise.’
‘He could have, yes.’
‘That could have been the meeting she foresaw — or expected.
The meeting whose dangers she tried to reason away by recourse to Freud.’
‘As you say, Harry — it could well have been.’
She nodded faintly, passed a nervous tongue along her lips, then looked at him intently.
‘But there's not a shred of proof, is there?’
‘None,’ he responded bleakly.
Another heavy sigh, this time of courage being summoned.
‘I may be able to obtain some proof.
What then?’
‘What proof did you have in mind?’
‘I know several members of staff at the Versorelli Institute quite well.
My opposite numbers, you understand.
I could ask them for details of Dr Kingdom's visit in November.
I could say he had lost some documents, needed the dates and times of his attendance — patients visited, doctors consulted and so forth— to complete his records.
There's no reason why they should think such a request odd — or even unusual.’
She frowned in anticipation of what would be entailed.
‘They wouldn't check with him, I'm sure.
They'd treat my questions as entirely innocent and provide the answers without the slightest difficulty.’
‘You'd be prepared to do that?’
‘If there's no other way, yes.’
And there was no other way.
The glance they exchanged acknowledged as much.
‘How long do you think it would take?’
‘I don't know.
A few days.
It's a question of the right opportunity presenting itself.’
A small silence was filled by mutual contemplation of the step they were about to take.
Both knew it would not end with tricking information out of the Versorelli Institute.
‘It'll be risky,’ said Harry, noticing as he did so how his choice of tense had changed from the conditional to the future.
‘If Kingdom finds out —’
There was nobility as well as determination in the gaze with which she cut him short.
‘What choice do I have, Harry?
Heather is my friend as well as yours.
If Dr Kingdom has done anything to harm her…what choice do I really have?’
TWENTY-NINE
Harry woke with a violent start.
His sleep, he knew at once, must have been unusually deep, for he had no clear idea how long it had lasted nor where for that matter he was.
For several seconds, his brain refused to function, resisting all his efforts to impose the reassuring certainties of time and place.
He felt cold to the point of shivering, weak enough for standing to be out of the question.
He raised his trembling hand to his forehead and felt the dampness of sweat against his skin.
He tried to swallow, but there was pain waiting deep in his throat to defeat him.
And there was noise and motion as well, some rattling, juddering momentum of onward travel.
He raised his head cautiously and looked around.
He was in a tube train.
Of course he was in a tube train.
How could he have forgotten — even momentarily?
He was on his way back from Kensal Green to Paddington, on his way back from discovering in Zohra Labrooy at least one friend of Heather's who was prepared to be an ally of his.
as if to convince himself he had not imagined their encounter, he forced his mind to concentrate on what she had agreed to do.
She would elicit from her colleagues at the Versorelli Institute the exact itinerary Kingdom had followed there in November.
When he arrived.
When he left.
When he was absent for as long as a day.
And when she had gleaned every detail…why then they would have him, wouldn't they?
All Harry had to do was return to Swindon and await her word.
She had undertaken to contact him by the end of next week to report what progress she had made and he did not doubt she would do so, for she was a woman of her word.
Or so he thought.
But, then, what did he really know of her?
Heather had never spoken  of her friend Zohra Labrooy, or of any other friend come to that.
Yet friendship remained the only star to steer by.
Dysart was a friend.
So was Heather.
Maybe Zohra could become one as well.
The train was beginning to slow for the next station.
Suddenly, the hideous possibility occurred to Harry that he had slept past his stop and would have to retrace his route from some remote reach of the Bakerloo line.
His weariness rebelled against the prospect and he glanced across at the opposite window in search of some clue as to his whereabouts.
But what he saw was something altogether different.
The man in the seat opposite was thin, sallow-faced and raincoated.
His black hair, streaked with grey, was plastered across a bald scalp.
He was so ordinary as to be extraordinary, so obscure that only stealth could be his calling.
And his two small eyes, twinkling like a rodent's, were fixed on Harry.
Surely he could not be, but surely he was….
The man on the train at Reading.
In his hand, as final confirmation, was the same paperback book, on its cover a girl in black underwear, slumped dead across a couch, strangled with a scarf.
The train was braking hard now, but Harry could not think fast enough.
What was the probability — the unvarnished statistical likelihood — of such a coincidence?
Next to nothing, surely.
Surely to God.
With a sudden pang of remorse, he reproached himself for not telling Zohra about the warnings he had received, if warnings they were, about the messages he had decided to ignore, on her behalf as well as his own.
They were in the station now, reaching and passing the moment when deceleration made the blurred nameboards legible.
It was Warwick Avenue, the last stop before Paddington.
At least, thank God, they had not overshot.
What should he do?
Get off here?
Or remain to stare down the reflection of his own fear?
Even as he sensed his incapacity to make such a choice, it was made for him.
Incredibly, the man was leaving.
As Harry watched, he slipped the book into his pocket, rose and moved towards the door.
The speed at which the station lights flashed by was diminishing fast, like some faltering heliograph whose meaning Harry could not discern.
The man was standing by his left shoulder, waiting for the train to stop.
Harry had only to reach out his hand to restrain him, but movement seemed suddenly to have deserted him.
He remembered a newspaper article he had read about people waking on the operating table, paralysed by the anaesthetic, but aware of everything that was happening, conscious of pain but incapable of protest.
The train had nearly stopped, but only one thought filled his mind: how many warnings was he to be allowed?
How many chances did he have left?
The train squealed to halt.
The doors slid open.
But the man did  not move.
It was as if he were timing something, judging to a nicety some effect he wished to produce.
He looked down at Harry.
And spoke.
‘Kalinichta, kirie Barnett.’
Then he was gone.
Through the doors even as they began to close.
A lithe step out onto the platform, a turn of the heel and away.
Harry, galvanized by the words, sprang from his seat and lunged towards the door, but too late: an impenetrable barrier of glass and metal separated him from his quarry.
The train jolted into motion, throwing him against a steel upright.
He clung to it for support, crouched for a view, glimpsed a retreating figure on the dwindling platform, then was swallowed in the soot-plumed tunnel.
‘Goodnight, Mr Barnett.’
THIRTY
‘Influenza, Mrs Barnett.
Classic case.
Lot of it about.’
Doc Allsop's professional grin, broad and crumpled as a crushed melon, was much the same whether he were offering congratulations or consolations.
That much Harry remembered.
‘It's the mild weather, you know.
Makes the viruses breed like rabbits.
And vice versa, no doubt .’
The cheese-grater laugh was also dolefully familiar.
‘Resistance probably undermined by this hot climate you tell me he's been living in.
And the over-indulgence that generally goes with it.’
Over-indulgence?
If he did not feel so dreadful, Harry would tell the fellow just what he could do with his bedside wit.
What on earth, come to that, was the old fool still doing in general practice?
It was he who had inflicted an appendectomy of doubtful necessity on Harry forty-two years ago.
Good God, the man must be seventy if he was a day.
‘Rest.
Aspirin.
Whisky.
Lots of all three.
Should do the trick, eh?’
Doc Allsop lumbered towards the door, with Harry's mother close behind.
Good riddance, thought Harry.
Illnesses did not require names in his scheme of things: they were merely misfortunes to be endured.
Like irony, if it came to the point, of which there seemed at present a good deal to be borne.
His old bedroom, preserved as in a museum.
The wallpaper, the chair, the tiny desk, the narrow bed: all were exactly as they had always been.
Even the Commonweal School group photograph on the wall: September 1948, with Harry featured twice, having sprinted along the back while the camera tracked round, thus appearing with smile and combed hair at the extreme left and with smile and tousled hair at the extreme right.
Not very funny, then or now.
Strange to think, though, that time had passed even while the moving lens recorded that carefully assembled multitude.
Photographs usually sustained the illusion that time could briefly be halted, but in this case…
The front door slammed.
Allsop was gone, taking his tired homilies and pink placebos with him.
Harry propped himself up on one elbow and pulled open the top drawer of the bedside cabinet.
They were still there: the wallet of  photographs and the envelope containing three postcards.
They, at least, he had not imagined.
And his pocket diary.
He picked it up and turned to the address section at the back.
Zohra Labrooy, 78 Foxglove Road, Kensal Green.
01-986-4316.
After 6 p.m.
Some things, then, were more reliable than his own twin likenesses in the school photograph.
He dropped the diary into the drawer, closed it and fell back on the pillows.
She would be in touch.
She would prove him right.
But the man on the train?
Would he be in touch?
Perhaps he had been an illusion.
Perhaps Doc Allsop would have confirmed as much if Harry had asked him.
‘Hallucinations?
Entirely consistent with influenza, old chap.
Only to be expected.
Take two or three of these before meals and let me know if the symptoms don't clear up.’
Plodding footsteps on the stairs.
His mother was about to reappear.
He suspected she could have wished for nothing better than to have him confined to bed and reliant on her care.
It would only be for a few days, of course.
Then he would be up and about, able to apply himself to unfinished business.
He tugged at the sheet and closed his eyes, hoping she might think he was asleep.
But he hoped in vain.
‘Well, Harold?
You heard what Dr Allsop said.’
‘Yes, Mother.
Rest, aspirin, whisky.
Sounds like a good idea — apart from the aspirin.’
‘Rubbish.
The old fool doesn't know what he's talking about.’
‘Then why did you call him in?’
‘To confirm my diagnosis.
There's only one way to treat influenza — and strong drink isn't it.’
Her father had been a strict Baptist.
Harry thought he had a good deal to answer for.
‘What is?’
‘Why, beef-tea, of course.
I shall go down to Mr Sturch's straightaway.
‘Sturch has been in butchery about as long as Allsop has been in medicine, insofar, it occurred to Harry's mind, as there was any real difference between the trades.
‘But Mother —’
‘It's for your own good, Harold!’
He was too tired to argue.
‘Yes, Mother.’
At least he could sleep while she was away.
On the third day of his illness, Harry received his first visitor: Alan Dysart.
Harry's mother reacted to his arrival as if the Prince of Wales had called by unexpectedly.
If she remembered he was the same man whom her son had once employed, there was no way of  telling from the awed reception she gave him.
Harry decided that the embarrassment this caused him was a sign he was getting better.
As for Dysart, he simply pretended not to notice.
‘Laid up again, Harry?
You seem to be making a habit of it.’
He looked exactly as he had on the day of their last meeting, the day of his departure to the United States: calm yet concerned, sensitive yet restrained, the perfect model of the thinking politician.
Why Harry felt sorry for him he did not know.
It could have been the comfortless chair he was sitting in.
More likely it was the knowledge that, for all Dysart's manifest charm and proven ability, he had a wife who was at best an  adulteress , at worst a traitor; either Minter's dupe or his co-conspirator.
‘How did you hear I was ill?’
‘I didn't.
I got back from Washington on Friday.
This was my first opportunity to find out what progress you ‘d made.’
‘In looking for Heather, you mean?
‘Unless you've given it up.’
‘No.
I haven't given it up.’
How much to tell?
Dysart had been, over the years, as loyal a friend as any man could ask for.
The least he deserved in return was that Harry should tell him all he knew.
Besides, if he had been to Tyler's Hard, he would doubtless have recognized Harry from Morpurgo's account of a strange visitor the previous Saturday.
‘I've tried to retrace some of her movements.
She went to Tyler's Hard with Nigel Mossop, a colleague at Mallender Marine, on the twenty-eighth of August.
I went there myself last Sunday.
I hope you don't mind.’
‘Not at all.’
Dysart smiled.
‘Willy did mention it.
I was puzzled, I'll admit, but now I understand.
How did you know Heather had been there?’
The photographs were one secret Harry would not share.
‘She spoke of Mossop as a friend.
I knew him as well, of course , so I contacted him and he told me about the trip.’
‘I see.’
Dysart nodded, but how much he saw was not clear.
Nor did he ask the obvious questions which Harry would have found so difficult to answer.
Why had Mossop been so cooperative?
Why had Heather chosen him as a companion?
‘Did you speak to Mrs Diamond, Harry?’
‘Yes.’
‘Tell me what you made of her.’
Harry had largely forgotten the woman as soon as he had concluded that her complaint about Morpurgo smiling on the day of Clare Mallender's death was of no significance.
Yet Dysart's expression reminded him of something else she had said: that Dysart and Clare had been arguing immediately before the explosion; that  there had been friction between them for some time.
‘Good-hearted, I suppose, but a terrible gossip.’
‘Reliable?’
‘As a witness — not very.
Dysart smiled.
It was what he had wanted to hear.
They both knew what Mrs Diamond had said, but neither proposed to give it the status open discussion would confer.
After all, if Dysart had fallen out with Clare, he was not likely to have broadcast the fact after her death.
‘Mrs Diamond never liked Willy, I'm afraid,’ he said.
‘Some people simply cannot conquer their horror of disability.’
‘Cyril Ockleton told me how Morpurgo came to be disabled.’
‘Did he?’
‘Heather went to see him in Oxford on the third of September.
He drove her to Burford and showed her the site of the car crash.’
Dysart frowned.
‘Why should she be interested in that?’
‘I don't know.
I'm still trying to find out.’
Suddenly, Harry was gripped by a sneezing fit which dissolved into painful coughing.
At his signal, Dysart poured out a spoonful of linctus (obtained courtesy of the pharmacist, in the teeth of Doc Allsop's advice) and stood by while he swallowed it.
Slowly, the power of speech returned.
‘I really am sorry about this, Alan.
You'd better keep your distance.’
‘Don't worry.
Politicians have total immunity.
I just hope I'm not tiring you.
Your mother would never forgive me if I caused a relapse.
Where did you pick up this bug?’
‘I don't know.
I began to feel under the weather on Thursday morning after leaving Haslemere.
Heather went there on the tenth of September, you know, to see Rex Cunningham.’
‘What did she want with him?’
‘As far as I can see, she attached some significance to the fact that you, Morpurgo, Ockleton and Cunningham are all former members of the Tyrrell Society.
She'd obtained a Skein of Geese matchbook from somewhere.
Perhaps from her sister, because she knew you and Clare had dined there last year, shortly before….’
‘Shortly before Clare was killed in mistake for me.’
Dysart's voice sounded unusually grim as he finished Harry's sentence.
‘I took her there for a last relaxing evening before we threw ourselves into the election campaign.
As a matter of fact' — he frowned in concentration —‘I do recall her putting a matchbook in her handbag at one point and saying she would pass it on to Heather because she collected the things.
She made a joke of it, saying she had given Heather all the most exclusive matchbooks in her collection, that it was ironic how she'd become a slave to her sister's hobby.’
A flicker of recollected pleasure that swiftly turned to the pain of regret crossed his face.
‘But what of it?
I see Cyril Ockleton whenever I go back to Breakspear College.
He told me Willy was destitute.
I was in a position to give the poor fellow employment and accommodation.
As for Rex Cunningham, he runs a decent restaurant: where better to take Clare, since she was an Old Breakspearean as well?’
Something seemed suddenly to catch his eye: the Commonweal School group photograph on the wall above the desk.
Springing up, he took two steps across to it and peered at the glazed array of schoolboy faces.
‘You're in this, of course, Harry.
How old would you have been in — what does the caption say?— 1948?’
‘Thirteen.’
‘Aha.
Thirteen.
Let me see.’
A minute or so of scrutiny passed, then he said: 'Got you.
Far end.
Third row back.
Standing.’
‘What does my hair look like?’
‘Your hair?
All over the place.
Why?’
‘Well, look at the other end.’
A second later, Dysart chuckled in understanding of a forty-year-old schoolboy prank.
‘Very good, Harry.
Very good.
I recall some of the chaps doing the same at Oundle.’
‘But you didn't join in?’
‘No.’
He turned away from the photograph.
‘I don't think I'd have cared to be represented by two images in the same picture.
It would have seemed…eerie.
Like being tracked by your own ghost.
Like being….’
He laughed off the solemnity of the thought and returned to the chair.
‘Anyway, that photograph has as much bearing on our present difficulties as the Tyrrell Society.
I can't understand why Heather should have wanted to dig up such stuff.
The car crash.
The death of Ramsey Everett.
Old tragedies best forgotten.’
‘I can't understand it either, but she did.’
‘You say she went to the Skein of Geese on the tenth of September.
Did she dine there?’
‘Yes.’
‘Alone?’
‘No.
Dr Kingdom accompanied her.’
‘Did he?
Have you met Dr Kingdom yet, Harry?’
‘Yes.’
‘What's your opinion of him?’
‘Professionally cool and aloof, but surprisingly easy to rile.’
‘You think he's hiding something?’
‘I know he is.
You see, I recognized him.
From Rhodes.
He was in Lindos five days before Heather's disappearance.’
Whilst Harry recounted the circumstances of his brush with Kingdom at Papaioannou's trinket shop, Dysart listened attentively.
Then his gaze moved again to the Commonweal School group photograph.
‘You know, Harry, when I met Dr Kingdom, it seemed to me he was altogether too self-possessed to be true.
This proves the point.
He presents himself neatly combed to the world.
But you've caught him out — in a tousle-haired moment.’
A smile of grim satisfaction.
‘What are you going to do?’
‘He's supposed to have been at the Versorelli Institute in Geneva from the fourth to the fourteenth of November.
I'm in touch with someone who should be able to tell me exactly when he was at the Institute — and when he wasn't.’
‘You think they'll find he was absent on the eleventh as well as the sixth?’
‘It's a possibility.’
‘One visit to Heather on the spur of the moment could be innocent enough,’ Dysart said musingly.
‘Psychiatrist concerned for his ex-patient, that kind of thing.
There's nothing sinister in her not having mentioned it to you.
But if he was away from the Institute the day she disappeared….
That would be different.
If you do find that's the case, I'd like to know straightaway.’
His expression was unmistakeably serious.
‘Will you contact me in that event, Harry?
Wherever I am, I mean.
It could have very serious implications.’
‘Yes.
I will.’
Dysart had left the chair again, this time to stand by the window, gazing out at the view which had met Harry's bleary eyes every morning of his childhood.
The backyards and rear walls of the houses fronting on Bristol Street, with the distant roofs of the railway workshops looming behind them: a domestic vista of brick, slate, chimneypot and curling smoke, as irksomely familiar as it was strangely precious.
‘Have you found out anything else?’ said Dysart, without looking round.
‘One other thing, yes.’
One other thing he could admit to, at any rate.
What he felt most inclined to do — warn this man who was his best and oldest friend that his wife was not to be trusted — he had given his word he would not.
‘Have you been to the Skein of Geese since you took Clare there last year?’
‘No.’
‘Or spoken to Rex Cunningham?’
‘No.’
‘Then he won't have told you what he told Heather about the evening you dined there.’
Dysart turned round and stared enquiringly at Harry.
‘Which was?’
It seems he surprised Clare gazing lovingly at a photograph of a man whilst you were away from the table.
A man he recognized as a fellow member of the Tyrrell Society: Jack Cornelius.’
An upward twitch of the eyebrows was the only signal of surprise Dysart permitted himself.
‘Jack Cornelius?’
‘Yes.
I wondered if you'd introduced them.’
‘Well, they may have met through me, yes.
I've invited Jack to a few receptions which Clare would have attended, but even so….’
‘Heather seems to have taken it as a confirmation of her belief in the significance of the Tyrrell Society.’
Dysart frowned in puzzlement.
‘That's beyond me.
The Tyrrell Society was just one of a dozen drinking and dining clubs at Breakspear College twenty years ago.
It attracted people of similar views and backgrounds and it's no surprise — or shouldn't be — that such people still mix in the same circles now.
I suppose it's remotely possible Clare was romantically involved with Jack Cornelius, although it doesn't say much for my powers of observation that I was unaware of it, but it's equally possible Rex Cunningham has simply jumped to the wrong conclusion: he was ever one to do that.
Either way, what of it?
Clare was a free agent.
And if Heather thought there was something sinister about her relationship with Jack Cornelius — assuming there was a relationship — why did she never ask me if I knew anything about it?’
‘Because you were a member of the Tyrrell Society as well.’
‘Ah yes, of course.’
Dysart sat down on the end of the bed.
‘How do you account for Heather's obsession with a long forgotten student club, Harry?’
‘I don't, unless she thought the Tyrrell Society was somehow an unlucky influence.
Ramsey Everett.
The car crash.
Then her own sister.’
Dysart nodded, considered the point for a moment then said: ‘Some might say it was a sign she hadn't recovered as well as we'd hoped.’
‘Yes.
Some might say that.’
‘A more unlikely candidate for Clare's affections than Jack Cornelius….’
Dysart shook his head.
‘He's always struck me as something of a misogynist.
But perhaps even misogynists can kick over the traces.
That steely Irish charm of his would appeal to some women, I don't doubt.
Perhaps Clare was one of them.
It is possible.
Just possible.
I can't deny that.’
He looked up at Harry.
‘What do you think Heather did after Cunningham put this idea into her head?’
‘I imagine she confronted Jack Cornelius.’
‘And you propose to do the same?’
‘Yes.
Once I find out where he teaches.’
Dysart smiled.
‘Hurstdown Abbey, near Taunton.
It's a Roman Catholic boarding school attached to a Benedictine Monastery.
Very exclusive and very expensive.
Not quite Eton or Harrow with incense thrown in, but close to it.
Jack must have been there, oh, ten years or more.
He teaches history and coaches rugger: his two great passions.’
‘You know him well?’
‘I did do, certainly.
After leaving Oxford, he went back to Ireland to teach.
He was in Belfast when the Troubles began, then I heard he'd gone to Italy.
Next he cropped up at Hurstdown.
He lured me there a couple of years ago to talk to his sixth form group about the  Irish problem.
He seemed completely in his element, though all those monks flitting round the place rather gave me the creeps.
I thought it odd at the time that he should feel so at home there.’
‘Why?’
‘Because he'd been a novice monk himself once, in Ireland, before he went to Oxford.
He was older than the rest of us at Breakspear, you see, having tried for some years to make a go of a religious vocation before abandoning it in favour of teaching.
He always used to speak so bitterly about his experiences as a monk that it seemed bizarre to think of him working alongside them at Hurstdown.
But, then, time is a great healer, isn't it?’
In this case, Harry was far from sure that it was.
‘Yes.
Go and see him, Harry.
If Heather did track him down, we need to know what he told her.
I'd speak to him myself, but —’
Harry was convulsed by a second bout of sneezing.
This time, it did not dissolve into a coughing fit.
Dysart smiled at him sympathetically as he hurled a bundle of damp tissues into the bin by the bed and plucked a handful of replacements from their box.
‘I think it's time I let you get some rest.’
‘I'm all right, really.’
But Harry could tell by the blocked and croaking sound of his own voice that he was not.
‘When you are, see Jack Cornelius — and let me know what you learn about Dr Kingdom.
Meanwhile….’
Dysart moved across to the desk and stooped over it.
He had taken something from his jacket pocket and Harry could see that he was writing on it.
‘What are you doing?’
‘I know you insisted you didn't need any money, but I'm sure that isn't really the case.
I'm as interested in what you can discover about Heather's state of mind as you are yourself, so it's only fair I should contribute to your expenses.
The Skein of Geese doesn't come cheap, for a start….’
‘No, but —’
‘You have the time and I have the money, Harry.’
Dysart turned back from the desk smiling broadly.
‘So don't argue.’
He slipped a cheque under the base of the bedside lamp.
‘Besides, it comes with a condition attached, so don't think of it as a gift.’
‘What condition?’
‘As soon as you find out anything that suggests Heather is still alive, as soon as you learn where she might be or whether she's in any danger, contact me at once.
Is it a deal?’
It seemed the least Harry could promise.
‘Yes,’ he said wearily.
‘It's a deal.’
‘She may be relying on our efforts, you know, so we must be sure we don't let her down.’
‘I don't intend to.’
Harry looked for the first time at the cheque where it lay beside him, flattened by the base of the lamp.
A thousand pounds.
It was more than he needed, but not less than he could use.
What, it occurred to him, was the difference between accepting this contribution to his expenses and taking the kind of bribe Jonathan Minter had offered him?
Some would say none at all, but he knew it was not so.
A gift from Dysart was a gesture of friendship, from Minter an act of corruption.
‘As a parting thought, Harry.’
‘Yes?’
‘This photograph Rex Cunningham supposedly saw in Clare's possession: the one of Jack Cornelius.
Don't place too much store by such evidence.’
Dysart was standing, had he but known it, within inches of the pictures Heather had taken, the pictures on which Harry would rely if all else failed.
‘As you should know from your own experiences’— he glanced up at the framed portrait of Commonweal School staff and pupils, September 1948 —‘the notion that the camera never lies is a fallacy.
It doesn't set out to lie, of course, but it sometimes succeeds.
It sees everything — and understands nothing.’
He looked back at Harry and smiled.
‘So take my advice: don't believe everything it tells you.’
The day after Dysart's visit, Harry began to feel distinctly better.
By Tuesday, he was able to venture out of doors for the first time since arriving home, late and ailing, on Thursday night.
An expedition to the bar of the Glue pot convinced him that, apart from a hacking cough and a tendency to tire easily, he was very much his old self.
On Wednesday, he swallowed his pride, banked Dysart's cheque and purchased a car with most of what remained from the cash he had brought back from Rhodes.
His experiences at Barnchase Motors meant he was well aware how seriously to treat the sales patter at the Sapphire Garage, ‘Wiltshire's premier value-for-money used car outlet’.
A Vauxhall Viva resprayed in unspeakable tangerine to conceal a multitude of rusty sins and described as ‘a sound and reliable workhorse’ looked to his eye more like a duck very near death's door.
Still, for two hundred and fifty pounds he had no room for complaint.
He reckoned it would take him where he wanted to go — at least for a few weeks.
Returning to Falmouth Street in his new acquisition — and already encountering some resistance to engaging first gear — Harry listed in his mind the excellent reasons for buying a car.
Mobility.
Convenience.
Flexibility.
The following day he would underline all three by driving it to Hurstdown Abbey.
There was another reason, of course, but he was not prepared to admit even to himself that it had played any part in his decision.
In a car he would be safe from the man on the train and the messages he carried.
He would be rid of him at last.
But that, he was determined to believe, had nothing to do with the matter.
Nothing whatsoever.
THIRTY-ONE
Harry turned off the car engine and wound down the window.
Then he took the wallet of photographs from his pocket and leafed through them to the ninth picture in Heather's collection.
The match was perfect.
In miniature gloss-printed image and sparse grey winter-lit reality, Hurstdown Abbey lay before him.
He climbed from the car, slammed the door and leaned back against it, giving his imagination as well as his vision time to absorb the place and its setting.
The village of Hurstdown was a straggle of drab cottages either side of the main Taunton to Williton road.
A pub, a post office, a garage, a war memorial, a litter-choked horse trough and an Anglican parish church whose size and proportions were more suited to a Nonconformist chapel.
As a settlement, it was nothing.
And the reason was not far to seek.
Hurstdown Abbey, an arched and buttressed temple to Victorian Gothic, soared above the village in grand and lofty superiority, leaving all else to huddle at its feet in subjugation.
Around it were gathered the cloisters, quadrangles, halls, dormitories and playing fields of the school, stretching away up a gently sloping flank of the Quantock Hills.
Here, its high walls and castellations seemed somehow to declare, the temporal power of the Church was not a distant memory but a present-day reality.
Harry crossed the road, passed through an ancient arched gateway and started up the drive towards the school.
What he had judged from the photograph to be red-brick he saw now was deep red Quantock stone, used in the construction of the Abbey and all its surrounding buildings.
Its colouring, combined with the dismal weather, the heavy-handed architecture and the beech trees dotting the grounds, created an atmosphere by which he felt instantly oppressed.
It was  as if the whole weight of the Abbey's sombre traditions were bearing down upon his shoulders and he was shrinking beneath the load.
After a hundred yards or so, the drive divided, leading in one direction towards a classroom block, in the other fanning out into a courtyard where cars were parked either side of the main entrance.
Harry's original intention had been to approach Cornelius via a secretary or administrator.
He had timed his arrival for shortly after midday in the hope that lunchtime would find the staff free of commitments.
Now it came to the point, however, he sensed a reluctance within himself to confront any member of this self-important establishment on his own ground, far less his own terms.
He crossed the courtyard hesitantly, unsure what his next move should be.
Then he saw — or rather heard, for the clip of their boot-studs on the flagstones was what first caught his attention — a file of boys in football kit making their way along a covered path linking the courtyard to the playing fields that lay behind the school buildings.
As his route and theirs converged, Harry remembered that Dysart had said rugby was one of Cornelius's ‘two great passions’.
He doubted if these boys had been playing soccer — Hurstdown's sporting young gentlemen would surely scorn such a plebeian game — and, sure enough, the boy bringing up the rear, older and taller than the rest and evidently in charge, was clutching a rugby ball to his chest.
Stepping into his path, Harry enquired as innocently as he could if Mr Cornelius was anywhere to be found.
‘Yes, sir.
You'll find him on the practice pitch.’
Catching Harry's uncertain look, he added: ‘Wynne-Thomas will be happy to take you there.
Wynne-Thomas!’
Harry's guide was a small fair-haired lad whose purple-and-orange hooped shirt reached nearly to his knees.
He led the way along a series of paths, up assorted flights of steps and out across a seemingly limitless expanse of finely mown rugby and hockey pitches that climbed the hillside in stepped succession.
‘There's Mr Cornelius.’
Wynne-Thomas pointed towards two men standing together on the next pitch.
One was tall and grey-haired, thin but broad-shouldered, wearing a voluminous cricket sweater over baggy grey trousers.
The other was an overalled attendant of a line-marking machine, whose accuracy the pair seemed to be debating.
Wynne-Thomas presumably thought it unnecessary to say which of them was Jack Cornelius.
‘Will that be all, sir?’
‘Oh, yes.’
Harry could not help smiling at the boy's excessive politeness.
‘Thanks.’
He was tempted to add, but did not, ‘You can cut along now.’
Not that it mattered.
Wynne-Thomas cut along anyway.
As he moved towards the two men, Harry savoured the moments of secret observation that preceded their awareness of his presence.
Dysart had said Cornelius was older than his contemporaries at  Breakspear and this man did indeed look nearer fifty than forty, unruly iron-grey hair framing a gaunt high-boned face, the brow hooded enough and the nose sufficiently hooked to add a sinewy hint of predacity to his relaxed and smiling features.
Physically strong, Harry judged, and mentally agile: the Corinthian sportsman and the patrician academic, with some diabolical ingredient thrown in that curdled the mixture.
It was, in testimony to his alertness, Cornelius who saw him coming first.
He turned away from the other man and grinned crookedly in greeting.
Then, before Harry had even rehearsed an opening remark, he said: ‘You must be Harry Barnett.’
Instantly, the tables were turned.
Harry was suddenly the victim of the surprise he had hoped to exploit.
‘Yes, I am,’ he stumbled, ‘but —’
‘Alan Dysart phoned me a few days ago.’
Cornelius shook Harry by the hand.
His grip was firm and self-assured.
‘He warned me you'd be paying me a visit.’
The warmth and perfection of his enunciation were marred only by his faint Irish accent and the artificiality which it seemed to impose on his genial tone.
Harry sensed a harshness, an edge, a flinty ruthlessness buried beneath the practised charm.
‘I have an undeserved reputation for brusqueness, Mr Barnett.
I think Alan was hoping to ease your passage.’
Surely Dysart had never suggested he might do such a thing?
For the moment Harry could not be certain.
Perhaps illness had dulled his recollection.
‘Did he tell you why I'd be coming?’
‘You want to speak to me about Heather Mallender.’
No prevarication, then, and no evasion either.
‘I can spare you half an hour before my presence is called for in the refectory.
Why don t you come to my room?’
Without further ado, he started off towards the school buildings.
Harry fell in beside him, struggling to keep pace with his rapid strides.
‘I read about her disappearance, of course, and your part in it.
The episode has placed Alan in a difficult position.
The papers can't find anything in it to use against him, but, all the same, it leaves his career in something of a vacuum.’
Suddenly, Harry's increasing breathlessness sparked off a coughing bout.
He had the impression whilst he paused to recover himself that Cornelius was watching him intently, that his piercing gaze was sweeping over him in search of every weakness, every strength, every facet of his character that an opponent might need to know.
‘It sounds bad,’ Cornelius said drily, when the coughing had subsided.
‘I'm getting over flu,’ Harry panted.
‘Perhaps you should have given yourself longer.’
Harry looked at him then and thought he saw what it was that glimmered beneath the affable surface of his remarks.
Contempt, coursing like some seam of metal through his words and their meaning, the contempt  felt by one who knew his own powers for one who clearly did not.
‘It's always a mistake to overdo things, Mr Barnett, don't you agree?
To reach beyond one's grasp.’
Now, Harry was certain, Cornelius meant more than the length of time a middle-aged man should give himself to recover from influenza.
‘If you're ready, we'll carry on.’
They descended a flight of steps, entered a classroom block by a side-door and began to thread a route through corridors and passages busy with bustling knots of purple-blazered schoolboys.
Harry noticed in their faces, as they glanced at Cornelius, neither affection nor hostility, but something he would never have associated with the juvenile mind: awe.
To every humble last one of these boys, Jack Cornelius was either a devil or a god.
The realization bit into Harry's confidence that he could outwit such a man: who was he really fooling?
A broad staircase led down into a hushed and panelled hallway.
Here, it seemed, pupils were not permitted to stray.
The only faces that greeted them belonged to sundry dead abbots glaring down from dusky oil paintings.
Cornelius's striding progress carried them to a heavy oak door with the sign HEAD OF CAREERS fixed to it.
He opened it and stood back to let Harry enter ‘Head of Careers’ is an absurd title, isn't it?’he said.
‘as if I could in some way decide for those leaving us what they will go on to do.’
Harry remembered the expressions of the boys they had passed.
‘Perhaps they think you can.’
But Cornelius's only answer was a gnomic smile.
He was not to be drawn.
The room was large, furnished like the private study of a rich and cultured man: desk, chairs and bookcases in what looked like hand-tooled mahogany, a tapestry covering one wall, several ornately framed paintings, a chaise-longue, a couple of wingbacked armchairs.
The windows were tall and mullioned, looking out onto the courtyard Harry had crossed earlier, with the top panels stained purple and gold to match the colours of the school.
‘I generally have a glass of sherry before lunch,’ said Cornelius.
‘Will you join me?’
For all his loathing of sherry, Harry heard himself agreeing.
A drink was pressed into his hand, a chair held back and he found himself seated opposite Cornelius by the window, for all the world like some sixth-former seeking advice on whether to go for Oxbridge or the Guards.
‘Let me save you some time, Mr Barnett.
Heather Mallender visited me here on Sunday the eighteenth of September.
She wanted to know — as I suspect you do — what my relationship had been with her late sister.
I told her — as I am happy to tell you — that I had met Clare Mallender on three or four occasions, all of them in the company of other people.
Receptions to which Alan had invited me — and an educational conference which we both attended.
We were the  vaguest of acquaintances, nothing more.’
There was no false note in Cornelius's voice, but, all the same, Harry doubted every word.
‘Heather was as sceptical as you yourself appear.
Rex Cunningham had told her that he had seen Clare in possession of a photograph of me which had convinced him we were intimate friends.
Well, dear Rex was either lying or labouring under a misapprehension.
No such friendship existed.
I cannot say with absolute certainty that Clare Mallender did not possess a photograph of me, but I can say that there was no reason why she should have done.’
It was as simple as only a barefaced lie could be.
Yet it was also unchallengeable.
Cornelius was too accomplished a performer to let his smugness show, but it was palpable all the same: he could not be caught out.
Heather had made no headway and nor, Harry felt sure, would he.
‘You reject Rex Cunningham's claim?’ he said lamely.
‘No, Cornelius replied with a smile.
Rex is as capable of making an honest mistake as he is of lying.
I would not venture to say which he is doing in this case.’
‘Haven't you taken it up with him?’
‘Why should I?
He wouldn't change his mind, whatever I said.’
‘But if it isn't true —’
‘It isn't, believe me, Mr Barnett.
Besides….’
He cast a sidelong glance through the window, as if ruminating on a philosophical problem.
‘Besides, it occurred to me that Rex might be deliberately misleading Heather in order to prevent her discovering some connection between Clare and himself.’
The suggestion was preposterously unlikely, but that, Harry suspected, was just the point.
It declared as openly as Cornelius dared that he could invent a dozen different theories if he was obliged to, behind which the truth, whatever it was, could be concealed forever.
‘Is that all Heather wanted to know?’
Harry said, detecting as he spoke the strain of exasperation in his voice.
‘No.’
Cornelius signalled by a flicker of one eyebrow that he knew Harry had expected him to say the exact reverse.
‘She also asked me to recount for her the circumstances leading up to the car crash in May 1968 in which poor Willy Morpurgo suffered brain damage.’
Honesty, it seemed, was also a string in the expert liar's bow.
‘Are you familiar with that sad tale, Mr Barnett?’
‘Yes.
I am.’
Cornelius, the man who had suggested the ill-fated drive to Burford, the man who had stayed behind when the others started back to Oxford, sat before Harry, twenty years on, with a smile on his face that mixed candid reminiscence and flagrant duplicity.
According to Ockleton, he had become ‘as maudlin as only an Irishman in liquor can.’
But now, looking at the lined, self-knowing expression of this consummate dissembler, Harry found it easier to believe he had merely staged a performance, an expert and convincing charade that had achieved the desired result.
‘You were  very lucky that day, weren't you?’
Harry said hesitantly.
‘To miss the return journey, I mean.’
‘I was also drunk, Mr Barnett.
We Irish are renowned for both qualities.’
Drunk?
Harry had the impression this was one man who had never been drunk in his entire life.
He guarded his tongue and his thoughts too well to let  alcohol betray them.
‘Why do you suppose Heather wanted to know about such distant events?’
‘She claimed they might have some bearing on Clare's death.
Why such a bizarre notion should have entered her head I cannot imagine, but I did not like to disillusion her, so I told her what I could.
She thanked me for the information — and then she left.’
Had Heather really gone that quietly?
Cornelius's smile, reaching Harry across the grey pool of light that spread between them, glistened like the fly on a fisherman's line.
Harry would learn nothing, it implied, unless or until it was too late for him to profit by it.
Far too late.
‘You're an historian, I believe, Mr Cornelius.
Can't you conjecture why Heather should be so interested in this piece of ancient history?’
The smile broadened.
‘Which piece do you mean, Mr Barnett?
Walter Tyrrell?
The Burford Mutiny?
Or a simple car accident on the seventeenth of May 1968?’
Betrayal, the theme that had first entered Harry's head in Burford, recurred to his mind now as the link between all the widely spaced events that had borne down on Heather Mallender.
An arrow in the forest.
A lie on hallowed ground.
A push in the dark.
The laughter of drunken fools.
And of one who was wiser than the rest.
A country lane, wet after rain.
The squeal of rubber tyre and human terror.
But no skid marks.
No clue or sign or token.
Unless Heather had found one.
‘Actually,’ he said, commencing slowly what every contrary sense told him was a venture into dangerous territory, the piece of history I had in mind was a defenestration.
Not the famous one at Prague, but another, closer to our own time.’
A mirthless chuckle was Cornelius's admission that Harry had displayed more subtlety than expected.
‘Your grasp of history impresses me, Mr Barnett.
Perhaps you understand — as many do not — that the past is not only always with us, but is us, the cause and context of our every action.
What we do is prompted by what we believed a minute or a year or a century ago.
Wouldn't you agree?’
Anthony Sedley.
Prisoner.
Prisoner of the past.
Was he the reason Cornelius had lured them to Burford that day?
To point a moral?
Or betray a trust?
‘Yes.
I'd agree.’
‘Then perhaps you can assist me on a minor point of methodology?’
‘I'm sorry?’
‘What enabled you to be so certain Heather Mallender visited me here?’
‘It seemed likely —’
‘Not likelihood, certainty!’
Cornelius's voice was suddenly harsh, as if a pupil's essay had revealed a deficiency of logic.
‘You did not deduce that Heather Mallender came here.
You knew it for a fact.
That is obvious to me.
The question is: how did you know?’
Harry did not know what to say.
No lie would aid him in a contest with a master of the craft, but the truth, his only hope of gaining the upper hand, had to remain hidden.
He felt confused beneath Cornelius's unwavering stare, unsure whether he had not betrayed himself by patting his pocket to check if the photographs were still there.
Cornelius had no cause to suspect their existence, of course, yet — Suddenly, there was a tap at the door.
With a rush of relief, Harry looked round to see a boy — senior, to judge by his appearance — peering nervously into the room.
‘Oh, excuse me, sir.
I thought you'd be alone.’
‘What is it, Appleby?’
‘Well, I was hoping to have a word with you about this week's Greek tutorial.’
‘Hmm.’
Cornelius's expression mellowed.
‘All right.
Wait outside.
I'll be with you in a few minutes.
Mr Barnett and I have nearly concluded our business.’
‘Thank you, sir.’
Appleby withdrew.
‘I trust I'm correct,’ said Cornelius, as the door clicked shut.
‘There's really no more to be said, is there?’
A moment ago, he had seemed to have Harry at his mercy.
Now he was content to release him, to toss him back in the water like a catch unworthy of the landing.
‘Er, no, I suppose there isn't.’
Harry rose from his chair, eager not to let the opportunity of escape slip from his grasp.
He wanted nothing so much at the moment as to be out of this man's piercing sight and withering scrutiny.
It was only when he had followed Cornelius most of the way across the room that the significance of what had just happened dawned on him.
‘Hold on!
I thought you taught history here?’
‘I do,’ Cornelius replied, pulling up and turning round to face him.
‘And Greek as well?’
‘Ancient Greek.
To those few students of Latin who express a particular interest.
There are not many.
Hurstdown's Benedictine origins encourage us to emphasize the language of Catholicism at the expense of that of Orthodoxy.
But one or two boys every year venture into Greek in preparation for a Classics degree.’
‘And you're able to help them?’
‘As it happens, yes.’
The writing on the wall.
The name on the envelope.
The phrase learned and spoken by the man on the train.
At last they began to make sense.
At last the warning pointed to its source.
‘You find a knowledge of Greek useful, then?’
‘Occasionally.’
Cornelius smiled and stretched out his hand to open the door.
‘As you'll appreciate, Mr Barnett, it does have its applications.’