

Chapter 5
We both slept badly that night: on two occasions I woke when Benjamin cried out in his sleep.
He was as anxious as I was about our journey to Glastonbury and the next morning we went down to the palace refectory feeling heavy-eyed and sluggish.
A surly servitor thrust poorly baked bread and watery beer at us and we sat, lost in our own thoughts, until the door was flung open and Mandeville and Southgate entered.
They looked as fresh as maids in May.
(You take it from old Shallot, the wicked have little difficulty in sleeping!)
They slid on to the bench opposite us, making pleasantries about how cold the weather had become and that we should soon be on the road for Somerset.
‘Do you believe all this?’
I abruptly asked them the same question I had of Benjamin.
‘Do we believe what?’
Southgate answered angrily.
‘In Arthur's sword and a miraculous chalice?’
‘If the King does,’ Mandeville replied, ‘I do.
We also believe, Master Shallot, in the need for good order, strong rule, peace, and no stupid, futile rebellions.’
His two strange secretaries slid into the room and, without a flicker of a glance at us, went to sit at another table.
Mandeville, his mouth fun of bread, nodded towards them.
‘You consider us ruthless, Shallot?
Then think of Cosmas and Damien.
Or, even worse, of their elder brother  who tried to escape.
Do you know what the Turks did?
They stripped him naked, pegged him to the soil, tied a hollow pipe to his side and took a starving rat —’ Mandeville slurped from his beer ‘— not one of your English sort.
Those in Asia are two foot long from tip to tail.
Anyway, they put this rat down the pipe with a fire at the open end.
The rat could only go one way, burrowing its way out through the living flesh.’
I gagged and glanced at the two bald-pated twins: they didn't seem so terrible now but rather pathetic.
I then stared at Mandeville and Southgate.
Whatever they said, these were the real madmen.
They had a passion for law and order which bordered on mania, living examples of Machiavelli's The Prince, for what Henry wanted, these men would do.
‘Why do we have to go to Glastonbury?’
I blurted out before my master could stop me.
Mandeville sneered as his strong teeth tore at the coarse rye bread.
‘Master Shallot, you and your master have a growing reputation for quick eyes and subtle wits.
Do you ever go hunting?’
‘Not if I can help it!’
‘You should do, Shallot.
Especially with dogs, for that's what we are going to do in Somerset.
Hunt down traitors and find what the King wants.
We are the huntsmen and you are our dogs.’
I bit back a tart reply as my master tugged at my sleeve and we tactfully took our leave.
Outside in the corridor I grabbed him by the elbow.
‘I'm no Man's dog, Master!’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘Just leave it, Roger, leave it!
We have other matters to tend to.’
‘Such as?’
‘Hopkins's sister, not to mention Tailor Taplow.’
‘Master Shallot!’
We both spun round.
Rachel Santerre stood there, looking as beautiful as a summer's dawn though her face was pale with dark rings round the eyes.
‘Master Daunbey, Master Shallot.’
She looked fearfully over her shoulder.
‘Mistress, what's the matter?’
I asked, watching that lovely bosom rise and fall in agitation.
‘I don't know,’ she stammered.
‘But I am fearful.
Buckingham's blood is on Sir John's hands, and Mandeville and Southgate frighten me.
They are going to stick their noses into matters which do not concern them.’
We looked at her.
‘You don't understand,’ she whispered hoarsely.
‘I live at Templecombe.
God forgive me, I feel the ghosts there, the Templar knights.’
‘Rachel!
Rachel!’
The young woman cast one more despairing glance at us, shook her head and disappeared round the corner to answer her mother's plea.
Benjamin kicked at the rushes.
‘Pray,’ he muttered.
‘Pray, Roger, that we return safe from Templecombe!’
(as if I needed such urging!)
We returned to our chamber for our cloaks and wallets though Benjamin appeared to dally.
‘Master, we should go.’
‘In a little while, Roger, I am waiting for someone.’
He became lost in one of his dour moods so I let him be and went to the window to stare out at a dairy maid carrying pitchers of milk between the barns and the kitchen.
At last there was a knock on the door and a young man entered wearing a battered leather jacket and torn breeches.
He bobbed his greasy head at Benjamin as if greeting some great lord.
‘You have the address?’ my master asked.
‘Oh, aye, sir.’
In any other circumstances the young man's burr would have made me laugh.
‘Well?’
‘Hopkins's sister is a widow and has been for many a year,’ the fellow replied.
‘She lives in a small alleyway just past The Magpie and Crown off Watling Street.’
‘Thank you.’
Benjamin slipped the fellow a coin and closed the door behind him.
‘Mistress Hopkins,’ I asked, ‘off Watling Street?
What has she to do with this business, Master?’
‘She may know something, a piece of tittle-tattle, which may help us.’
‘So we are off to Watling Street?’
Benjamin smiled.
‘And Newgate Prison.’
Naturally we had to obtain Doctor Agrippa's permission to leave but, within the hour, we were on a barge taking us upriver.
It was a cold but beautiful day.
The sun shone from blue skies, the water was glassy smooth and, on every side, I felt London press in: the green fields, the orchards, the cries of the boatmen and those of children playing with hoops along the river bank.
Suddenly I felt homesick, even before I left, and quietly raged at the royal bastard's devious plans.
We landed at East Watergate and made our way up into Knight Rider Street.
Our short walk through London soon cheered me up, especially the taverns — The Raven's Watch, The Bible and Swan, The Leg and Seven Stars — with drinkers outside, their flagons full of ‘angel's food’ or ‘dragon's milk’, whilst the air was sweet with the smell of soft raisin-filled saffron cakes baking in the cookshops.
It was mid-morning and many of the apprentices and stall-holders were taking a short rest, albeit some of them were already as drunk as March hares; one group of apprentices outside The Death's Head on the corner of Old Fish Street  were indulging in a strident belching contest.
I kept a wary eye open for any of my old friends, in particular the goldsmith Waller, even as I was distracted by the sight of the apprentices throwing their caps in the air as they shouted for custom, pompous city officials in their fur-lined robes and, of course, those beauties of the night, the high-class courtesans in their satin dresses and flowery head veils.
These arrogantly wandered along the streets raising plucked eyebrows at the young bucks and gallants resplendent in tight hose, padded doublets and incredibly large codpieces.
We then took a short cut through some alleyways.
Here the street-walkers were not too sophisticated: outside her tenement a harlot stood, skirts raised, over a chafing dish of coals on which she had sprinkled brimstone and perfume so as to fumigate herself.
Further along, an apothecary was trying to sell the customers of such women a cure for the clap made out of boar's grease, sulphur, bark and quicksilver, all thickened by heavy treacle.
My master, of course, ambled along like a child and I had to keep him away from the rufflers, those former soldiers looking for easy pickings, the mad Abraham men who danced naked pretending to be insane, the cappers who begged for money and attached horse-locks to the outstretched arms of people stupid enough to give it.
Once attached, the cappers would not let their victims go until they handed their purses across.
The din became even louder as we turned into Trinity where a gang of felons was being driven about London in a cart wearing a scrawled notice around their neck listing their offence.
These were hookers — rogues who carried a tall staff with a hook at the end which they pushed through windows to pluck down everything of value — best blankets, nightshirts or pots.
(It was because of these men that the legends spread that goblins and elves stole such stuff.)
Anyway a gang of these had been caught and the crowd  now vented their fury by pelting them with rotten eggs whilst householders tipped chamber pots from upper stories.
A young man was chained to the back of the cart for pretending to be a priest.
His back was lacerated, the tips of his ears bloody where they had been cropped whilst a fool's cap, fastened to his head, listed his lies and deceptions.
At last we reached the alleyway just past The Magpie and Crown.
A beggar lad showed us the house in a dank, narrow alleyway where Mistress Hopkins lived.
It was a lean, high tenement, three or four stories high.
The windows were all shuttered and what paint was left was peeling off in huge flakes.
The door was ill-fitting yet surprisingly open, off the latch.
I knocked loudly and shouted.
Even then I had a premonition of danger, of menace.
Old Shallot's signs: a pricking at the back of the neck, a churning of the bowels, light sweat on the forehead and this incredible desire to run.
‘Mistress Hopkins!’
I bawled.
‘Mistress Hopkins!’
The small passageway was shadowy and fetid and my words rang hollow.
‘Mistress Hopkins!’
I repeated.
Above us the old house creaked and groaned.
Benjamin pushed me in and slammed the door behind us.
We groped around in the darkness, found a fat tallow candle and I lit it with my tinder.
Hands shaking, I walked deeper into the house, Benjamin behind me.
We passed a small, ill-kept chamber, dusty rickety stairs, then entered a scullery or kitchen.
This was a little cleaner.
A battered pewter cup stood on the table and, at the other end, in a chair facing an ash-filled fire grate, sat a lady, head forward, shoulders hunched, her veil fallen over her face.
The place stank of death.
I walked over, tipped the head back and bit back my scream.
Mistress Hopkins, no beauty in life with her scrawny face and wispy hair, had been brutally killed: her eyes popped out of their sockets, her swollen tongue was clenched between gapped yellow stumps whilst her skin was  blue-black, the breath throttled by the scarlet garrotte cord still tied round her neck.
Benjamin lifted the old woman's hand.
‘Not too cold,’ he murmured.
‘She probably died within the hour’.
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘Why an old lady?’
Benjamin covered the woman's face with a cloth and sat at the table.
‘Someone,’ he declared, ‘knew we were coming.
But that was no great secret.
After all, I hired a servant at Richmond to discover where Mistress Hopkins lived.’
He rubbed his chin.
‘I suppose it's useless asking him.
He could have let others know where we were going without realising it.
No,’ he sighed, ‘someone knew we were coming.
Someone who knows the mind of priests.
A monk, especially a recluse like Hopkins, would have few friends and would scarcely confide in his brothers at Glastonbury.
So perhaps he discussed matters with his sister?’
Benjamin tapped the table top.
‘The sensible conclusion is that our secret assassin decided to remove the danger just in case.’
He waved a hand round the silent, smelly room.
‘And I suspect it was someone powerful, perhaps the secret Templar my uncle is hunting.
After all, Mistress Hopkins would scarcely open the door to anyone.
There is little sign of a struggle so I conclude our murderer arrived as a welcome visitor.’
Benjamin pointed at the pewter cup.
‘Mistress Hopkins probably served him wine.’
He looked under the table and picked up another cup.
‘She even joined him.
The assassin would assure her all was well, slip behind her chair, then fasten the garrotte string round her neck.’
‘He may have also been searching for some of Hopkins's papers?’
I added.
‘Perhaps something the mad monk entrusted to his sister?’
We inspected the rooms on the lower floor.
Their contents were pathetic though the assassin had made his presence felt; two battered coffers had been prised open, tawdry  jewellery cast aside along with scraps of parchment and a thumb-marked Book of Hours, but none of these proved of any value.
We went upstairs and searched amongst her paltry possessions in those dusty, shadowy chambers.
‘Nothing,’ Benjamin murmured.
‘Perhaps there was nothing to begin with,’ I replied.
‘Perhaps Mistress Hopkins was murdered simply because of what she might know.’
We left the house and walked up Budge Row into Cheapside.
We forced our way through the bustling market which was packed from one end to the other with stalls, carts, horses and people of every station; the poor in their rags, the rich in their costly silks.
A group of powerful noblemen pressed their way through, preceded by men-at-arms three abreast, mounted on great destriers and hoisting gilded spears.
The standard bearers followed, banners of bright red and yellow depicting strange devices: black griffins, scarlet dragons and silver stags.
We continued on past the stink and stench of the Shambles where the lowing of the cattle waiting to be slaughtered jangled our nerves and hurt our ears.
At last we reached Newgate, that loathsome pit of hell, the city prison built around the gatehouse of the old city wall.
We went through Dick Whittington's archway and banged on the metal-studded door for access.
A greasy tub of lard with filthy hair and a red, unshaven face introduced himself as the keeper and became almost fawning when Benjamin informed him who he was.
The keeper wiped dirty fingers on a stained leather jacket and jangled a huge bunch of keys.
‘Come, come, my lords!’ he murmured, bowing and scraping before us.
He smiled ingratiatingly.
‘After all, Master Taplow hasn't much time left, he's to die at two this afternoon.
He led us across the antechamber to show us a tar-drenched  jacket lined with sulphur which hung from a hook on the wall.
The gaoler stopped and gazed at it admiringly.
‘Master Taplow's winding sheet,’ the evil sod murmured as if he was examining a painting by da Vinci or Raphael.
‘He'll wear that!’
I exclaimed.
‘Of course,’ the keeper replied.
‘It will be slipped round him and he'll burn all the quicker.’
‘Why not just hang the poor sod?’
I muttered.
‘Oh, no.’
The gaoler stepped back, eyes widening.
‘Oh, no, we can't have that!
The law is the law.
Taplow is a common traitor and the law says he should burn.’
(Do you know, I am a wicked old man, I love soft tits and a good cup of claret.
I must have lived, oh, well over ninety-five years, but when I eventually meet God I want to ask him a question which has haunted me all my life.
Why do we human beings love to kill each other?
And why do we do it in the cruellest possible ways?
Excuse me, I must lift my cane and give my chaplain a good thwack across the knuckles.
‘You'll not go to heaven and meet God,’ the snivelling little hypocrite mumbles.
‘Yes, I will, I'll tell St Peter a joke and, when he's busy laughing, I'll nick his keys.’
Lackaday, I digress!)
The little grease-ball of a gaoler waddled off, taking us along passages and galleries as black as midnight, down steps coated with slime and human dirt where rats swarmed thick as fleas on a mangy dog.
The smell was nauseous, the cobbled floor ankle-deep in slops.
At last we came to the Corridor of the Damned, the cells housing those waiting to be executed.
‘Hello there, my beauties!’
A smiling, mad face pressed itself against the grille.
‘Don't feel sorry for me,’ the madman shouted.
‘All Tyburn is is a wry neck and wet breeches!’
The gaoler spat a stream of yellow phlegm and the mad face disappeared.
At last we stopped at a door.
The gaoler  opened it, took a cresset torch from the passageway and pushed it into a small crevice in the cell wall.
The dungeon pit flared into life as the door slammed behind us.
It stank like a midden and the straw underfoot had lain so long it was a black, oozy mess.
A heap of rags in the corner suddenly stirred and came to life and Taplow, loaded with chains, got to his feet.
He had dark hair and his plump body was covered in filth.
He grinned at us through the darkness.
‘Welcome to my palace, sirs.
And who are you?
Those who like to see a man before he dies?
Do you like to ask me how I feel?
What I am thinking?’
He peered closer at us.
‘No, you're not that sort.’
‘We are from the Lord Cardinal,’ Benjamin announced.
‘No, no,’ he added quickly.
‘We bring no pardon.
But, who knows,’ he added desperately, ‘perhaps a mercy, a bag of gunpowder tied round the neck.
Master Taplow,’ he continued softly, ‘later this day you will be burnt at Smithfield, convicted of treason.’
Taplow crouched down.
‘Aye,’ he muttered, ‘a bad end to a good tailor.’
Benjamin crouched down with him.
I just leaned against the wall, trying to control my panic for I hate prisons, Newgate in particular.
(Oh, yes, and before you ask, I have been there many a time.
If you want to see hell on earth go to the condemned hole the night before execution day.
The singing, the crying and the screaming — I thought I had already been killed and gone to hell!
Ah, the cruelty of the world!)
‘Master Taplow,’ Benjamin continued, ‘you were involved with the monk Hopkins, acting as his courier?’
The tailor licked his lips.
‘Aye, that's the truth.
Will you tell that gaoler to give me some wine?’
‘Of course.’
‘Ah, well.’
Taplow scratched his head.
‘Yes, I was Hopkins's courier.
I took messages to the Lord Buckingham, pretending I was delivering suits or looking for trade at his London house.’
‘Did Buckingham ever reply?’
‘No, he did not.’
‘What else did you do?’
Taplow edged closer.
God forgive me, he looked like a mud-coloured frog crouching there in the half-light.
I had to cover my nose against the terrible stench and just wished my master would finish the business.
‘What else did you do?’
Benjamin asked again.
‘Different errands for Hopkins.
Leaving messages here and there, but nothing in particular.’
‘Why did you do it?’
Benjamin gazed at the man.
‘Why should a tailor become involved with some mad, treasonable monk?
Especially a man like you, Taplow, who accepts the reformed doctrines of Luther?’
Taplow's eyes fell away.
‘Once I was a Catholic,’ he stuttered, ‘till my wife died.
Hopkins was the only priest who cared.’
I stirred, forgetting the discomfort in the cell, as I caught my master's suspicions.
Something was wrong here.
Taplow was filthy, but looked well fed and, for a man facing a horrible death, too calm and serene.
‘Did you take messages to anyone else?’
He shook his head.
Benjamin stretched across and grasped the man's hand.
‘Master Taplow,’ he whispered, ‘there is very little I can do for you except make sure the gaoler gives you your wine, pray for your speedy death and that in Purgatory Christ will have mercy on your soul.’
‘Aye,’ Taplow whispered.
‘Let my Purgatory be short.’
Then he went back to lie down in the corner of the cell.
We hammered on the door for the gaoler and returned to the main gates of the prison where Benjamin left a coin and instructed the sadistic bastard to do what he could for  poor Taplow.
Then we left, through the old city gates, skirting its wall as we hastened along alleyways and runnels down to the river quayside at East Watergate.
Benjamin hardly spoke but kept muttering to himself.
Only when I ordered the boatman to take us to Syon did my master break free of his reverie.
‘Strange, Roger,’ he remarked.
‘Here we are.
We have just witnessed an old lady's strangling and a silly tailor imprisoned in squalor who, in a few hours’ time, will be burnt horribly to death.
Death seems everywhere,’ he continued, ‘and red-handed murder is a constant visitor in our lives.’
I sat and let him brood.
Indeed, looking back over the years, I have become surprised, not that people murder each other but that, given our love of bloodshed, they don't do it more often.
Anyway, I just tapped my boot against the bottom of the boat and looked over the river, busy with huge dung barges emptying their putrid waste in midstream.
Benjamin stayed lost in his own thoughts but I caught his unease.
Old Wolsey loved to lead people by the nose, in particular his nephew and myself, and relished his little games of sending us unarmed into darkened chambers full of assassins.
(Just wait until I've finished this story and you'll see what I mean!)
At last we reached the great Convent of Syon, its gleaming white stone crenellations peeping above a green fringe of trees.
We disembarked and made our way up a gravel path, through the gatehouse and into the guest room.
The white-garbed nuns fluttered around us excitedly, pleased to welcome visitors to their famous house.
A beautiful place Syon, with its cool galleries and passageways, high-ceilinged chambers and pleasant gardens.
Mind you, this was no ordinary convent.
The nuns were some of the best doctors in a Europe and saved may a person from death but old Henry put paid to them, flattening the convent and pillaging its treasures.
The great bastard!
A lovely house Syon, whose occupants tended the sick and brought about many a cure.
Mind you, they could do nothing for Johanna, the love light of Benjamin's life.
I have mentioned her before: the daughter of a powerful merchant, seduced and abandoned by a great nobleman whom Benjamin later killed in a duel.
Johanna, however, had become witless, her beautiful hair streaming down about a pallid face, her mouth slack, her eyes vacuous.
Whenever Benjamin was in London he always visited her.
He would sit and hold her, rocking her gently to and fro as if she was a child whilst she, muttering gibberish, rubbed salt into his wound by believing he was the nobleman come back to claim her.
The meetings were always heart-wrenching.
I could never stand and watch so would walk away to wink and flirt with the young novices.
At last Benjamin would drag himself away and Johanna, screaming for her lost love, would be taken away by the gentle sisters.
This time was no different and my master left Syon with the tears streaming down his face.
As usual he grasped my hand.
‘Roger,’ he urged, ‘if anything should happen to me, swear you will protect Johanna!’
And, as usual, I would swear such an oath.
Oh, don't worry, I kept it!
Years later when The Great Bastard pulled down the monasteries and emptied the convents I took Johanna into my own home.
Indeed, I have made her immortal: my old friend Will Shakespeare wrote a play about a Danish prince called Hamlet who moons about the stage wondering whether he should kill his murderous mother.
I don't like it and I told Will that he should reduce it to one act with Hamlet throttling the silly bitch immediately!
But, you know old Will Shakespeare.
Shy and quiet, he hid his face behind his hands and laughed.
Nevertheless, I helped him out with one scene where this Danish prince sends his betrothed Ophelia mad.
(May I say, having watched the play, I'm not surprised.)
Anyway poor Ophelia emerges as a tragic woman who drowns herself in  a river, flowers in her hand, hair spread out like a veil around her.
Well, Ophelia was really Johanna and the river is the Thames.
I always think it was a nice touch.
We walked back to the quayside, Benjamin still disconsolate.
‘Can't anything be done?’
I asked.
I searched round for a crumb of comfort.
‘Master,’ I added rather hastily, ‘some people spend their Purgatory after death but individuals like Taplow or poor Johanna go through Purgatory here on earth.’
(I was always like that, ever ready to give a tactful word of comfort.)
Benjamin gripped my wrist and nodded but, just as we were about to step into the boat, he clapped his hands together.
‘Purgatory,’ he muttered.
‘Yes, Master?’
He glanced at me strangely.
‘When is Taplow about to die?’
I looked up at the sun.
‘Two hours past noon.
Why?’
Benjamin pulled me into the boat.
‘Then come quickly.
We must see him.
We have to see him die.’
We arrived too late.
Smithfield Common was packed.
The horse fair had been abandoned, the stalls cleared and the shops deserted.
All of London had poured on to the great open waste, heads craned towards the stake on the brow of a small hill just next to a three-armed gibbet.
The crowd was thick as hairs on a dog and we were unable to force our way through.
As I have said, all of London was there, bodies reeking of sweat beneath rags, serge and silk, minds and hearts intent on watching a man being burnt to death.
We peered over their heads.
Taplow, standing on a high stool, was already tied to the stake, his arms and legs tightly pinioned, head and face partially covered by a white fool's hood.
Already small heaps of green faggots were laid about the stool, with dry  weeds on top as high as the victim's groin.
The masked executioners walked round as if they were involved in some artistic endeavour, positioning the faggots for the best effect.
The crowd, held back by serried ranks of soldiers, was already growing restless and shouts of ‘Get on with it!’,
‘Let the poor sod die!’, rang out, followed by the usual volleys of refuse.
‘We must get closer,’ Benjamin muttered.
‘Why, Master?’
I begged.
‘A man is going to die.’
I stood on tiptoe.
‘It's too late.
The torch has already been put to the kindling.’
I watched the executioner light the faggots but apparently the kindling was too green and the fire didn't catch.
Benjamin looked in desperation at the gatehouse of St Bartholomew's Priory: the balcony was already full of important, well-dressed people who had brought their children for a day out; they had also brought sugared apples, dishes of marzipan and jugs of wine to make their enjoyment complete.
Benjamin pulled one of Wolsey's warrants from his pouch, one of those old letters written by the Cardinal so Benjamin could gain access to any place he wanted.
My master seized me by the arm and pulled me over.
The captain of the guard outside St Bartholomew's let us through and we went under the darkened archway and up some steps into the chamber which led out on to the balcony.
Once again Benjamin used his warrant, pushing his way through the grumbling spectators until we had a good view of both the execution scene and Smithfield Common.
The catcalls from the crowd had now intensified at the executioners' bungling of their job.
(Believe me, it's a terrible way to die!
Once, whilst in Venice, the Inquisition caught me, tried and condemned me to burn in the great piazza before St Mark's.
I was actually  tied to the stake and the kindling lit but, once again, fortune intervened.
However, that's another story!)
Anyway, looking back over the years I can imagine what that poor bastard at Smithfield felt.
The Inquisition were effective, his executioners were fools.
Torches were again put to the kindling but the fire only teased the victim's feet and ankles.
The poor fellow screamed.
‘Oh, Christ, son of David!’
As he did, the crowd fell silent.
Benjamin just stared fascinated and I studied him rather than the condemned man for, as I have remarked before, Benjamin had a horror of public executions.
‘Why are we here, Master?’
I whispered.
‘Shut up, Roger!’ he hissed.
The flames were now strong enough to reach the two bags of gunpowder tied to the man's neck.
There was a loud explosion and the flames roared fiercer.
The victim's head was thrust back and the fool's cap fell off.
The fire was now an intense sheet of flame.
Taplow's lips continued to move though his throat was so scorched he could not make a sound.
The fire now reached his face, blackening his mouth, swelling the tongue, pushing the lips back to the gums.
His limbs began to disintegrate into a bubbling mass of fat, water and blood.
‘Christ have mercy on him!’
Benjamin muttered.
‘I just wish I could have seen his face clearly for one last time.’
The execution stake was now hidden beneath its wall of flame.
I stared out over the crowd.
They looked like some great beast with gaping mouth and hungry eyes, then I caught a movement over near the great elms at the far side of the common.
(The branches of these trees were often used as makeshift gibbets.)
I saw a red-haired man jump down from one of the branches as if he, too, was sickening of the scene and was preparing to leave.
I glimpsed the black robes and wondered why Southgate would be so  interested in such a grisly execution.
I asked the same of Benjamin as we walked out of a postern gate of St Bartholomew's back towards the river, but my master was only half-listening.
‘I can't tell you the reason,’ he murmured.
‘Not yet, Roger.
Not while we're trapped in this tangle of lies!’
Chapter 6
We took a barge back to Richmond to find the palace in turmoil.
The King and his Cardinal were preparing to leave and the courtyards were full of sumpter ponies, officials and chamberlains.
Porters thronged the stairs and galleries carrying packages and bags.
Huge four-wheeled carts, each pulled by six horses, were lined up in front of the main doors as Fat Henry moved his furniture and belongings elsewhere for another round of pleasure.
The royal standard of England no longer fluttered on its pole, a sign that Henry and Wolsey had already departed with a small advance party though Doctor Agrippa had remained, waiting for us in our chamber.
‘You had a useful visit to the city?’
‘Interesting,’ my master replied.
Agrippa, like a little spider in his black garments, came up beside Benjamin and handed him a small sheaf of documents and two fat purses.
‘Your uncle wishes you a safe journey.
This silver will ease your passage and there are the usual letters of accreditation.’
I took down our saddle bags from the hook in the wall and flung them on the bed.
‘And you, my good doctor?’
I asked.
‘You will stay safely in London?’
Agrippa crept near me, pushing his face close to mine.
I caught his strange perfume and gazed into those clear, glass-like eyes.
‘I wish I could go, Roger,’ he murmured.
‘I wish I could die, but my time has not come.’
Benjamin watched us both strangely.
‘Then what is all this?’
I asked, refusing to be cowed.
‘Why do you talk of death?
Agrippa, have you no flicker of friendship for us?
What does my Lord Cardinal think will happen at Templecombe?
And what does the tortured brain of that royal madman really want?’
Agrippa's face softened.
He blinked, and when I looked again, his eyes were light blue, childlike in their innocence.
‘Roger, Roger,’ he whispered, ‘I am the Cardinal's man in peace and war, at least for the next ten years.
But when the prophecy is fulfilled and the cow rides the bull and the priest's skull is smashed, I shall be free.’
(At the time I had not a clue what he was talking about but, in hindsight, he was, of course, referring to Boleyn's ascendancy over Fat Henry and Wolsey falling like a star from the sky of royal preferment.)
‘Before you leave,’ Agrippa continued, ‘for friendship's sake, I will give you this advice: Age Circumspecte.
Act wisely!’
Then he spun on his heel and left the chamber.
Oh, well, we forgot Agrippa's strange advice as the next few days passed.
Benjamin remained locked in the sombre mood which had dogged him since he had witnessed Buckingham's execution.
Where possible he would seize scraps of parchment and draw lines, muttering to himself and scratching his head.
I was left to my own devices.
I wandered back into the city and even thought of revisiting my old haunts but, near Whitefriars, a counterfeit man recognised me.
Instead of the usual friendly salutations, he scuttled away down the alleyway to sell his information to men like Waller and others to whom I owed debts.
A petite, pleasant-faced doxy, however, caught my eye and for a few hours I became old Shallot again, whiling away the time, telling the most  outrageous stories and making her laugh both in the taproom and on her feather-filled mattress in the chamber above.
Lovely, lovely girl!
She had eyes as bright as buttons, a sharp wit and the most beautiful pair of shoulders I have ever clapped eyes on.
Ah, well, she's gone, for golden girls and golden boys must, in their turn, go to dust.
A nice little phrase.
I coined it but my good friend Will Shakespeare seized it for himself.
That's the way with scribblers, they are for ever borrowing other people's quotations.
Refreshed and a little more composed after my love tryst, I went back to Richmond where Benjamin asked me to accompany Southgate to collect stores from the Tower.
I reluctantly agreed and we went in silence down the mist-shrouded Thames to that narrow, evil fortress.
We had to wait awhile; the troops there were drilling in preparation for being shipped to some Godforsaken town in the Low Countries to wage one of Fat Henry's futile, forgotten wars.
Now you will hear the old buggers tell you how their hearts are kindled and the blood bubbles in their veins at the prospect of war: banners snapping angrily in the breeze; war horses caparisoned for battle pawing the ground; brave young men in shining armour, their faces flushed with the prospect of war; swords sharpened, helmets plumed.
It's a load of bollocks!
That's how it begins but it ends in maimed bodies, chopped limbs, blood spurting like fountains.
Green grass turning rusty brown, rivers choked with corpses.
Always remember old Shallot's military theories.
First, where possible, run!
Secondly, if that's not possible, surrender.
Thirdly, volunteers never live till pay day.
And I know!
I have fought in too many battles and lost my boy in one, the only child of my third wife.
I called him Benjamin because he wasn't like me, rotten and twisted, but tall and noble.
A brave heart, oh sweet Jesus, he went to Ireland with Essex's armies and died in the bogs of Antrim.
Oh, Lord, I miss him still!
It's true what the Greeks say: ‘Those whom the Gods love always die young’.
In which case I'll live for bloody ever!
At the Tower, on that distant autumn day, the young men were preparing for war.
The smithies were busy beating the rivets of armour into place, fashioning sallets, lances, swords and all the necessary equipment for killing.
The young men practised in the dusty yards, swinging swords against each other or dodging the deadly quintain, the stuffed dummy with a club on either end so, if you didn't move quickly enough, you got a nasty bruise on your head.
Old Shallot, as always, kept well away from this but Southgate seemed fascinated by it.
After we had collected what we came for, he returned for one more look and broke his disdainful silence.
‘I wish I was going to war.’
His chilling blue eyes stared at me.
‘Don't you, Shallot?’
‘Oh, yes,’ I lied.
‘I dream of it every day.’
Southgate smirked.
‘When we get to Templecombe, you'll wish you had.’
He flicked a hand at the sweating soldiers.
‘At least they'll know their enemy.’
We left Richmond two days later, early in the morning, just after first mass.
Our small cortège milled about in the courtyard near the large double-barred gate of the palace.
Mandeville and Southgate slouched on their horses, both dressed in leather quilted jackets, their feet encased in long riding boots.
They were armed with dirks, swords and daggers and wore large travelling cloaks.
Behind them, as if carved in stone, were their two secretaries, Cosmas and Damien, who sat pulling their horses' reins, eyes fixed intently on Mandeville.
A short distance away were the Santerres: Sir John shouting orders and beside him his wife, riding side-saddle, her desire to leave apparent in the agitated remarks she made to her husband.
Rachel looked as pretty as a picture, her lovely body warmly covered by a  grey riding cloak lined with miniver fur.
The rest were servants and grooms with our baggage piled on a sturdy, four-wheeled cart.
‘Mistress Santerre looks beautiful,’ I whispered to Benjamin.
‘She puts us all to shame.
I tell you this, Master, if we met a pretty maid I suspect she'd fall in love with one of the horses before she took to any of us!’
Benjamin laughed.
‘I just hope we will be safe, Roger,’ he murmured.
‘Oh, Lord save us, of course, Master!
As bullocks on thin ice.’
(Looking back, I wish I hadn't said that.
Words uttered in haste often have a prophetic ring to them; within a month Benjamin and I would be fighting for our lives on icy waters in Somerset.)
Soon we were ready.
Mandeville, who saw himself as the King's own commissioner and therefore self-appointed leader, shouted orders; the great gates swung open, and he led us out.
As we rode towards London, one of Mandeville's secretaries unfurled the pennant on a pole he carried bearing the royal arms of England, showing all and sundry that we carried the King's own warrant.
As we passed people stood back on either side, loud-mouthed apprentices and washerwomen in leather clogs stopping their noisy clatter and waiting for us to pass.
We reached the muddy cobbles of the city, going through Bowyers Row and up towards Cripplegate.
On the corner of Carter Lane, with the mass of St Paul's cathedral towering above us, we had to pause whilst labourers using ward hooks pulled down the still smouldering, blackening timbers of a burnt-out tenement to ensure no spark ignited neighbouring houses.
At last a city official, wearing the blue and mustard livery of the Corporation, decided the burnt-out tenement had been sufficiently destroyed and we were allowed to pass on.
Now, as I have said, Mandeville led us, the Santerres  behind with their small retinue whilst we were at the back just before the cart.
I looked hungrily around, drinking in the sights of London: the beaver hats, lined with green velvet, of the wealthy merchants, the shabby caps of the artisans and, above all, the ornate head-dresses covered in clouds of gauze of the court ladies stepping out for a morning's shopping.
We reached St Paul's, the great copper eagle on its weather vane dazzling in the weak sunlight.
(I remember it well for the sun shortly afterwards disappeared and we did not see it for weeks.)
We had to halt as cartloads of bones dug up from the cemetery were taken down Paternoster Row to the charnel house.
As we did so, a ragged urchin slipped from the crowd and passed a piece of parchment to Sir John Santerre.
I was about to tell my master when we heard the sounds of music coming from beyond the wall of St Paul's.
Benjamin waved me over and we looked through the open gate.
A group of musicians stood in the angle of one of the buttresses of the cathedral playing tambour and fife whilst the Dean and Chapter, garlands of roses on their heads, danced in solemn procession around the severed head of a buck which had been placed on a pole, its brown eyes staring glassily over those who now rejoiced at its death.
At the foot of the pole the succulent body of the deer lay sprawled, blood still seeping from the severed arteries of its neck.
I stared in astonishment at Benjamin.
‘It's a custom,’ my master muttered out of the corner of his mouth.
‘Every month the city verderers have to deliver a fat buck for the Dean's kitchen; in thanksgiving the Dean and Chapter perform this dance.’
He cleared his throat.
‘God knows why, when they call themselves churchmen.’
I looked at the sleek, well-fed clerics performing their silly jigs.
‘It's hard to decide, Master, which are fatter, they or the buck.’
‘Never mind that,’ he murmured.
‘Did you see that message being slipped to our bluff Sir John?’
I nodded.
‘I wonder what it said, Roger?’
‘God knows, Master.
Your uncle weaves such tangled webs!’
We heard Mandeville calling us and continued our journey up towards Cripplegate, forcing our way through the lawyers and serjeants of the coif who were assembling outside the door of the Priory of St Elsing-Spital for their last mass of the Michaelmas term.
We reached the old city walls and passed through the gates.
Above us the decapitated heads of traitors, crowned with laurels or ivy, gazed down at us, their eyes and mouths turned black by the pecking of ravens.
We had to pause awhile as the body of a suicide, dragged by the feet, was taken by city bailiffs to be dumped in the city ditch.
This was followed by a cart full of putrid offal, heading for one of the brooks near the Barbican.
A beggar ran alongside the cart and came whining towards us, hands extended.
Mandeville drove him away so he passed further down the group and tugged at Benjamin's leg.
‘Master, Master, a penny, a penny!’
Benjamin's hand went to his wallet and he gasped as he stared down at the beggar.
Despite the ragged head-dress and mud-stained face, I recognised our good Doctor Agrippa.
‘Age Circumspecte!’ he hissed and disappeared into the crowd.
‘What does he mean?’
I asked.
‘He told us that before.’
‘A pun, Roger.
The old Latin tag, ‘Act wisely’, perhaps a warning about the Agentes.’
‘Magnificent!’
I murmured.
as if I hadn't realised that already.
We reached Red Cross where the city dwellings gave way  to fields and small copses and, an hour later, we were in the open countryside.
I won't bore you with the details of our journey across southern England.
The roads were still hard so travel was fast and easy as Mandeville used the royal messenger service to obtain good food and warm beds at priories, monasteries, taverns or royal manors.
We travelled in three distinct groups: the Agentes, the Santerres and ourselves.
No one was really at ease.
Lady Beatrice ignored my wandering eye, young Rachel dared only smile shyly at us, whilst the Agentes were a law unto themselves.
Southgate and Mandeville, their two mutes behind them, travelled at the head of the procession, whispering to each other.
My master, preoccupied with Hopkins's riddle drew me into discussion about its meaning, only to reach the conclusion it would tell us nothing until we had reached Glastonbury or Templecombe.
For the rest, when the opportunity presented itself, we questioned Sir John about the legends of Arthur, the Grail and the wonders of Glastonbury Abbey, but never once were the Templars mentioned, as if they were a forbidden subject, a treasonable offence even to refer to them.
Twenty years ago I took the same journey to look at the ruins of Glastonbury, destroyed by Fat Henry and his evil spirit, Thomas Cromwell.
Sad, nostalgic, the countryside had hardly changed and, if I closed my eyes at certain parts, I was back with Master Benjamin and all those people, now long dead, travelling to a place where conspiracy, treason and sudden death became part of the very fabric of our lives.
The only difference then was the weather for it turned cold and hard, the clouds massing thick above us as if the sky intended to fall and crush out all life on the face of the earth.
A cold, biting wind chilled our fingers and stiffened the muscles of our body and, just as we crossed into  Somerset, the long-awaited snow began to fall.
At first in soft flurries but, by the time the gables, spires and turrets of Glastonbury came into view, a veritable blizzard raged.
Now I am an old cynic.
I have seen men and women betray and kill each other without batting an eyelid.
(So much so that, although I believe in God, my great difficulty is accepting that he believes in us!)
Glastonbury, however, would challenge the most hardened hearts, a place of mystery and mysticism which catches you by the throat and provokes the mind to strange dreams.
The land itself is relatively free from trees, low, flat and well beneath sea level.
The abbey was great and sprawling, a veritable palace behind its high walls and, from the brow of a small hill, Sir John Santerre pointed out the chapel, the abbey church, the cloisters, the hall, the abbot's kitchen, guest houses and gardens, all quite distinct in spite of the falling snow.
However, what caught my imagination was the great Tor or hill overlooking the abbey which jutted like a giant's finger up towards the heavens, making the small church on its summit a most suitable meeting-place between God and man.
If the abbey was a marvel of man's work, the Tor was God's answer for in that flat land it looked like one of the high places mentioned in the bible where the ancient patriarchs went to talk to Yahweh.
Even Mandeville and Southgate murmured in admiration.
Benjamin and I just stared speechlessly down at the abbey, then up at the great Tor.
‘Oh, yes,’ Santerre declared proudly.
‘This, gentlemen, is Avalon.
The island of glass, the island of apples, Arthur's last resting place.
Once,’ he continued, ‘everything beneath the great Tor was covered in marsh, meres and pools, but the monks have drained these dry and turned the land into one of God's great wonders.’
I forgot the falling snow and biting wind.
‘What is that?’
I pointed to the great Tor.
‘What you see, Master Shallot.
A high place,’ Santerre replied.
‘Sacred even before Christ was born.
The ancient tribes used to come here by boat, led by their leader the Fisher King, to worship on the Tor.
Some people say,’ he lowered his voice, ‘that inside the hill are secret passageways, halls and chambers used by the ancient ones.
People have entered its secret paths and entrances and have either never returned or, if they were fortunate enough to do so, came out with their minds mazed, their wits scattered.’
‘And why should Arthur come here?’
Benjamin asked.
‘To be healed,’ Santerre replied.
‘There has always been a monastery here but, in ancient times, when the meadows were flooded you had to use secret routes and pathways to reach it.
Arthur's great fortress lies further north at Cadbury, a huge hill which still bears the remnants of a formidable fortress.
Legend says Arthur's Sword was thrown into one of the pools here after the Grail, kept in the monastery, was brought to him too late.
If he had drunk from it, the wounds received in his last dreadful battle against his nephew Mordred would have healed.
So, Arthur now lies buried beneath the Abbey.’
Santerre wiped the snowflakes from his face as he stared round at us.
‘Chilling legends,’ Mandeville interrupted, his dark face damp with snow.
‘But, remember, we are here on the King's own business and the legends of this place sent Buckingham to his death.’
With that he kicked his horse forward and we made our way down the trackway to the ornately carved gateway of Glastonbury Abbey.
A porter let us in and we were taken into a great yard.
Lay brothers hurried about, unpacking the carts, and we were escorted into the spacious, white stone guest house: a large solar on the ground floor with above it chambers for each of the abbot's guests.
Servitors took our wet clothing and served us cups of mulled wine, followed by earthenware bowls full of a meaty soup which  warmed our hands and removed the chill from our stomachs.
We sat in chairs before a great log fire.
Only when we were rested and our bags unpacked did the abbot, Richard Bere, together with a young sub-prior and other monks of the abbey, enter the guest house to greet us.
Bere was a frail, white-haired man, one vein-streaked hand clutching an ash cane, the other resting on the arm of the sub-prior.
(A great man, Bere.
He carried out many building works at Glastonbury.
After him came poor old Richard Whitting, who was abbot when Cromwell sent his agents in.
Whitting died a horrible death.
The abbey was plundered and pillaged, its treasures looted, its roofs pulled off, and what was once man's homage to God became a nesting place for foxes, ravens and kites.
Ah, well, enough of that.)
On that cold, snow-laden winter day Bere and his brethren were most welcoming, but the abbot's anxious lined face and short-sighted eyes betrayed his fear at having the powerful Agentes within the sacred walls of the abbey.
He had a pathetic wish to please and I hated Mandeville for his arrogance as he rapped out his orders.
We would stay the night, transfer our baggage to sumpter ponies and make our way to Templecombe, he instructed.
‘But,’ Mandeville boomed, standing over the abbot, ‘we shall return, Reverend Father, to ask questions about the traitor Hopkins.
You will produce any memoranda or books held by him and, above all, the manuscript he was so fond of studying with its doggerel verses which drew him and others into the blackest treason.’
‘We are the King's loyal servants,’ murmured Bere defiantly.
‘Brother Hopkins, God rest him, was a man lost in the past but the manuscript he studied will be handed over.’
He smiled at all of us, nodding courteously to Lady Beatrice, then with his silent monks around him, walked wearily out of the guest house.
We rose early the next morning awoken by the clanging  of the abbey bells.
I opened the shuttered window to look out on a countryside blanketed in snow.
The blizzard had passed but the sky threatened more.
We gingerly broke the ice in the washing bowl, washed, changed and joined the others in the small refectory below.
A lay brother came over and took us into the abbey church to hear morning mass and, believe me, for the glory is now gone, the abbey church of Glastonbury was the nearest thing to heaven on earth.
Soaring pillars, cupolas and cornices leafed with gold; huge walls covered in brilliant, multi-hued pictures depicting scenes from the bible.
The Lady Chapel in blue, red and gold marble; the choir and rood screen of carved, gleaming oak which shimmered in the light of hundreds of candles.
The air was sweet with incense which wafted round the marble high altar like the spirits of the blessed.
So much space, so much beauty.
The choir stalls were each carefully sculptured and the wood polished till it shone like burnished gold.
Banners of different colours, scarlet, red, green and blue, hung from the hammer-timbered roof whilst around the church were carved statuettes of the most breathtaking beauty depicting the Virgin Mary, St Joseph, St Patrick, and the whole heavenly host.
I knelt and gazed around in astonishment.
Yet now it is all gone, nothing left.
Henry's agents saw to that.
I know many of you are of the reformed faith and in your minds perhaps rightly so, but if you had seen what I saw then, you'd still mourn.
You'd weep at the destruction of such sheer glory.
After mass a lay brother offered to take us on a tour of the church and other interesting sights of the abbey.
The Santerres demurred, Rachel claiming she felt unwell, but Mandeville and Southgate eagerly joined us.
We were shown the great marble slab covering Arthur's coffin and the chalice well which provided water for the brothers.
My  master peered down this as if expecting to see a vision at the bottom.
‘Is it true,’ he asked, ‘that the Grail might lie beneath the waters of this well?’
The seamed, yellow face of the old lay brother broke into a grin.
‘So legend says,’ he wheezed.
‘Many have searched yet nothing has been found.’
We also visited the holy thorn, a wild rose bush supposedly sprung from Joseph of Arimathea's staff.
I tell you this — the legend is true.
Even in that bitter weather the plant was beginning to blossom and, when it bloomed at Christmas, the abbot as was customary would send a cutting to the King.
After this, at Mandeville's insistence, the old brother took us into the library, a long room, its walls covered with heaped shelves of books.
Benjamin's hands positively itched to take down the leather, jewel-embossed tomes (so did mine for other reasons), but Mandeville shook his head.
‘We have seen enough for today,’ he murmured.
‘Such matters are to be examined at our leisure.
Templecombe's our destination.
We must be there by noon.’
We returned to the guest house and found our companions ready to leave.
Outside in the courtyard lay brothers were moving baggage from the carts to sumpter ponies whose iron-shod hooves scraped the cobbles, their hot breath hanging like clouds as they whinnied in protest at being taken from their warm stables.
I searched out Rachel.
She still looked pale so I plucked up courage to speak.
‘Mistress, is there anything wrong?’
She smiled thinly.
‘Nothing, Roger.’
(How I thrilled at her use of my first name!)
‘The journey has been exhausting and I will be glad to be home.’
I would have dallied longer but the venerable Bere came  down to wish us farewell.
Mandeville was a as curt as ever.
He leaned over, patting his horse's withers.
‘Father Abbot,’ he declared for all to hear, ‘we thank you for your hospitality but we shall return.
Certain questions need to be asked to which truthful answers must be given.’
He then gave the order to move off and led us out of the abbey gate.
Our journey was cold and uncomfortable, a brutal reminder of the comforts we had left behind.
The sky, grey and lowering, threatened more snow whilst the previous day's fall carpeted the hedgerows and fields, choking the ditches and making the trackways slippery and dangerous.
Never once did we stop even in Templecombe village but made our way through the sleepy hamlet, the houses on either side all boarded up, the only sign of life being columns of smoke and the occasional villager foraging on the outskirts for fire-wood.
These seemed happy enough — burly, red-faced peasants who doffed their caps and shouted salutations to their Lord of the Manor, genuinely pleased to greet his return.
We were making our way up a trackway towards the main gate of the manor when suddenly an old hag slipped out of the trees on one side of the path and stood squarely in front of Mandeville.
She was a veritable night bird in a dirty cloak with a hood half-covering her greying wisps of hair.
Her face was lined and raddled, the toothless mouth slack, displaying reddened gums, yet her eyes were full of life.
She wiped her dripping, hooked nose, clasped her hands together and cackled.
Believe me, if I had seen her in any other place, I would have dismissed her as a witch from a mummer's play.
One of those old beldames who like to proclaim themselves keepers of secret mysteries.
But this old bird was more sinister, a veritable crow, a harbinger of bad news.
Mandeville gestured at her to get out of his way.
She just laughed and stepped back, her eyes bright with malice.
‘Welcome to Templecombe!’
Her voice was surprisingly strong and powerful.
She made a mock bow.
‘Sir John Santerre, your lovely wife and the beautiful Rachel.’
The old crone licked at the saliva frothing on her lips.
‘Get out of my way, woman!’
Mandeville ordered.
‘Yes, I will.
I will.’
The old crone cringed back.
‘When I have told you my news.’
Mandeville leaned forward.
‘And what news is that?’
‘There will be deaths!’ the old woman proclaimed, one bony finger streaking up to the grey clouds.
‘Death by fire!
Death by iron!
Death by rope!
Death by water!
And you, Sir Edmund Mandeville, emissary of a king who is not a king, the hand of death lies over you!
The Midnight Destroyer sits at your right elbow whilst the Lord Satan squats at your left.
You all,’ she screamed, her eyes blazing, ‘you all have entered the Valley of Death!’
‘What do you mean?’
Southgate shouted.
No languid lisping now, I noted.
The old woman sagged, her chin falling to her breast.
She looked up from under grey, bushy eyebrows.
‘You have had your news, now I'll be gone!’
And, before any of us could do anything, she flitted like a ghost back into the trees.
Mandeville glared furiously at Sir John Santerre.
‘Who the devil was that?’
‘One of your tenants, sir?’
Southgate accused.
Santerre shrugged.
‘She's a crazed old woman who says she has visions.
She's lived in a hut in a clearing just beyond the trees for God knows how long.’
His eyes were lowered.
‘Some people call her mad.
Others say she is Hecate, Queen of the Night.’
‘She's just an old woman.’
Rachel spoke up, her voice muffled behind her cloak.
‘Pay no attention to her, sirs.
She's a veritable Cassandra who sees doom and death in the flight of a sparrow.’
Mandeville coughed and spat.
‘If she accosts me again, he grumbled, ‘I'll burn the bitch!’
And on that uncomfortable note we continued our way along the track.
A porter opened the double-barred gate, shouting a welcome to the Santerres as he led us along the old causeway which wound past birch, oak and yew trees up to the front of the house.
Chapter 7
Let me tell you about Templecombe.
The Templars first built it as a fortified manor but later generations had embellished it to make it more comfortable.
A massive stone edifice built in a square about a spacious inner courtyard, three stories in all, its roof was of grey slate.
Although we could see the old arrow-slit windows, more sophisticated owners had added rounded oriels, jutting bays and ornate chimney stacks.
The stone gleamed as if freshly washed whilst every window was glazed, some with pure glass, others, despite the poor light, even displaying brave heraldic emblems in a variety of hues.
On our arrival, the great door was flung open.
Servants gathered on the steps and for a while all was confusion as stewards, bailiffs, cooks, huntsmen and pages hurried down to greet the Santerres.
Despite Sir John's brusque ways, I saw he was a well-respected, even loved, lord of the soil.
Servants took our baggage, grooms led our horses away, as the Santerres proudly escorted us in.
Despite its bleak exterior, Templecombe proved to be a jewel.
The entrance hall was gleamingly panelled, the wood carved and sculpted.
The floorboards, the great sweeping staircase, its balustrade and newels, were fashioned out of the most expensive materials.
We were taken to the main hall, a long lofty chamber dominated by a hammer-beamed roof with an oriel window at one end depicting the Lamb  of God carrying a standard.
Other large windows, with cushioned seats beneath, were on either side of the cleverly carved fireplace above which hung a canvas painting of Adam and Eve being tempted by the serpent.
A great log fire crackled in the hearth, the room was lit by squat wax candles fixed on metal spigots around the walls and, at the far end, under the oriel window, was the dais and high table.
The floor was paved with marble flagstones, black and white so it looked like a chessboard, and on this had been laid the thickest rugs from Persia, India and Turkey.
There were chests of cypress and cedar, small tables bearing trays, silver cups, pewter tankards and flagons.
Cloth of gold and exquisite tapestries hung on the walls, their fringes reaching down to the wooden panelling.
Everything seemed to boast the power and wealth of the Santerres.
‘He owns rich fields,’ Benjamin whispered, ‘and the wool from his flocks is famous even in Flanders.
Sir John has a finger in every pie and is well known to the harbour masters all along the south coast.’
This rich Lord of the Manor now stood in the middle of the hall revelling in his ostentatious show of wealth whilst servants placed high-backed chairs in front of the fire.
At Santerre's insistence we sat and warmed ourselves with possets of hot wine and slices of sugared pastry.
Even Mandeville, tired after his ride, relaxed and murmured his appreciation.
The greatest change, however, was in Rachel.
She'd cast aside her cloak and even her veil so her jet-black hair fell down on either side of a face now glowing with happiness.
I had eyes only for her but Benjamin was all agog with interest in the room and kept looking around, murmuring his admiration.
‘Come.’
Rachel stood, smiling at both of us.
‘Whilst our elders and betters take their rest, let me show you round our home.’
She then took us on a tour, chattering excitedly like a  child.
The house, as I have said, had three stories, each a perfect square bounded by four polished galleries, three rooms leading off each.
Even on the top one where Rachel showed us our chambers, the air was warmed by sweetened braziers and the atmosphere was comforting with gleaming wainscoting, coloured cloths, woollen carpets, carved chests and chairs.
Everything was clean and bright in the candlelight.
Even the corbels and cornices of the ceiling had been freshly painted.
Rachel explained that her step-father had not stinted in his refurnishing of his new home.
Now and again, however, we caught glimpses of its Templar past: black Beauce crosses printed on the walls which the passage of time had not faded; old arrow slits through which you could glimpse the snowy fields beyond; small gargoyles, some depicting wyverns or dragons, others the faces of long-dead knights.
Gradually we realised that despite the wealth, warmth and comfort, Templecombe held an eerie, sinister air.
Even as Rachel flitted before us down passageways and galleries, I could feel other presences, as if ghosts hiding in the shadows watched her pass then trailed behind us, looking for some weakness they could exploit.
Benjamin's shoulders twitched and on one occasion I saw him shiver.
‘A strange place,’ he murmured as Rachel walked ahead of us.
‘The dead do not lie at rest here.’
At last Rachel had shown us everything but, still full of enthusiasm, said there was more to see outside.
Benjamin and I hid our exasperation, took our cloaks and followed her into the snow-covered grounds.
We visited the outhouses, stables, smithies, brewing rooms, barns — slipping and slithering, though Rachel was as sure-footed as a cat.
We went through a clump of yew trees into a clearing where a small church stood, a simple primitive affair with steep tiled roof and a small entrance tower.
Rachel pushed the door open and beckoned us in.
If the manor was opulent, the old church was positively  bleak.
A baptismal font stood near the doorway, a row of squat white pillars on either side of dark transepts, then through a rood screen into a plain, stone sanctuary.
On either side were stalls, their seats up, each displaying a scene from the bible.
Benjamin looked at these and exclaimed in delight.
‘Look, Roger!’
He pointed to one of the raised seats where centuries earlier a carpenter had carved a bear climbing a tree.
The scene was so vivid and lifelike you almost expected the bear to move or the tree to bend.
Rachel sat on the sanctuary steps and watched us.
‘I love this place,’ she murmured, gazing up at the black roof beams.
‘It's so simple, so pure.
My step-father wanted to tear it down but my mother and I refused to allow it.’
She smiled at us, then her face grew solemn and her eyes widened.
‘The Templars used to meet here,’ she continued.
‘This was their chapel.’
She shivered and pulled her cloak close.
‘Very evil men,’ she whispered, ‘with such dark practices, their ghosts still linger here.
Mother's always saying the house should be exorcised.’
‘Do you think they were guilty of such terrible crimes?’
Benjamin asked.
Rachel stood up.
‘Perhaps, but not committed here.
Let me show you something.’
She led us out of the church, round the back and through a wood.
The line of trees suddenly ended where the ground fell away and, beneath us, was a large lake, the water turning to ice and, in the middle, a mist-shrouded island.
On this, amongst the few trees growing there, stood a low dark building which, in the fading light, had a desolate, sinister air.
‘The Templar house,’ Rachel explained.
‘Just a long stone room but legend has it that the Templars used it for their mysteries.
I have never been across.’
She gestured to the barge nestling amongst the frozen weeds.
‘Others go over  but I wouldn't set foot there even in the height of summer!
That island frightens me.’
Her face brightened.
‘Come,’ she added, ‘you must be exhausted and I prattle on.
Supper will be served soon.’
She took us back to the house where a servant showed us up to our rooms.
We each had a small chamber.
Mine was between those of Cosmas and Benjamin.
Mandeville, Southgate and Damien were on the other gallery.
The rooms were probably once Templar cells but now they were luxuriously furnished.
Each had a large fourposter bed, an oaken wardrobe, a table, stool and chair, whilst the arrow-slit windows had been widened and filled with tinted glass.
A log fire crackled in the hearth and two capped braziers had been moved in just inside the door.
My room was as warm and smelt as fragrant as a summer's day.
For a while I sat on the edge of the bed until Benjamin joined me.
He seemed tired and perplexed and, without invitation, began to summarise what had happened so far, ticking the points off on his fingers.
‘First, Hopkins was a monk, a Benedictine from Glastonbury but he also served as a chaplain for the Santerres here at Templecombe as well as for the outlying farms.
‘Secondly, he had a passion for Arthurian legend and lore and searched for the Grail and Excalibur.
He discovered an ancient manuscript in Glastonbury's library with a doggerel verse which no one understands.
‘Thirdly, Hopkins told Buckingham that he could lay hands on these precious relics.
My Lord of Buckingham come to Templecombe thinking the relics might be hidden here, or maybe just to verify with Hopkins that what he had been told was the truth.
Sir John Santerre was approached but panicked.
He believed Buckingham's search for the relics masked some subtle treason, and so the Agentes were alerted.
Buckingham then wrote to Taplow in London but this correspondence was seized by our good friends  Mandeville and Southgate.
Buckingham was arrested: he went to the block whilst poor Taplow was burnt at Smithfield.
The Santerres were investigated but cleared of any suspicion.’
Benjamin paused.
‘What else?’
‘The murdered agents?’
‘Ah, yes.
Fourthly, two of Mandeville's agents who had been placed in the Buckingham household and first alerted their masters to Buckingham's so-called treason, were murdered with a garrotte string as was Hopkins's sister but we have no clue as to who the murderer was.
Fifthly, there is a secret coven or conspiracy linked to the ancient order of the Templars who are also searching for the Grail and Arthur's Sword.
God knows who these could be.
The abbot and his brothers at Glastonbury?
John Santerre?
Or even worse, Mandeville or Southgate.
After all, there is suspicion that the order has an accomplice close to the crown.
‘Sixthly, we have been sent here to find the Grail and Excalibur — though there's fat chance of that — as well as to assist our two dark shadows to root out the activities of these Templars.
‘And, finally, we have the warnings of that crone.
Why did she deliver the message then?
Who told her to?
Was it the monks of Glastonbury?’
‘Master, she is a witch.’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘Nonsense, Roger.
I don't believe in such powers.’
He got up and started pacing up and down the room.
My master was like that: once his mind probed a mystery or problem, he became physically agitated, gnawing away at it until he had satisfaction.
A true Renaissance man, Benjamin Daunbey.
He didn't believe in witches, sorcerers and warlocks.
I did.
When you meet the likes of Mabel Brigge, you quickly recognise someone who has made a pact with Satan and acquired occult powers!
A beautiful demon, Mabel!
To kill someone, all she did was fast for  three days and concentrate her mind on destroying the life of her enemy.
I watched her do this and bring about the destruction of one of England's greatest noblemen but that's another story.
Benjamin stopped pacing up and down.
‘Do you agree with what I have said, Roger?’
‘Well, of course, Master.
It's all happened, hasn't it?’
‘Of course not.’
‘If you say so, Master.’
Benjamin came and sat down beside me.
‘Less of your sarcasm, Roger.
We know only what we have been told or made to see.
How do we know Buckingham committed treason?
How do we know he wrote those letters to Taplow?’
‘Because the mad bugger confessed!’
I interrupted.
‘We met Taplow in prison and saw the poor bastard die!’
Benjamin pulled a face.
‘No, the man we met in prison was not Taplow but someone else.’
He smiled at my snort of disdain.
‘Don't you remember, Roger?
Think of that prisoner, with his fat arms and legs.
Oh, he was covered in dirt and spoke like an actor reciting his lines but he made one mistake.
Taplow was supposed to be a Lutheran but the prisoner said he believed in Purgatory.
No Lutheran would have said that.
‘Now, when we went to Smithfield I caught a glimpse of the dying Taplow.
Oh, he had the same colour hair as the man we met in prison but he was much more emaciated.’
I closed my eyes and thought back.
Taplow, in his prison cell: the fat on his arms and legs, the chubby, well-fed face beneath the dirt, the reference to his soul going to Purgatory, the fire at Smithfield, the thin, broken body I had glimpsed.
My master was right.
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘Let's remove Buckingham from our investigations,’ Benjamin replied.
‘He was a great nobleman with Yorkist  blood in his veins and Henry wanted his head.
The good Duke was foolish enough to make enquiries about certain precious relics and the King's agents closed in.
I suspect his letters to Taplow produced during his trial were forgeries, whilst Taplow himself with his tenuous links with Buckingham was used as a catspaw.
You know our gracious King.
Taplow, the poor sod as you would put it, was tortured, bullied, to say what he did in court but then Mandeville had to make sure he did not tell the truth afterwards.
He was removed to some far cell and a minion brought in to act his part.
Mandeville thought we would be satisfied with that.
He never dreamt that we would go to witness the execution or, even if we did, would get close enough to realise the man being burnt at the stake was not the same person we'd questioned at Newgate.
I would have suspected nothing if the counterfeit Taplow had not made reference to Purgatory.
So…’
‘So,’ I finished for him, ‘we can ignore everything the little bastard in Newgate told us!’
‘Yes, a pack of lies.’
Benjamin drew in his breath.
‘But if one part of the pie is rotten,’ he concluded, ‘how do you know the rest is true?
What if there is no Grail or Excalibur or secret Templars?
And why were those agents murdered?’
‘Mandeville might have killed them,’ I suggested.
‘Perhaps they objected to the destruction of Buckingham and the web of deceit to which they'd been party?’
‘Possible,’ Benjamin murmured.
‘Possible.’
He rose and absentmindedly patted me on the shoulder.
‘But come, Roger, we have to wash and change.
Our hosts await us.’
My master wandered out and I unpacked my belongings, washed, changed and went down to the sumptuous banquet Santerre's cooks had prepared for us.
The high table was covered in pure silk cloths, bathed in light by countless wax candles which winked and dazzled on the silver trenchers, flagons, glass goblets and knives with  precious pewter handles.
The meal was delicious: beef and venison pastries and different wines, blood-red claret as well as light, sweet Rhenish.
Conversation was desultory for we were all exhausted though Mandeville declared that tomorrow he would spread his net.
Certain questions had to be answered by Sir John and then we would return to Glastonbury Abbey.
I ignored the sinister bastard and drank fast and deep with eyes only for Rachel.
Dressed in a sea-blue gown with matching head-dress, each studded with small mother-of-pearls, she looked so beautiful!
(I see my little chaplain snigger because he knows I have talked about her before.
All right, the little sod's reminding me of the truth, so I'll tell it.)
Yes, I was jealous, that's why I drank deep.
I could not but notice how tenderly Rachel looked at Benjamin and jealousy, a flame so quickly started, is the most difficult fire to extinguish.
After a while I became so deep in my cups I grew surly, said I felt unwell and trotted off to bed where I could nurse my hurt as well as conceal my bad manners.
I lay on my fourposter ready to bemoan what had happened but the next minute I rolled over and sank into the deepest sleep.
God knows when the banquet ended.
I remember half-waking and seeing my master bend over me.
‘Are you well, Roger?
Is it something you ate?’
‘Yes, yes,’ I murmured bitterly, half-asleep.
‘Something I ate.’
My next awakening was more harsh.
I was in the middle of my favourite dream, standing in the dungeons, sipping a cup of claret whilst masked torturers had Fat Henry spreadeagled on the cruellest rack.
I could smell smoke and hear the most terrible screams.
Suddenly I shook myself awake, realising it was no dream; smoke was drifting under my door and, in spite of the thickness of the walls, I could hear the most awful groaning and crashing.
‘For pity's sake, fire!’
I shouted.
I opened the door and went out.
The gallery was filled with smoke, the guttural screams and crackling sounds coming from the chamber occupied by the secretary, Cosmas.
Quick-witted as usual, I shouted: ‘Fire!’ and dived back into my room with only one thought in my mind.
The cornerstone of Shallot's philosophy: when danger threatens, collect your possessions and flee like the wind.
I ran to find my master who was still fully dressed.
‘For God's sake, Roger,’ he said, ‘what's happening?’
‘For God's sake, Master!’
I snarled back.
‘Isn't it obvious?
The silly bastard next door started a fire and I have no desire to join him!’
Benjamin stared at my cloak full of the little trinkets and valuable possessions I had collected.
‘Roger, Roger, don't be so modest, you can't break the door down with those!’
He snatched the cloak out of my hand and threw it on the bed.
Outside, I could hear doors opening on the gallery and running footsteps.
At Benjamin's urging I helped pick up a wooden chest.
We staggered out and began to use it as a battering ram against the locked door.
Mandeville and Southgate appeared, followed by the other secretary, Damien, his pallid face even more ghastly as he stared in terror at the fire enveloping his brother's room.
He beat the air with his hands and made the most heart-rending cries.
God be my witness, Mandeville was as tender with him as a mother with a baby.
He grabbed the poor creature by the neck and drew him close, then gazed savagely across at us.
‘Come on, you poltroons!
Break the bloody door down!’
Assisted by Southgate and two sleepy-eyed, half-dressed servants we hammered again at the door until it buckled, creaking and groaning, before snapping back, breaking the  lock.
The smoke billowed out, forcing us to drop the chest.
Benjamin scurried back to his room and brought napkins soaked in water, flung these at us and told us to cover our mouths and eyes.
Other servants appeared led by Santerre.
A chamber was opened and I realised that, like many wise householders, Santerre used one room to store huge vats of water against the very fire we were now fighting.
Benjamin and I, however, were first into the room.
My master staggered over and opened the nearest window and, as the smoke cleared, we saw that the huge fourposter bed was now a sheet of flame.
It was one of the most curious things I had ever seen.
You must remember Templecombe was made of stone and the chambers on the top gallery had no wooden wainscoting so the fire hadn't spread.
Oh, two rugs on the stone floor were smouldering but the fire was contained.
It looked as if the entire bed had simply erupted into a ball of flame.
Even then, as servants pushed by us with buckets of water and began to douse the flames, I knew there was something wrong.
Both the braziers near the door had not been disturbed.
The fire in the hearth was now a heap of white ash.
So where had the flames sprung from?
I concluded that I had done enough and was getting ready to sidle away when a servant pushed a large bucket of water into my hands and I realised that, under Santerre's direction, a human chain had been formed.
At first the water made no difference but eventually the flames began to die until what was left of the bed was nothing but black smouldering ash.
Mandeville was the first to approach it and, amongst the remains of the bed, we found the charred body of Cosmas.
His corpse was nothing but burnt flesh, his features indistinguishable.
I glimpsed white teeth and a gaping jaw but the sight of the eyeballs turning to water and the blackened flesh of the man's hands proved too much.
I fled back to the privacy of my own room to retch and vomit.
Further  down the hall, Santerre shouted for the windows to be opened, canvas sheets to be brought, and issued curt requests that Rachel and his wife go back to their rooms.
Mandeville's curses rang out interspersed by the awful, mournful sounds of the dead man's brother.
At last I stopped retching and washed my hands and face with a cloth.
When I turned Benjamin was standing there.
‘What caused that?’
I gasped.
‘Death by fire!’ my master repeated.
‘And it was no accident, Roger.
Cosmas was murdered.
Burnt alive!’
Benjamin would say no more.
I finished cleaning my mouth and hands and went back to the dead man's chamber.
The flames were now extinguished, windows had been opened in the top gallery and the smoke was beginning to dissipate.
Two servants, their mouths and noses covered by rags, removed Cosmas's remains in a canvas sheet.
The burnt bed was broken up and pieces tossed through the window into the courtyard below.
Benjamin seemed most interested in the charcoal braziers and sifted with his boot amongst the white ashes of the fire but, muttering to himself, claimed he could discover nothing untoward.
By the time we returned to bed, dawn was breaking.
A few hours later Benjamin shook me awake.
‘Come on, Roger, we have to break our fast.
Mandeville's waiting for us in the hall below, talking about God's vengeance come to judgement.’
I rubbed my eyes.
‘You still say it was murder?’
I asked.
‘Why?’
‘The door was locked from the inside,’ Benjamin replied.
‘Cosmas remained wrapped in the bedding and was burnt alive.
He had only one candle which was not powerful enough to start such a blaze so quickly whilst the fire was whitened ash.’
‘What about gunpowder?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, a trail of gunpowder from the bed under the doorway, then someone could have struck a tinder?
Benjamin shook his head doubtfully.
‘We didn't see any such marks on the floor.’
(Now I see my little clerk shaking his noddle and giggling to himself.
Oh, this master of the secret arts thinks my idea stupid.
Well, let me tell you a short story.
Many years later I was sent as emissary to Mary, Queen of Scots, when she was playing the two-backed beast with Bothwell.
Mind you, I can't blame Mary: her husband Darnley was so pitted with the pox he had to drape a white veil over his face.
Anyway, I told Mary about Cosmas's death then forgot all about it.
That is, until a few months later when Darnley and his page boy, whilst staying at Kirk o' Fields Palace, were killed in an explosion.
I often wondered whether Mary got the idea from me.
Ah, well, that's another tale.)
Benjamin was truly perplexed by Cosmas's death: he did admit there were rare cases of human beings bursting into flames.
(At the time I thought the idea was ridiculous until many years later when I attended a church in Holborn where the vicar, giving a fearsome sermon, abruptly burst into flames.
I have never seen a church empty so quickly.)
Anyway, on that snow-laden morning as Benjamin and I went deeper into the Valley of Death, Cosmas's murder remained a mystery.
Only one thing stood out: Benjamin said there was a scorch mark on the outside of Cosmas's door but claimed it could be old.
No other evidence of anything untoward could be detected.
He waved his hands despondently.
‘Who knows?’ he sighed.
‘Perhaps it was an act of God.’
I got up, washed, dressed, and Benjamin and I went down the great sweeping wooden staircase.
We heard raised voices from the main hall but Benjamin insisted that we first walk out on to the porchway and take the morning air.
We stood on the top step, an icy wind driving any sleep from our  eyes and faces, staring out over the snow-carpeted grounds.
Rooks cawed in the dark trees which ringed the house and I imagined demons nestling in the branches, mocking us.
Southgate came through the door behind us.
‘Sir Edmund Mandeville awaits you.’
‘Oh dear,’ I mocked.
‘God can wait, but Sir Edmund…!’
And, with a mocking haste, I rushed back into the house, Benjamin following more slowly.
Southgate caught up with me as I entered the main hall and saw Santerre and others sitting round the high table.
‘One day,’ Southgate hissed in my ear, ‘your wit, Master Shallot, will take you to the scaffold.
Or on to the point of someone's sword!’
‘One day, one day!’
I jibed back.
‘Isn't it strange, Master Southgate, you are not the first to say that.
And, even stranger, those who do say it meet violent deaths themselves.’
I turned and looked him full in the face.
‘Don't threaten me,’ I whispered in false bravado, ‘I am a fighting man!’
(Lord, the lies I told!)
‘Your looks are as crooked as your eyes,’ Southgate sneered.
(Oh, yes, I was a handsome rogue, tall with jet-black hair, olive-skinned but with a cast in one eye, I always thought it gave me a devil-may-care look.)
I noticed Southgate's hand had fallen to the hilt of his rapier.
I gulped and peered over my shoulder to make sure Benjamin was behind me.
‘When this business is over,’ I scoffed, ‘draw your hangar.
But as you keep saying, our Lord God, Sir Edmund Mandeville, awaits us!’
Chapter 8
The group at the high table — Sir John, Lady Beatrice, Rachel, Mandeville and the white-faced Damien — had already broken their fast.
Sir John clicked his fingers and servants placed a trencher before me with strips of dry bacon, small white loaves and a pot of thick creamy butter; blackjacks of ale were also served.
I gazed around and noticed how white and drawn everyone was.
I smiled cheerfully, wished everyone a good morning and began to stuff the food into my mouth.
Benjamin, of course, was more courteous.
(A proper courtier, my master.
He would have shamed an angel with his table manners.)
He sipped from a tankard and stared at Mandeville.
‘Sir, my condolences on the death of your secretary.’
Mandeville nodded slightly.
‘Death, Master Daunbey.
Death?’
Benjamin coughed.
‘No, sir, you are correct.
The word is murder.’
‘But how?’
Sir John stuttered.
‘How in God's name, in my house?
The man's chamber was locked.
There are no secret entrances or passageways.’
He looked away.
‘At least not in that room.’
Benjamin smiled.
‘So some exist?’
‘Well, of course,’ Santerre stammered.
He shifted his feet nervously.
‘Here, beneath us, are cellars and passageways.
The Templars often used them.’
He smiled faintly.
‘Now, I store my wines, wood for the fire and coals there, nothing singular.’
‘What makes you think it's murder?’
Mandeville asked sharply.
‘Because, sir, beds do not explode into flames,’ Benjamin replied.
‘If my observations are correct, the mattress and blankets were turned into a roaring inferno within seconds.
The braziers had not been moved, the fire was dead, the candle had spluttered out.
And yet a powerful fire must have started so quickly it gave poor Cosmas no time even to get out of bed.’
Benjamin sipped from his tankard.
‘But who or why or how,’ he continued, ‘is as much a mystery to you as it is to me, Sir Edmund.
‘As you say, the door was locked, no one else was in the room and the fire was meant to kill swiftly, expertly, and with little damage to anyone else.
Go and check the chamber.
The ceiling is of plaster and would take hours to ignite.
The walls and floor are of stone.
In many another house, the flames would have spread along the top story, but not here.
Our murderer knew that!’
‘But the bed and blankets,’ I intervened (Old Shallot being intent on delivering his pennysworth!), ‘would be as dry as tinder.’
‘And why didn't Cosmas get out of the bed?’
Santerre asked.
‘Because,’ Benjamin answered, ‘he was seriously maimed.
But how?’
He shook his head.
‘You think he was murdered?’
Santerre asked.
‘Yes, I have said so but…’
Mandeville tapped the top of the table with his empty tankard and glanced accusingly at Santerre.
‘The question really is, who was behind this attack?’
Sir John pushed back his chair, his red face bristling with rage.
‘Are you accusing me, Sir Edmund, or my family or  servants?
If so, say it!’
He breathed in deeply through his nostrils.
‘Remember where we are, Sir Edmund.
This is not London but the South-West of England.
Memories die hard here.
Edward Stafford, my late Lord of Buckingham, was much loved and respected, so remember that.
I can no more vouch for the loyalty of every one of my tenants than His Grace the King or my Lord Cardinal can guarantee the loyalty of every Englishman.
‘Secondly…’
Santerre paused to consider what he was about to, say.
‘Do go on,’ Southgate put in silkily.
The bastard was really enjoying himself.
‘Secondly,’ Santerre continued hastily, ignoring his wife's warning glance, ‘memories of the Templars still survive here.
In their time they were regarded as great magicians who brought prosperity to these parts.
They had a reputation as healers, good lords who possessed the secrets of both heaven and earth.
Do you think,’ he looked straight at Mandeville and I admired the fellow's courage, ‘do you really think, Sir Edmund Mandeville, that the people of these parts don't know the true reason for your presence here?
That they do not know what you seek as well as your intention of rooting out any trace of an ancient order.
Above all, they must know of your part in the destruction of my Lord of Buckingham as, God be my witness, I know mine!’
‘Are you saying,’ Southgate accused, ‘that you sympathise with the dead Duke?’
‘No, sir, I do not!’
Santerre bellowed.
‘And pray do not put words in my mouth.
My Lord of Buckingham came here.
He sat at this very table and, when he was gone, your two creatures came and asked me what he said.
I told the truth.
The rest was in your hands.’
Santerre pulled his chair back to the table.
‘God knows,’ he concluded softly, ‘some of the Duke's blood may be on  my hands.’
He stared round the hall.
‘I am not of these parts,’ he continued, ‘I was Hampshire born.’
Santerre clutched his wife's hand firmly in his.
‘But when I married Lady Beatrice, she took my name and I took her house.
I came here to be a good lord as well as the King's most loyal servant!
Think of that, Sir Edmund, before you sit at my table and hint about who was responsible for the death of your secretary!
God knows, it wasn't me or mine!’
Southgate sneered.
Mandeville simply stroked his dark face as if weighing up carefully what he was to do next.
‘Sirs,’ Benjamin intervened tactfully, ‘before any judgement is passed, we must recognise the truth of what Sir John says.
My Lord of Buckingham was of these parts.
We have come here to disturb legends which are a part of the very soil of these lands.
Sir Edmund Mandeville, think about what has been said.
Your two agents, Calcraft and Warnham, may have been followed to London and killed by one of the Duke's retainers or by these secret Templars.
Sir John cannot be held responsible for the loyalty of every one of his servants, and Cosmas's death, God rest him, is a mystery.’
‘What intrigues me,’ I asserted, ‘is that the witch we met yesterday prophesied such a death.
Don't you remember, Sir Edmund?
Death by fire, by rope, by steel and by water?
And may I remind you that none of us were exempt from that curse.’
My words created an eerie silence.
‘I should have had that witch brought in!’
Mandeville cursed.
‘The witch can't be blamed,’ Rachel declared softly.
‘She only spoke the truth: this house is haunted.
The spirits of the Templars wander its passageways and galleries.
Cosmas's death is not the first tragedy to have occurred here.’
Her face hardened.
‘Oh, yes, there have been other deaths here, haven't there, Mother?’
She did not wait for a  reply.
‘My own father was killed in a riding accident.
Servants have slipped downstairs.
An old nurse hanged herself in one of the barns.
A gardener was found drowned in the lake.
Suicides, or so the coroner declared.’
Rachel's sombre words chilled all our souls.
‘Is this true?’
Benjamin asked her parents.
Santerre nodded.
Lady Beatrice rubbed her face in her hands, distraught, losing her air of frosty self-possession.
‘Yes,’ she answered reluctantly.
‘Many say this house is haunted.
The common people do not blame me or my husband for Buckingham's downfall but say his fate was star-crossed by this house.
Sometimes, just sometimes, I wish I could burn the entire building to the ground!’
‘We could always make a start,’ Southgate quipped.
‘Nonsense!’
Benjamin replied.
‘True, I accept the legions of hell are all around us.
We fight, as St Paul says, against an invisible foe.
Ghosts may walk but so do murderers.
Cosmas's death had more to do with flesh and blood than curses, witches or ghosts.’
He smiled bleakly at Rachel.
‘Though I agree that the old witch has a most singular gift for prophecy.
Sir Edmund Mandeville is correct — perhaps she should be brought in for questioning.
However, before we consider that, let's establish if anyone went into Cosmas's room.’
Damien the mute had been watching my master's lips intently.
He tugged me by the sleeve and pointed to Santerre's wife.
‘Lady Beatrice, did you go into Cosmas's chamber?’
Mandeville asked.
‘Yes, earlier in the day I did.
I am mistress of this house and I have to see that all is well.’
‘As did I,’ Sir John added.
‘For the same reason.’
‘I saw a maid going in,’ Southgate declared.
‘A brown-haired lass with a white coif on her head.
She was carrying blankets and linen.’
‘That would be Mathilda,’ Sir John replied.
‘But she's a simple country girl with hardly a thought in her head.
Nevertheless, I'll question her.’
‘I don't think a maid,’ Benjamin asserted, ‘would plot murder.
Sir John, how long did yesterday's evening meal last?’
‘About two hours.’
Benjamin stared down at the table top.
‘Roger was the first to leave, then you, Master Southgate, followed by Lady Beatrice and Sir John.
Finally you, sir,’ he pointed at Mandeville, ‘with your two clerks.’
‘And what time did you leave?’
Southgate asked.
Benjamin blushed.
‘I didn't.
Lady Rachel and I remained here.
She collected a book from her father's library containing all the Arthurian legends, a copy of Malory's Arthur of Britain and the Knights of the Round Table.’
My heart chilled and I gnawed at my lip to hide my disappointment.
Rachel had caught my eye but it seemed her interest was in my master rather than me.
‘What are you implying?’
Mandeville asked.
‘I am implying nothing.
I'm just curious if anyone visited poor Cosmas's chamber.’
A chorus of denials greeted his question.
Mandeville stood and picked up his cloak, thrown over the back of a chair.
‘We were to travel to Glastonbury today but first I must deal with this dreadful business.
Sir John, I will need some sort of box to serve as a coffin for poor Cosmas.
This can be placed in your manor chapel and perhaps tomorrow, on our way to Glastonbury, we can leave it at the village church.
I also have letters to write.
His Grace the King will not be pleased by what I have to say.
Master Southgate?’
Both the Agentes took their leave, followed by a silent, doleful Damien.
Lady Beatrice and Rachel murmured their excuses whilst  Sir John stretched, grumbling that it was all a dreadful business but the affairs of the estate demanded his attention.
Benjamin watched him leave.
‘I wonder where Sir John is really going?’ he muttered.
‘If he had any sense he'd stay here and keep an eye on his daughter,’ I quipped back.
‘You did not tell me, Master, that you spent the night down here in the hall playing cat's-cradle with Mistress Rachel?’
Benjamin smiled.
‘She's beautiful, isn't she, Roger?
But she's not for you and she's certainly not for me.
This is no game.
We are surrounded by death, murder, plot and counter-plot.
There is no time for dalliance.
Trust no one except me until this matter is finished.’
He stared round.
‘Roger, despite the quilted cushions, the golden clocks, the silver spoons and Venetian goblets, this house has the stink of death about it.
I did not wish openly to agree with her but Mistress Rachel was correct.
There is something about this place which reeks of ancient sin and, the sooner our task is completed, the better.’
‘Do you think the secret Templars exist?’
I asked.
‘Possibly.
Such societies or covens batten on their own secrecy.
They create an exclusive world and, despite its green fields and pleasant villages, the King is right — England seethes with discontent.
Great lords with Yorkist blood in their veins hold high office.
There's a growing dislike of the Church.
The Scots still threaten in the north whilst in Europe great alliances are formed which leave England isolated.
In such an atmosphere secret societies like the Templars flourish.
You'll always find the strongest weeds on a dung hill.’
‘And the Grail and Excalibur?’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘The King wants them or, more importantly, if he can't have them, he wants to make sure no one else does.
I cannot make sense of that rhyme.
What are the waters of Jordan?’
He pulled a face at me.
‘That's  why I was talking to our young beauty last night.
Is there, in this God forsaken place, some stream, river, house or church bearing the name Jordan?
And where could Moses’ Ark possibly be?’
‘And could she help?’
‘No, nor could her father — or so Mandeville told me last night after you had retired.
So Master Hopkins's riddle is still shrouded in mystery.’
‘Did he leave any papers?’
‘None whatsoever.
According to Mandeville, before he left for his fateful journey to London, Hopkins cleared out his entire chamber, the very one you are now using.’
Benjamin pointed to the fire flickering in the great hearth.
‘He stripped his chamber of everything, and what he couldn't burn, he destroyed.’
‘A strange act.’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘Perhaps he had a premonition about what might happen in London.
Or maybe someone gave him a warning.
Or perhaps he knew that Warnham and Calcraft in Buckingham's retinue were really the King's agents.’
Benjamin sighed.
‘Whatever, Master Hopkins took his secret to the grave.’
He leaned closer.
‘Roger,’ he whispered, ‘I wish to stay here, but you go back to your chamber, collect your boots, cloak and that broad-brimmed hat you wear.
Sir John will leave within the hour.
When he does, I want you to follow him from afar off.
I know it will be hard in a snow-covered countryside but see where he goes to.’
The prospect didn't appeal to me but, there again, neither did the thought of lounging around Templecombe.
So I slipped back upstairs, taking more careful note of my surroundings, particularly the small gargoyle's heads in the cornices of the ceilings and, above all, the great blackened Beauce crosses.
Why hadn't they faded with time?
Were they being constantly re-painted and gilded as some sort of memorial to that ancient secretive order?
I reached the chamber, found the door half-open and cursed my own  stupidity.
I don't trust myself and, apart from Benjamin, I certainly didn't trust anyone else yet I had forgotten to take the key down with me.
I pushed the door open quietly.
A young woman sat with her back to me on the far side of the great fourposter bed.
Her head was covered in a white coif with a white shawl shaped in the form of a triangle going down her back like a liripipe.
I heard the clink of coins, smiled and tiptoed round the bed.
‘Good morrow, Mistress,’ I said, leaning against a bedpost.
I glanced at my purse in her lap and the coins scattered on the bed beside her.
‘Do I owe you something?’
The young woman just stared back like a frightened rabbit.
I caught a glimpse of auburn hair and large blue eyes in a suntanned face.
She seemed to be about seventeen or eighteen years old.
‘I asked you a question, Mistress.
Do I owe you some money?
If not,’ I continued sarcastically, ‘can you tell me why my purse is in your hand?’
I stepped closer and the young woman rose and made to flee but I seized her by the wrist.
She struggled.
‘I am sorry,’ she pleaded, her voice betraying a thick country burr.
‘Oh, sir, I am sorry but I saw it lying there and the temptation was too much for me.’
I pulled the girl closer, caught the faint perfume of lavender and roses and noted appreciatively how, under the brown smock, her plump breasts rose and fell in agitation.
‘You're Mathilda, aren't you?’
‘Yes, sir, I'm the chambermaid and I am also responsible for the linen cupboard.’
‘And you prepared the beds for Sir John's guests?’
The girl nodded, still wide-eyed.
‘Including the bed of the man who died?’
Now the girl's face paled.
‘Yes, sir, but as I have told Sir John and Master Devil…’
I laughed at the girl's pun on Mandeville's name.
With  his black garb, Italianate features and fearsome reputation, Sir Edmund must appear as Master Lucifer himself to the peasants of Templecombe Manor.
‘I saw nothing untoward,’ she repeated.
‘You are hurting me, sir, let go of my wrist!’
‘Why should I?
You are a thief.
You could be hanged for what you have done.’
I looked at her in mock sternness.
She caught the mischief in my eyes and pressed against me.
‘Oh, come, sir,’ she said.
‘Perhaps you could give me one of these coins and send me away with a beating?
I have been wicked.’
She pressed her body closer against me.
I could feel her soft breasts and noted how slender and long her neck was.
I released her hand and grasped her firmly by the buttocks, small but ripe.
The girl touched the leather belt round my waist.
‘You could use that,’ she said thickly.
Well, you know Old Shallot.
Like a jousting knight, my lance was ready!
The girl's body was curved and slender and my hands were straying to the ribbons on her bodice.
Then I thought again.
Old Shallot's rule: never force yourself on a woman.
And, like the romantic fool I was, I thought Mathilda was only offering herself in an act of desperation.
I tapped her gently, picked up a silver coin and thrust it into her soft, warm hand.
‘Don't do it again,’ I growled.
‘Now, begone!’
I heard her trip across the floor and the door closed behind her.
I stood, eyes closed, congratulating myself on my newly found sanctity — then cursed at the sharp knock on the door.
I went across and threw it open, exasperated that my holy moment had been so brutally shattered.
Mathilda stood there, her bodice unlaced, breasts as ripe as any fruit, half-spilling out of her dress.
‘I really do think,’ she murmured mischievously, ‘that I deserve correction.’
Well, what could I say?
Old Shallot has another rule: never resist temptation twice.
And within five minutes, we were both as naked as when we were born, bouncing merrily across the great fourposter bed.
She was young and vigorous, a warm and comely maid, and what she lacked in skill, Mathilda certainly made up for in enthusiasm.
She laughed and screamed until I had to smother her mouth with kisses.
Even now, years later, I still remember poor Mathilda.
A small, warm flash of sunlight in that grim, murderous place.
Sometime after, pleasantly exhausted, I collected my horse from the stable, saddled it and led it down the causeway out of the manor gate.
A fresh sheet of snow had fallen in the night which now lay two or three inches thick, the cold wind freezing it hard.
The countryside looked like some vision of hell; white, silent fields and black trees against a grey sky.
Rooks cawed as they foraged hungrily for food but, apart from that, nothing except the eerie, deathly silence of a countryside in the grip of winter.
Lord save us, I would have given a bag of silver for the sounds and smells of old Cheapside!
I had already gathered from the groom that Sir John had not left so, when I came to a small copse of trees, I took my horse deep inside, hobbled it and sat on a boulder.
I sipped from a wineskin, remembering Mathilda's warm charms and waiting for Sir John to come.
My buttocks began to freeze and I was wondering whether to return when I heard the clop of the horse's hooves and glimpsed Sir John riding vigorously by.
Despite the icy ground underneath, he was urging his large roan horse on with all his might.
A few minutes later I followed, using dips and bends in the track to keep myself hidden.
He reached the crossroads, deserted except for a lonely scaffold post and the rotting cadaver of a hanged man still in its gibbet jacket.
I watched Sir John take the path to Glastonbury and knew there was little point in tracking him any further.
The Lord of the Manor had  apparently lied to us.
He must have some urgent business with the monks to make this cold, lonely journey.
I turned my horse back, looking forward to the warmth of Templecombe Manor and feeling rather sleepy after my exertions with young Mathilda.
The turrets and gables of Templecombe were almost in sight beyond the trees when my horse whinnied and shook me awake.
A group of masked men had slipped like ghostly shadows from the trees on either side of the track.
They were all dressed in black, though I glimpsed the white three-pointed cross of the Templars daubed crudely on the shoulders of their cloaks.
‘What is it you want?’
I shouted, desperately trying to turn my horse's head so I could flee like the wind.
One of the figures moved.
I heard the click of a crossbow and a bolt whirled warningly above my head.
The man holding the crossbow approached; his voice, muffled by the mask he wore, ordered me to dismount.
‘Piss off!’
I shouted.
I desperately tried to draw my sword but my belly was churning with such fear that I was unable to grasp the hilt.
‘Get down!’
The group drew closer.
I glimpsed naked steel and, as you know, that has only one effect on Old Shallot.
I get this indescribable desire to flee.
One of the masked men tried to seize the bridle of my horse.
‘Damn you all!’
I screamed and, pushing my horse forward, sent him sprawling with my foot.
Hands clutched at my legs whilst the horse, thoroughly alarmed, reared, flailing his iron-shod hooves.
I had now regained some of my little courage, drew my sword and whirled it round my head like Sir Lancelot of the Lake.
My only desire was to keep these hideous creatures at bay whilst I desperately looked for a gap in the ring of steel surrounding me.
I felt my sword bite flesh, a scream, then I struck again.
I don't know what really happened for I had my eyes  closed, lashing out with my sword, whilst my horse, who had more courage than brains, took care of itself.
I heard hoof beats and opened one eye to see my attackers run back into the trees, two of them not moving as quickly as they would want.
I admit, I was quaking with fright and this had its usual effect on Old Shallot: weak legs, wobbly belly, heaving chest and total panic.
When my master found me I had dismounted and was squatting on a patch of snow, busily emptying the contents of my stomach.
Benjamin heard the faint crackling in the undergrowth but took one look at me and gave up any idea of pursuit.
Instead he took the wineskin from the horn of my saddle and forced me to drink.
He looked around and saw the patches of red on the snow.
‘A terrible fight, Roger?’
(God bless him, he was so innocent.)
‘I did my best, Master,’ I said humbly.
‘There must have been at least a dozen of them,’ I lied in mock modesty, ‘and I doubt if four of them will live to greet tomorrow's dawn.’
‘Who were they?’
‘God knows!’
I snarled.
‘They were hooded, capped and masked, though they had crude Templar crosses painted on their cloaks.
I think they were more than just a  marauding band of outlaws.’
Benjamin walked into the line of trees and stared through the snow-dripping darkness.
‘A dozen you say, Roger?’
‘At least, Master.’
‘Then why didn't they kill you immediately?’
‘I don't know!’
I snapped.
‘But when they come back, I'll ask them!’
‘No, no, you have been brave enough, Roger.
I think they either wanted to question you or give you a warning.
What it does prove,’ Benjamin continued, ‘is that they have the manor watched.
They must have seen you follow  Santerre.’
He looked over his shoulder at me.
‘And why aren't you pursuing him?’
‘There's no need.
For some reason the pompous bastard has decided to return to Glastonbury.
He must have pressing business there.
Perhaps,’ I added, ‘Santerre's a Templar and has gone to warn his masters that one of Mandeville's men has already been killed.’
I got up and drained the rest of the wineskin.
‘I'd give a bag of gold,’ Benjamin murmured, ‘to know what has taken Santerre to Glastonbury.
Perhaps you should have followed him.’
‘And do what?’
I shouted, my legs still shaking with fright.
‘Wandered into the monastery and said, ‘Oh, what a coincidence!
What are you doing here, Sir John?’
Anyway,’ I nodded into the trees, ‘perhaps those bastards would have struck before I reached Glastonbury.
There are enough woods, marshes and fog-shrouded moors to hide a bloody army in this Godforsaken land!’
I patted my horse, whispering my thanks to him, then mounted.
‘I'm going back to Templecombe,’ I moaned.
‘I'm tired, wet, pissed off, really pissed off, Master, and I have had enough!’
I looked evilly at him.
‘Anyway, what were you doing here?’
Benjamin remounted and grinned at me.
‘I am still intrigued by that witch.
I was trying to find the place we met her yesterday morning when I heard you shouting and the sounds of ambush so I rode to investigate.’
He pushed his horse nearer and grasped me by the arm, his long dark face, usually solemn, wreathed in smiles.
‘Come on, my warrior prince,’ he murmured.
‘What's a few footpads to a man like Shallot, eh?’
(I felt like telling him those bastards had aged me by years, but I suppose we have to keep up a brave face.)
‘Come on.’
Benjamin kicked his horse forward.
‘Let's see if we can find where the old witch lives.’
Moaning and groaning, I rode alongside.
We were almost  near Templecombe gates when Benjamin and I both decided that we had found the gap in the trees through which she had fled and, despite my warnings, he insisted on going in.
If the old witch was a prophet, then so was I, for we had hardly ridden a bow's length into the trees when Benjamin declared himself lost.
The wood was thick, the undergrowth covered in snow; even in summer it would have been difficult to follow the trackway.
It was already getting dark and so, to my relief, Benjamin decided to turn back.
Chapter 9
At Templecombe we found everyone going about their own business.
After stabling our horses, my master muttered that he had business to attend to and wandered off to his chamber.
I went looking for Mathilda and found her working in the buttery with the other maids.
She threw me a warning glance, telling me with her eyes to stay well away.
I begged a tankard of ale from a surly cook and went to warm myself before the hall fire until my master roused me.
‘Come on, Roger, we have work to do.
I have been thinking about that riddle.
Perhaps the old Templar chapel can provide an answer.’
I was warm and sleepy but my master kept haranguing me: compliance seemed the easiest way out so I put on my boots, grabbed my cloak and accompanied him down to the Templar chapel.
The door was open.
Inside, Mandeville and Southgate were standing near the baptismal font.
‘So the wanderer has returned?’
Southgate sneered.
‘What brings you here?’
‘The riddle,’ Benjamin replied.
‘We've already thought of that,’ Mandeville muttered.
‘But there's no Jordan water here, or Moses’ Ark.’
He pointed down the church.
‘Damien's in the sanctuary.
We found a pinewood arrow box.’
Mandeville bit his lip.
‘What's left of poor Cosmas has been sheeted, coffined, and lies before the altar.
It's the least we could do.’
He forced a  smile.
‘I would appreciate it, Master Daunbey, if you would go there, say a prayer and offer Damien your condolences.’
Benjamin agreed.
We walked down the dark, dingy nave under the simple rood screen into the sanctuary.
The makeshift coffin lay on trestles before the altar.
Six purple candles, three on either side, flickered in heavy iron holders.
Someone had nailed a simple crucifix to the top of the lid with the name ‘Cosmas’ scrawled in black beneath it.
On a prie-dieu, at the foot of the coffin, knelt the dead man's brother, his shaven head bowed, his shoulders shaking with silent sobs.
Mandeville came up behind us.
‘The coffin will lie here tonight,’ he whispered.
‘Tomorrow we will take it down to the village church.’
He then strode off as Damien turned, his eyes red with weeping, his white face now puffy.
Before, he had always been rather frightening but now he looked pathetic with his tear-stained cheeks, grieving eyes and red gaping mouth which could only make gurgling sounds as Benjamin took him by the hand and tried to convey his condolences.
The poor mute nodded, his hideous face twisted into a smile, but when he looked at me, his eyes narrowed.
Oh no, I thought, here we go.
Old Shallot's a suspect again!
I tried to look sympathetic but that only made matters worse and the fellow waved his fingers in the air as a sign for us to go and, turning his back, resumed his prayers.
We left and he followed us to the church door.
We heard it slam behind us and the key turn in the lock.
‘The poor fellow wants to be alone,’ Benjamin murmured.
‘I understand that,’ I replied.
‘But must he look at me as if I am the murderer?’
Benjamin linked his arm through mine and we walked back to the manor house.
‘I know the truth, Roger.
But they think differently.
After all, you were the first to leave the dinner table.
You could have prepared that fire and retired to bed.’
‘How could I?’
I cried.
‘Moreover, Master,’ I dragged my arm away, ‘you know Cosmas was a professional spy, an agent.
Didn't he lock his chamber door?’
‘Unfortunately not,’ Benjamin replied.
He looked at me, his face innocent.
‘Don't forget, Roger, the key was on the inside of his chamber.
Cosmas thought he was safe.
After all, he was protected by the King's chief agent.
Remember the old proverb: ‘It's easy for the hunter to forget how quickly it is to become the hunted.’
Anyway,’ he seized my arm again, ‘do you always lock your chamber?’
I wondered if my master knew something about my tryst with Mathilda but he had that distant, innocent expression.
Benjamin at his most inscrutable.
‘Did you really think,’ I asked, quickly changing the subject, ‘the chapel could pose a solution to Hopkins's riddle?’
‘Not really, but the riddle must refer to a place.
Either here at Templecombe or, more likely, Glastonbury.’
‘There's one other place, Master.’
‘Such as?’
‘The house on the island.’
Benjamin's face beamed in surprise.
‘Of course,’ he breathed and, turning round, went back past the chapel and down to the lakeside.
We stood staring across the icy water at the mist-shrouded island.
God knows, it was a most desolate place.
The water was covered with a film of ice whilst above it a grey mist boiled.
It almost disguised the island and its strange Templar house for we could only glimpse the tiles of its roof.
‘I wonder what used to happen there?’
Benjamin whispered.
I shivered and stamped my feet.
You didn't have to have the soul of a poet to conjure up what could have been; in my mind's eye I had a vision of Templars in their faceless conical helmets, red and white crosses on their black cloaks, moving across the island at the dead of night, the barges  being soundlessly poled whilst, at prow and stern, huge cresset torches spluttered and flared in the darkness.
Why would they go there?
I wondered.
Some macabre rite?
A Satanic mass?
The conjuring of evil spirits?
Or to indulge in illicit sexual pleasures?
‘We should go across,’ Benjamin commented.
‘Not now, Master,’ I said, trying to hide my panic.
‘It's growing dark.
Heaven knows how thick that ice is.
And, if we have to go, I would like to be armed.’
Thankfully, Benjamin agreed and we returned to the manor house.
I was cold and stiff, so went back to my chamber to warm myself.
I lay on the bed for a while wondering if Mathilda might return, before drifting into a troubled sleep where ghastly figures, masked and hooded, danced on a lonely island before a terrible demon god.
Benjamin shook me awake.
‘Santerre has returned,’ he whispered.
‘Let's go down and see where he really went.’
We found Sir John and his family in the great hall, sitting on the coffer-box chairs before the fire.
Santerre seemed cheerful enough, shuffling his feet, warming his hands, and loudly declaring how good it was to be back in his own home and with his own people.
He smiled and waved us over.
‘A good day's business,’ he bellowed.
‘Despite the snow, all seems well.’
He picked up a brimming wine goblet from the small table beside him.
‘And you, sirs, you feel at home now?’
Benjamin made the usual tactful responses.
I just stared at Santerre's cheery face.
The man's a consummate liar, I thought.
This bastard, with his bluff ways, merry eyes and welcoming invitations, nearly had me murdered this morning.
Santerre patted his stomach.
‘God knows, I have an appetite!’ he bellowed, smacking his lips.
He grinned at his wife.
‘Good food, eh, wife?’
Lady Beatrice caught his mood and laughed back.
‘Only the best for the Lord and Master!’
‘Pork roasted in a lemon sauce, with slices of mutton, heavily garnished.’
Santerre rubbed his stomach.
‘This cold weather puts the wolf in your belly, eh, Master Shallot?
A bowl of claret and afterwards a game of dice?’
Mandeville and Southgate walked stiff-legged into the hall.
Both men were not amused by Sir John's high spirits during a time of mourning.
‘Have you seen Damien?’
Mandeville snapped.
‘Yes,’ Benjamin replied.
‘About two or three hours ago.’
‘But that was in the chapel.’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘You asked, we answered!’
Mandeville stared into the fire.
God knows, perhaps I have a sixth sense, but the hair on the nape of my neck prickled with fear.
‘He can't still be praying,’ Southgate insisted.
The good humour drained from Santerre's face.
Rachel and her mother looked agitated.
Benjamin got briskly to his feet.
‘Talk is futile.
Let us go to the chapel.
If he's not there, perhaps he went for a walk in the grounds?’
We all left, going through the kitchen, out across the courtyard and down the trackway to the church.
The door was still locked and, when I peered through the shuttered windows, I could see no sign of candlelight.
‘Damien!’
Mandeville roared.
He tried the handle but the door was locked.
‘Damien!’
Mandeville shouted again and, losing his poise, hammered with his fists against the metal-studded door.
‘Mother!’
Rachel cried.
‘Come with me.’
The two women went down the side of the church, shouting Damien's name through the shutters.
Mandeville continued his knocking.
Santerre sent for servants and, at his direction, they dragged out a huge log drying in the stables for Yuletide.
Mandeville supervised them as if he was besieging a  castle.
Ropes were wrapped around the log and the servants swung it backwards and forward, hammering at the door until it groaned, cracked, then snapped back on its hinges.
‘Everyone is to stay where they are.’
Mandeville wiped the sweat from his face.
‘No one is to enter this church until I say.’
He went in.
‘The key is still in the lock,’ he exclaimed.
‘And even the bolts were drawn shut!’
He walked up the church shouting for Southgate to join him.
We all clustered silently by the door until a chilling moan from Mandeville and a despairing shout of ‘Oh, no!’ sent us hurrying into the church.
In the nave nothing had been disturbed.
Santerre ordered the torches to be lit.
In the sanctuary we found Damien sprawled over the prie-dieu.
A small crossbow bolt had been sent smashing into the back of his skull.
He had been thrown violently forwards, the blood which had spurted from nose and mouth splattering the base of his brother's coffin.
Mandeville pulled the corpse back, turning him gently in his arms like a mother would a child.
In the flickering cresset torch Damien's face looked horrible: the eyes half-open, the mouth silent for ever now, blood caking his face from brow to chin.
Mandeville laid the corpse gently on the floor.
‘Some bastard will pay for this!’ he hissed, the glint of madness in his eyes.
Santerre stepped back, spreading his hands.
‘Sir, do not threaten me.
You saw the door was locked from the inside.’
‘Where's the other key?’
‘On a ring on my belt.
And where I go, it goes.’
Southgate leaned over and patted Benjamin on the chest.
‘You saw Damien last?’
‘What are you implying?’ my master retorted.
‘Do you accuse me or Shallot of this murder?
And if so, how?’
Benjamin pointed to the dead man.
‘He saw us out of the church and locked the door behind us.’
Benjamin spun on his heel, grabbed a torch from Sir John  Santerre and walked down the nave, beckoning me to follow him.
We stopped at the far end just under the small choir loft where there was a recess leading up to the tower.
Benjamin gestured with his hand.
‘Sir Edmund,’ he shouted.
‘Put the corpse back as you found it and come here!’
The two Agentes were about to object but had the sense to see what Benjamin was doing.
They joined us at the far end of the church, Benjamin shouting at the Santerres to stand back.
‘Don't you see, Sir Edmund?’ he exclaimed.
‘Someone could have been hiding here when we came into the church earlier today.
We talked and you left, then Damien ushered us out and went back to the prie-dieu.
Now, let's pretend we are the assassin, standing here with a crossbow looking up towards the sanctuary.’
He lifted the torch and Mandeville followed his gaze.
‘Yes, yes,’ he muttered.
‘I see, Master Daunbey.
Poor Damien was kneeling at the entrance to the sanctuary screen, an easy target for someone lurking here with a crossbow.’
Benjamin lowered the torch close to the paved stone floor, scrabbling round with his fingers.
‘Look, in the torchlight you can see a dark stain.
I agree it's hard to distinguish between our footprints but this stain, this wetness, shows someone stood here for some time, their cloak and boots heavy with snow.
They must have come here even before Damien.
When we all left, and he locked the door behind us, the murderer committed his crime.’
Southgate clapped his hands slowly.
‘Most ingenious, my dear Daunbey.
But how did the murderer leave?’
Benjamin shouted at Santerre now walking down the nave towards us.
‘Sir John are there any secret entrances to this church?’
‘None,’ Rachel replied.
‘For God's sake, Master Daunbey, see for yourself.’
Benjamin asked for more torches and we went round the walls studying the floor.
Nothing but hard stone.
The only other entrance was a small door to the left of the sanctuary but that was closed with a padlock, rusting with age, and obviously had not been opened for years.
‘There's no sacristy here?’
I asked.
‘None whatsoever,’ Sir John replied.
‘When the Templars used this church, the priests would vest for mass either in the manor or here in the sanctuary.’
Benjamin took his torch and walked along the walls examining the shutters of each window.
All were closed, their clasps firmly in place.
‘A veritable mystery,’ he murmured.
‘The murderer was locked in but how did he get out?
Sir John, these shutters, they are locked from the inside?’
‘And from the outside,’ Santerre shouted.
‘Oh, sweet heaven!’
Benjamin breathed.
He led the group out of the church and, in a ring of torchlight, examined each window and the snow beneath.
However, this only deepened the mystery for the outside latch on each shutter was also down and, apart from the fresh footprints of Lady Beatrice and Rachel, there was no sign that anyone had used the window to get in or out.
‘Well,’ Southgate declared, as we gathered outside the door of the church again.
‘Damien's dead, murdered!’
‘Death by steel,’ I replied.
‘Don't forget the witch's curse.’
‘If it's witchcraft,’ Mandeville grated, ‘I'll see the old bitch burn within a week!’
He glared at Rachel.
‘You are right, Mistress, this house is cursed.
Two of the King's most loyal servants have died here, foully murdered.
The place should be burnt down.’
‘Nonsense!’
Benjamin interrupted.
‘Damien was killed with a crossbow bolt and ghosts don't leave stains on the floor.
We know how the murderer got in and where he lurked, the only problem is how he got out.’
Benjamin drew  himself up so his shoulders were no longer stooped.
‘Can't you see what is happening?’ he exclaimed.
‘The assassin has marked us down for death, but first he is playing with us like a cat does with a mouse.
The fear of death is often worse than death itself.
Cosmas and Damien's murders are meant to torture and punish us as well as unnerve and divert us from our true mission.
Two men are dead.
Yet, Sir Edmund, I am confident the assassin will eventually make a mistake.’
Mandeville viciously kicked at the snow with the toe of his boot.
‘But when, Master Daunbey, when?’
He looked at his lieutenant.
‘Southgate, have Damien's corpse removed.
Sir John, I will need a chest.
Tomorrow you will move both bodies down to the village church.’
Mandeville strode off, then stopped and turned.
‘Southgate, before you do that, I would remove everything from Damien's room, all papers and documents.
Sir John, dismiss the servants.
I need to see you all in the hall.’
We obeyed and went in to sit in a sombre half-circle round the fire.
No thought of food or drink now as Mandeville strode up and down in front of us, so angry he seemed impervious to the roaring flames of the fire.
‘Tomorrow,’ he began, ‘we must go to Glastonbury.
The snow lies thick but not deep enough to hinder justice.’
He wiped his mouth on the back of his hand.
‘I could ask where each of you were today but what's the use?’
I glanced quickly at Sir John.
Apart from Benjamin and I, he was the only one who had left the manor so his cloak and boots would have been covered in snow.
Had he gone to Glastonbury or come back by a secret route to Templecombe to hide himself in the church?
Or was the assassin already here?
Could it have been one of the footpads who tried to ambush me earlier that day?
I glanced up.
Mandeville was staring at me as if trying to read my thoughts.
‘We must be careful,’ he murmured, drawing in deep  breaths to calm himself.
‘We must not start accusing each other of murder.
Any one of your tenants, Sir John, and I mean no offence, could be the assassin.
Perhaps Master Shallot is right, we must not forget that damned witch.’
‘She may know something, Sir Edmund,’ Benjamin tactfully intervened.
‘But the murderer of Cosmas and Damien must be in this household.’
Mandeville agreed.
‘Sir John, tomorrow morning at first light, I want all your servants gathered here in the main hall.
And pray, sir, do not object.
This is the King's business.’
He pushed by the chairs and strode out of the hall.
Benjamin nodded apologetically to Sir John, beckoned to me and hastily followed.
Mandeville was already half-way up the stairs.
‘Sir Edmund,’ my master called, ‘a word!’
Mandeville looked down, his eyes glowing with a murderous rage.
‘Piss off, Daunbey!
In there I have to be courteous but I'll never forget that you and that bloody rogue of a servant were the last to see my clerk alive!’
He came back down the stairs.
‘You think it's a game, don't you?’ he snarled.
‘I have lost two good men.
Four, if you include Warnham and Calcraft.’
Mandeville pushed his face only inches away from that of Benjamin.
‘You may not like what we are, the King's agents, his tools, his spies.
You may not even like the King, but he wears the Crown of the Confessor.
A strong prince is infinitely better than ten strong princes fighting for the crown.’
‘I accept what you say,’ Benjamin quietly replied.
‘But that is not the matter at issue.’
Mandeville looked away.
‘You are right,’ he breathed.
‘It is not.
I have lost many agents but Cosmas and Damien were like flesh and blood.
I mourn their deaths.’
‘Then, sir,’ I exclaimed, ‘it is a time for honesty!’
I approached, shrugging off Benjamin's warning touch.
‘We are the only ones you can trust.
Warnham and Calcraft died before we ever entered this play.
So let me ask you honestly, the man we met in Newgate wasn't Taplow, was he?’
The anger drained from Mandeville's face.
He beckoned us further down the gallery and into a window embrasure where no one could eavesdrop.
He stared through the paned glass and smiled apologetically.
‘You are correct, Taplow died at Smithfield but the man you met was not him.’
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘The King's orders.’
‘And those letters Buckingham wrote?’
Now Mandeville's face paled.
He still had a flicker of morality in him.
‘Our King always wanted Buckingham dead, as did the Lord Cardinal.
It was simply a matter of fitting a noose round his neck.’
‘And Hopkins?’
I insisted.
‘A stupid priest who may have been a secret Templar and had access to hidden knowledge.’
‘And the rest…the Grail, Excalibur, the Templars themselves?’
‘Oh, that's all true.’
‘Come, Sir Edmund,’ Benjamin mocked.
‘Just tell us what is really true!’
Mandeville leaned against the wall and ticked the points off on his fingers.
‘First,’ he whispered, ‘the King wanted Buckingham dead.
He was powerful, over mighty, had Yorkist blood in his veins.
He also hated the King because of Henry's seduction of his sister.
Secondly, Buckingham wanted those relics, the Grail and Excalibur.
God knows why.
Perhaps as curios, perhaps as a talisman he could use in some conspiracy against the King.
Thirdly, Buckingham may not have been a traitor but he undoubtedly entertained  treasonable thoughts, perhaps was a secret Templar.
Fourthly, Hopkins was a conniving priest, a possible Templar, with an open distaste for our King.
Fifthly, Taplow the tailor was a Lutheran, also involved in treasonable practices.’
‘Such as?’
I brusquely interrupted.
‘He had tenuous links with Buckingham and also with Master Hopkins.
I admit the letters Buckingham supposedly wrote to him were forgeries, as was Taplow's evidence at Buckingham's trial.
The poor bastard was tortured so much he would have confessed to anything.’
‘So why,’ Benjamin asked, ‘didn't you allow us to interrogate the real Taplow?’
Mandeville stared through the frosted glass.
‘I asked a question, Sir Edmund?’
‘Taplow was promised his life if he supported our destruction of Buckingham but in Newgate he began to recant.’
This most sinister of spies shrugged.
‘For a short time one of my agents took his place.’
Mandeville smiled mirthlessly.
‘I wondered if it would work.
What made you suspect he wasn't the person he claimed to be?’
‘Lutherans don't believe in Purgatory, the Taplow we met did.’
Mandeville sniffed disparagingly.
‘Did you know Mistress Hopkins was murdered?’
Benjamin asked.
Mandeville shook his head.
‘We thought she wasn't worth the bother of watching.’
‘Well, someone thought she was important and garrotted her.
By the way, do you know who killed Warnham and Calcraft?’
‘If I did,’ Mandeville snapped, ‘the murderer would be hanging on the gibbet at Smithfield!’
‘So how much of the rest do you think is true?’
I asked.
‘Oh, the Grail and Excalibur exist.
The King is most insistent on that.’
‘And the Templars?’
‘Oh, yes, we have been hunting them for years.
They are a secret organisation existing in cells of six or seven.
No single coven knows much about the others but they are powerful, spread like a net through France, Spain, Scotland and England.
They are particularly strong here in the South-West.’
‘Who is their leader?’
‘A Grand Master, but we don't know his name or which country he lives in.’
Mandeville suddenly put his finger to his lips and stepped out of the window embrasure.
He looked down to the gallery where the Santerres now stood outside the hall door.
‘Sir John,’ Mandeville called, ‘I should be grateful if you could stay in the hall.
Certain questions must be asked.’
‘Look,’ Benjamin continued, ‘why are the King and his agents so interested in this secret society?’
Mandeville waited for the Santerres to withdraw before he answered.
‘The Templars are particularly hostile to the King and have supported most of the Yorkist rebellions.
They circulate stories about the Princes in the Tower still being alive and, during the present King's father's reign, they supported the two imposters, Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck.
If you remember your history, Master Daunbey, you may recall the fiercest rebellions were here in the South-West.
When the King was a boy, rebels from the West Country made him flee from the city whilst the pretender, Perkin Warbeck, actually laid siege to Exeter.’
‘Is Santerre under suspicion?’
‘Yes and no.
Santerre has proved to be a most loyal subject of the King but Hopkins served him as a chaplain and Buckingham came here looking for those relics.’
Mandeville snorted with laughter.
‘Matters are not helped by the two recent murders.’
‘And Lady Beatrice?
Her maiden name is Belamonte.
Her first husband, Lord of Templecombe, was Sir Roger Mortimer.’
Mandeville shook his head.
‘Her loyalty is really beyond question.
After all, it was Lady Beatrice who urged Santerre to confess everything about Buckingham to my two agents.’
‘And the monks at Glastonbury?’
Mandeville smiled bleakly.
‘A pretty mess.
Strong links probably existed between the Templars and the abbey.
Hopkins was a member of that house and the monks do guard the remains of Arthur whilst this mysterious riddle was found in a manuscript of their library.
Mandeville gnawed at his lip.
‘I have been honest with you.
Now, sir, be truthful with me.
What do you know?’
My master described what had happened on the trackway earlier that day.
‘Probably members of the Templar coven,’ Mandeville commented.
‘They could have been responsible for the deaths of Cosmas and Damien,’ I added.
‘Thus we must resolve the matter,’ Benjamin declared.
‘The servants of this house could, one or all, be either the assassins or in their pay.’
‘We shall deal with them in the morning,’ Mandeville snapped.
‘There's something else,’ Benjamin continued.
‘Sir Edmund, we must solve the riddle.
Yet, as far as I can see, this house or the chapel have nothing even vaguely resembling the waters of Jordan or Moses’ Ark.’
He shrugged apologetically.
‘I have wandered round the galleries but there's no painting or carving to arouse my curiosity.
Only two other places remain: Glastonbury Abbey and the desolate building on that lonely island in the middle of the lake.’
‘When we were at Glastonbury,’ Mandeville answered, stroking the side of his face, ‘I told the abbot to send one  of his lay brothers to Taunton with a message for the sheriff to bring armed men to Templecombe.
I expect them tomorrow morning.
Once they have arrived we will interrogate the servants, cross to the is lad as well as hunt down that bloody witch.’
‘And the two murders?’
I asked.
‘Do we have any further evidence?’
‘Nothing,’ Benjamin replied quickly.
‘One man dies in his bed which mysteriously catches fire.
Another is killed by a crossbow bolt but the only door is bolted and the windows shuttered.
We have established the assassin had been tramping round in the snow, yet Lady Beatrice and Rachel are wearing the same clothes as they were this morning and, as far as I know, never left the house.’
‘Both of you did,’ Mandeville tartly replied.
‘But why should we kill Damien?
Others were in the house.’
Mandeville caught Benjamin's steady glance.
‘Well, before you ask me, Master Daunbey, I stayed here, though Southgate did leave to ride the estate.’
He tilted his head and stared down the gallery.
‘And, of course,’ he whispered, ‘there is always Sir John Santerre.’
I looked sharply at my master.
He tugged his ear lobe, our agreed sign for the other to remain silent.
Benjamin did not fully trust Mandeville and was unwilling to admit that Sir John Santerre might have gone to Glastonbury.
Our meeting then broke up, Mandeville stalking back into the hall whilst we returned to our chambers.
Benjamin became lost in his own thoughts so I left him alone and lay on my own bed thinking about Mathilda until the bell sounded for supper.
Despite the rich food, the meal was a sombre affair.
Benjamin tried his best to make light conversation but Mandeville and Southgate were withdrawn, Sir John Santerre lost in his own thoughts, Lady Beatrice looked anxious  whilst the pale-faced Rachel merely toyed with her food.
Once the table had been cleared and everyone was preparing to leave, my master suddenly stood up.
‘This house must be searched,’ he declared.
‘Every room, every closet.’
‘What for?’
Mandeville asked.
‘I don't really know though I will when I see it.’
Santerre bristled with rage.
‘You may accompany us,’ Benjamin added softly.
‘Must it be now?’
Lady Beatrice asked.
‘I agree,’ Mandeville insisted.
‘Either now or tomorrow when Sir Henry Bowyer will arrive with armed men from Taunton.’
Sir John flinched.
‘Is that necessary?’
‘Yes, I sent the message when I was at Glastonbury.
The sheriff's men will be able to assist us.
Now, after the death of two of my colleagues, I need them for my own protection.
Anyway, I am sure you prefer myself and Master Daunbey to search the house rather than clod-hopping shire levies?’
Sir John did not demur but insisted that he join us.
Servants were called, torches and lamps brought and we began our search.
Believe me, Templecombe proved to be an even larger house than I thought.
The cellars were huge and cavernous but contained nothing remarkable; beer barrels, wine tuns, cut logs, sea coal and other stores.
At the far end of the cellar, we found one chamber where the door was padlocked and barred.
Santerre hastened to open it but told us not to bring any torches in.
‘Gunpowder and oil are stored here,’ he explained.
‘We use it for taking rock from the local quarries.’
The door was opened and I went in.
The room was nothing more than a dry, musty cell.
Benjamin followed, studying the coiled slow fuses, jars of oil and small barrels of gunpowder piled there.
He cocked his head to one side and I could see that something had caught his attention.
‘What is it, Master?’
‘Nothing, nothing at all.’
We continued our search and, I tell you this, if any place was haunted, it was Templecombe, particularly those cellars.
We then returned upstairs, going from room to room, only to discover nothing untoward.
At last Mandeville himself called off the search, rubbing his eyes and yawning.
‘We have done what we can,’ he commented.
‘Tomorrow we search the church and cross to the island.’
Benjamin objected.
‘There are still the servants’ quarters.’
Mandeville made a face.
‘Let the sheriff's men deal with them.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.’
We returned to our chambers, Benjamin joining me in mine.
He sat on the edge of the bed and began to recite all he knew as if memorising some poem: ‘Buckingham dies, the agents die, garrotted to death.’
He looked up.
‘Did you know you can garrotte someone in a few seconds?’
‘Is that relevant?’
I asked.
I felt so tired I just wanted to go to sleep.
‘No.
No,’ Benjamin murmured absentmindedly.
‘Then we come here and a witch warns us, prophesying death by various means.
Cosmas is burnt to death in his bed; Damien killed by a mysterious archer who apparently can pass through thick walls, but there's no clue to the riddle, no sign of the Templars and not a shred of evidence to indicate where the Grail or Excalibur lie.’
He rubbed his chin.
‘But there must be a solution.
Perhaps the sheriff's men will help.’
Chapter 10
We were awakened the next morning by Sir Henry Bowyer's rough arrival accompanied by at least a dozen likely-looking rogues.
These were not shire levies but professional soldiers who acted as the sheriff's posse in the pursuit of criminals.
Bowyer was a short, squat man with very little hair and a cheery red face.
He was always smiling and greeted us most amicably as we broke our fast in the great hall.
Nevertheless, he was a man you wouldn't trust.
He had piss-holes as eyes, foul breath, decaying teeth and an attitude towards Mandeville which can only be described as servile.
The sort of man whose head has been turned by success and left him staring in the wrong direction.
Bowyer's troopers, as professional soldiers are wont, soon made themselves at home in the courtyard and outhouses: within an hour, Sir John was receiving complaints of food being stolen from the kitchen; jugs of wine mysteriously emptying; and chickens, full of life the night before, suddenly being killed, plucked and spitted over makeshift fires.
Santerre, however, had problems of his own as Mandeville, assisted by Southgate and a servile Bowyer, had the great hall cleared and turned into a shire court.
He and Bowyer sat at the high table, the Santerres and ourselves were treated as onlookers.
Mandeville then gathered all the servants, cooks, scullions, chambermaids, Mathilda included, even the men from the stables.
He addressed them in short, pithy sentences and promptly began his interrogation of each of them.
‘How long have you served here?’
‘Does the word ‘Templar’ mean anything to you?’
‘Did anyone approach the chapel yesterday afternoon?’
The servants were good but simple people, local peasants who simply shook their heads and stared wide-eyed at this powerful lord from London.
Nevertheless, I admired Mandeville's skill for, as he questioned, I caught the unease of some of them.
Nothing really significant: a flicker of the eyes, a slight paleness of the face.
Answers given too quickly and too readily.
Mathilda herself was very ill-at-ease, shifting from foot to foot.
Mandeville sensed this and closed like a hawk for the kill.
‘You are the linen maid?’
Mathilda nodded.
‘Aren't you curious about these strangers staying in your master's house?’
She shook her head.
‘So you have not abused your position by searching our belongings?’
Mathilda's eyes flickered quickly towards me.
‘No, Master,’ she murmured.
‘I can vouch for that,’ I exclaimed.
‘The girl didn't know I was in my room when she was changing the linen.
She's the complete opposite to me, Sir Edmund, honest as the day is long.’
Benjamin looked strangely at me but a ripple of laughter lessened the tension and Mathilda was dismissed.
The others came up.
Mandeville asked the questions, or sometimes Southgate.
Occasionally, to show his power, the sheriff would try to hector, though Mandeville kept him firmly under control.
At last it was finished but before the servants were dismissed, Mandeville ordered their quarters to be searched.
Sir John and Lady Beatrice vehemently objected  to this, so Benjamin offered to supervise the soldiers and ensure it was not used as a pretext for theft or pillage.
This search, like the questioning, proved fruitless so Mandeville brusquely dismissed the servants.
I watched them leave, paying particular attention to Mathilda and how she held the arm of a grizzle-haired, thickset man who appeared to be her father.
I noticed he had a slight limp; I recalled the attack on me the previous day and the wounds I had unwittingly inflicted, but decided to keep the matter to myself.
After that we made a thorough search of the chapel, its walls, flagstones and altar, but there was nothing.
We even looked under the ancient stalls the Templars once sat in, and I confess (as is the wont of old Shallot) I did little work but spent most of the time admiring the brilliant carvings on the misericord of each stall.
The first three enthralled me: a man, miserably clutching a winding frame, being birched on the buttocks by his wife; a tapster drinking; and two peasants disembowelling a slaughtered pig.
Each carving was a breath-taking picture in itself.
Benjamin came over to join me.
‘The Templars,’ he declared, ‘would come into the stalls and raise the seats.
The carvings were placed on the reverse, not only for ornamentation's sake but to make the seats heavier.’
He grinned and pointed to the woman birching her husband.
‘The local craftsmen always enjoyed themselves, depicting scenes far from sacred.’
Mandeville, however, had finished his search which proved just as fruitless as the previous day's and told us to leave.
We all moved out of the church down to the lake which glistened brightly, though the island itself was still mist-shrouded.
A number of barges were hidden in the trees along the lakeside and Mandeville and Santerre ordered these to be brought together.
They were cleaned of frozen mud, made ready, and we all clambered aboard, Bowyer's soldiers poling us across.
God be my witness, that island was the most mysterious I had ever visited.
It was damp, cold, eerie and uncanny.
The trees were too close together and the snow-covered gorse seemed to have a life of its own, blocking our passage with its thick stems.
We struggled through, soaking ourselves to the skin.
‘Have you noticed anything?’
Benjamin breathlessly whispered.
He stopped and looked up at the tangle of gaunt branches above him.
‘No birds here!
No rooks, no crows, nothing at all!’
I stopped and listened, straining my ears for any sound above the crashing of the soldiers or the muttered curses as men slipped on the icy ground underfoot.
This raucous noise only seemed to emphasize the ominous silence of the island and reminded me of a story I had heard from a traveller who claimed to have sailed the Western Ocean and come across islands inhabited by ghosts of dead sailors.
I shivered and muttered a curse.
Mandeville and the others had now drawn their swords and were cutting their way through.
The Agentes, in particular, seemed to be affected by the oppressive mood of the island and were taking out their fears in the hacking blows of their swords.
At last we reached a clearing and the desolate building we had glimpsed from the shore.
It was of yellowing sandstone with a dark, red-tiled roof, no windows but thin, trefoil arrow slits in the walls.
The iron-studded door was padlocked.
Santerre apologised, he had no key, so Southgate hacked the padlock off and kicked the door open.
We walked in and torches were lit.
Believe me, the sombre atmosphere of that place seemed a living thing which clutched the heart and dulled the spirit.
Nothing in particular, just a yawning emptiness, a cold chilling air which had little to do with the ice and snow outside.
‘A home of death,’ I muttered.
‘Or a very sacred place,’ Benjamin replied.
Mandeville ordered the soldiers to stand round the walls, taking their torches which spluttered bravely against the darkness.
I had the almost childish impression that if we kept within the pools of light everything would be fine but, beyond the flames, shadows lurked and powers even darker waited to catch you by the throat.
The floor was hard paving stone, the walls lime-washed, the room devoid of even a stick of furniture.
The soldiers grew uneasy and grumbled amongst themselves so Mandeville shouted at them to begin the search.
Those men were professional foragers and, if there was a loose paving stone or secret passageway, they would have found it, but there was nothing.
Benjamin, however, just squatted, moving like a spider from one paving stone to another.
He stopped, exclaiming in surprise, so we gathered round as he scraped the floor with his finger.
‘Candle grease,’ he observed.
‘Someone has been here and fairly recently.’
Other drops were found but nothing else so Mandeville ordered us to resume our search.
I kept a wary eye on Santerre for this bluff manor lord, usually afraid of nothing, stayed near the door like a child frightened of a dark, strange room.
‘Is anything wrong?’
I asked.
Santerre shook his head but his face was pallid and I saw the beads of sweat on his cheeks.
‘What is it?’
I muttered.
The soldiers pushed by us, eager to get out.
Santerre just shook his head.
‘Nothing,’ he muttered.
‘Are you sure?’
Benjamin asked, coming up beside him.
Again Santerre nodded.
Benjamin looked up at the white-washed wall above the door.
He waited until the rest had left.
‘Sir John, I think something is very wrong and  Mandeville, in his haste, has overlooked it.’
Santerre just stared at him.
‘It's the walls,’ Benjamin continued.
‘They have been recently white-washed.
Now why was that done, eh?’
‘I don't know,’ Santerre mumbled and trudged off to join the others.
We crossed back to the other bank, Mandeville striding away from the barge, shouting orders at Southgate.
A cart pulled out from the courtyard, driven by a soldier taking the two coffins down to the village church where the priest would sing a requiem and those two pathetic brothers be buried and, in time, forgotten.
Mandeville made ready to follow.
The pompous Bowyer was ordered to stay at the manor but Sir Edmund waved us over.
‘You will come with us to Glastonbury, though first we have one further task to accomplish.’
He refused to say any more so we collected riding boots, hats and cloaks from our chambers.
A white-faced Mathilda sped by me in the gallery but Benjamin was shouting for me so I decided not to accost her.
We collected our horses, took leave of Santerre and galloped down the frozen, cobbled track as if Mandeville intended to waste no time in reaching Glastonbury before nightfall.
We rode a good way along the track before Mandeville slowed, leaned over and talked quietly to Southgate.
Eventually they reined in.
Southgate declared, ‘Yes, this is the spot,’ and I realised we were going witch-hunting.
We dismounted, One soldier was ordered to guard the horses whilst another, a lean whippet of a man with leathery skin and sea-blue eyes, was beckoned over by Mandeville.
Sir Edmund grasped the soldier by the shoulder and introduced him.
‘Bowyer calls this man Pointer because he is a skilled hunter.
If anyone can find his way through the tracks and forest paths to where that hag lives, Pointer will!’
The man grinned wolfishly, showing jagged teeth.
He  was well named.
I have seen better looking hunting dogs.
Mandeville fished in his purse and brought out a silver coin, rolling it in his fingers.
Pointer watched it greedily.
‘Find this old bitch's hut and two of these are yours.’
Pointer needed no further encouragement and I was too intrigued to object to floundering through the frozen bracken.
Pointer set off through the trees with a loping stride.
God knows how he did, they were clumped together and the undergrowth beneath made more treacherous by a carpet of snow.
On no occasion did Pointer seem bemused or in doubt but led us on, disregarding the ankle-deep snow and the sudden flurries and falls from over-hanging branches.
(On reflection, men like Pointer are not so rare.
Once, in the wild dark woods of Muscovy, I was hunted by men and dogs in one of the most terrifying escapades of my life.
I had been invited to a banquet by some mad Russian prince.
What I didn't know was that I was the entertainment afterwards!
Before the hunt began, the mad bastard told me that if the yellow-haired mastiffs did not tear me to pieces, I'd be pulled apart by horses.
You can be assured I needed no further encouragement to run on that occasion, but that's another tale.)
Now I dislike the countryside at the height of summer, but that forest was bewitched.
I protested loudly against the darkness, nature's traps and, above all, kept thinking of those assailants who'd attacked me yesterday.
‘A natural place for an ambush,’ I cried.
Mandeville grinned and wiped the sweat from his face.
‘That's why I told no one back at the manor of our visit.
I want to give this old bitch the surprise of her life.’
At last the trees gave way to a clearing.
At the far end was a small rocky hillock as if huge boulders had been jammed together by the hand of some mythical giant.
At the base of this cliff was a large cavern.
Mandeville drew  his sword and we followed suit, though God knows what we expected to find.
We strode cautiously across as if the old hag might appear at the mouth of the cave, uttering curses and dire prophecies, yet everything remained silent.
Benjamin stopped and pointed to the entrance.
There had been a light snowfall the previous night but it looked as if someone else had been here, visited the witch then gone back to the line of trees, covering their tracks by using a switch of old branches so no imprint could be seen.
We entered the cave.
The fire which should have flared at the entrance was a pile of wet ash and the oil-topped torches were extinguished.
Mandeville lit one of these and we went deeper in.
A strange place — carvings on the wall which, Benjamin explained, must be centuries old.
The cave itself was surprisingly warm and we realised we were walking through a gallery which led us into a lofty underground cavern.
It was furnished like any room.
The rushes on the floor were clean and sprinkled with herbs.
A cooking pot hung on a tripod though the logs beneath were now blackened cinders.
I glimpsed a chest and coffer, table and stool.
In the far corner was a bed and, beside this, slumped like a disused doll, lay the witch.
Benjamin hastened over and grasped the woman's shoulder.
She turned, arms flailing, head back, eyes open — but the gaping mouth would utter no more prophecies, her breath cut off by the red garrotte cord round her scrawny neck.
Mandeville just cursed and lashed out, sending a stool flying.
Southgate crouched by my master and felt the nape of the old woman's neck, trying to ignore those staring, popping eyes.
‘She's been dead for hours,’ he commented.
‘Her skin's cold as a dead snake's.’
He got up and wiped his hands.
‘Sir Edmund, the old witch apparently played her part and now she, too, has been removed.’
‘I agree,’ Benjamin replied.
‘But who killed her?’
Mandeville snapped.
‘I suspect the same people or person responsible for the murders of Cosmas and Damien, not to mention your agents in London.’
Benjamin pointed at the grotesque corpse.
‘She was only a paid player, a silly old woman.
The murderer knew we would make her talk.
She may have been killed any time in the last two days.’
‘You mean someone from Templecombe?’
Southgate asked.
‘Possibly,’ Benjamin replied.
‘One of the family, or a servant, or perhaps by the Templars themselves.’
My master shrugged.
‘We are strangers and how long did it take us — ten to fifteen minutes — to come here?
Yet there must be secret routes and trackways into the forest.
The murderer probably came by these, killed the old woman and went back, making sure he removed all trace of his movements.’
We could do nothing further.
Mandeville said he would report the woman's death when we returned to Templecombe and so we continued our cold journey through the bleak Somerset countryside.
We arrived at Glastonbury just after dark.
The trackways were nigh impassable, the weather so icy we could hardly talk, and Mandeville shouted with relief when the walls of Glastonbury came into sight.
A lay brother let us in through a postern gate where others took care of our horses and baggage.
Once again Abbot Bere came to greet us in the guest house, accompanied by a monk who had been absent at our earlier meeting.
A vigorous young man, ruddy-faced and bright-eyed, he was scholarly and courteous.
I liked him, whilst he and Benjamin struck up an immediate rapport.
‘This is Brother Eadred, our archivist and librarian,’ Abbot Bere declared.
‘He will assist you in your enquiries.
He knows our manuscript room like the palm of his own hand and is a peritus, an expert in Arthurian life.’
‘Did you know Hopkins?’
Southgate brusquely enquired, taking off his coat and shaking the damp from it.
‘Yes,’ replied Eadred.
‘Brother Hopkins was a man not at peace with himself or his order.
He was not a historian but a collector of legends.
He found our monastic rule hard to bear so spent every second he could in the library.’
Eadred patted the old abbot gently on the shoulder.
‘Reverend Father did all he could for Brother Hopkins.
He arranged for him to be released from his vows and work as a chaplain in Templecombe and the surrounding villages and hamlets.’
The librarian's face broke into a boyish smile.
‘He wasn't even good at that: he claimed he had found the key to mysterious secrets and hastened off to tell My Lord of Buckingham.’
He became solemn.
‘In the end Hopkins destroyed himself and others, and brought the King's wrath down on this community and elsewhere.’
He stared squarely at the Agentes.
‘Though, I tell you this, sirs, John Santerre is a loyal subject of the King.’
I bit back my questions as Mandeville began to list what he wished to see the following morning: Arthur's tomb; the manuscript in which Hopkins had found the riddle; and any other matter the reverend Abbot and Brother Eadred thought might assist us in our search.
Eadred coolly agreed, informed us that food would be sent across and bade us all a courteous good night.
‘I don't like him,’ Southgate grated as soon as the monks left.
‘I don't like this abbey and I think there's some sort of link between this place and Sir John Santerre.’
‘Why?’
I challenged.
‘What proof do you have?’
‘Well, after Sir Edmund finished his interrogation this morning, I had a word with a few of the servants, men from the outlying farms.
Santerre apparently did not go round his estates yesterday as he claimed.
So where was he, eh?’
We kept our mouths shut and Mandeville and Southgate stomped away.
We made ourselves at home, ate the simple  food sent across to us from the refectory and retired to bed.
Early the next morning Benjamin attended mass in the abbey church then roused me.
We breakfasted in the small refectory of the abbot's guest house on light ale and spiced oatmeal heated with boiling milk.
Mandeville and Southgate joined us, the soldiers who had accompanied us being billeted elsewhere.
The two Agentes were full of themselves, eager to exert their power in this famous abbey so, when Brother Eadred joined us, Mandeville insisted that we go straight to the library.
We left the guest house, going through stone-vaulted passageways into the cloister garth.
The study carrels were empty because of the cold weather: snow and ice covered the deserted garden though from the abbey church we could hear the faint chanting of Lauds.
We found the library wondrously warm, being ingeniously heated by hot pipes which also gushed water into the latrines.
I remember this well for I have never seen the like since.
I did, however, discuss such a marvel with Sir John Harrington, the Queen's nephew, who has since devised an ingenious system to build a water closet so that privies and latrines can be cleaned by pulling a chain and releasing water.
Very clumsy, though I've had one installed here at Burpham.
Of course, Benjamin was at home in the library, exclaiming with delight at the smell of parchment, pumice stone, ink and newly treated vellum.
He took down volumes from the shelves, undid their clasps and, chattering like a child, pointed out the beauty of the calligraphy.
Some letters were pictures in themselves, containing miniature dragons, wyverns, centaurs and other mythical beasts.
Mandeville and Southgate just stood watching patronisingly until Sir Edmund clicked his fingers.
‘I want to see the Hopkins manuscripts.’
Eadred stared at him in mock innocence.
‘No such books exist, Sir Edmund.’
‘Don't play games with me!’
Mandeville snarled.
‘I don't know the bloody title but I wish to see the ones Hopkins studied!’
‘Oh, you mean the Legends of Avalon?’
Eadred went and opened a great, iron-bound coffer and brought out a thick folio, leather bound and fastened by two small clasps.
He placed this gently down on the table and we all gathered round.
‘It's not really a book,’ Eadred explained.
‘It's actually a collection of legends about Glastonbury and this area.’
‘And what did Hopkins find?’
Mandeville undid the clasps and pulled back the leather cover.
At first we couldn't see anything on the white backing but then Eadred brought across a candle, held it near the page, not quite close enough to scorch, and sea-green writing began to appear.
‘A subtle device,’ Eadred murmured.
‘God knows how it is done.’
Time and again he wafted the candle flame and, for a while, the writing became quite distinct.
Benjamin borrowed a quill and a piece of parchment and copied the verse down, word for word.
It was no different from that Agrippa had quoted:
‘Beneath Jordan's water Christ's cup does rest, And above Moses’ Ark the sword that's best.’
Mandeville chanted it like a child learning a rhyme.
‘What the hell does it mean?’ he added.
Eadred invited us to sit round the table.
‘How did Hopkins discover this?’
Benjamin asked.
The monk spread his hands.
‘Perhaps an accident because, though the manuscript contains famous legends, there's nothing new in it.
What I suspect is that he was inspecting the binding and moved the candle to study it more closely to see if there was a gap between the cover and its backing: underneath the candle flame the writing must have appeared.’
Eadred pointed to the white page where the lettering was beginning to fade.
‘I was here when Hopkins discovered it.
He didn't tell me but became so agitated and excited, he left the book open with faint drops of candle grease on it.
I repeated what I had seen him do.
The rest you know.’
Mandeville leaned over and tapped the book.
‘And there's nothing else in here?’
‘Nothing at all.’
‘Then,’ Mandeville leaned towards Southgate, ‘my colleague here who is an expert in secret writing, codes and ciphers, will take this to another table and study it carefully.’
I looked at Southgate in mock surprise.
‘You can read!’
I exclaimed.
‘You can truly read?’
Well, that got the bastard really enraged.
‘I studied at Oriel!’ he snapped.
‘Theology, Philosophy, Logic and Mathematics!’
‘Then I beg your pardon, sir.’
I slapped my own wrist.
‘It just goes to show you shouldn't judge a book by its cover, eh?’
Southgate picked up the manuscript and stalked away.
Mandeville glared at me whilst Eadred and Benjamin seemed preoccupied with their fingers.
‘This is no laughing matter, Shallot,’ Sir Edmund declared.
‘Brother Eadred, on your allegiance to the King, do you know the meaning of Hopkins's riddle?’
‘Before God, Sir Edmund, I do not!’
‘Is there anything in this abbey that has even the vaguest reference to Jordan's water or the Ark of Moses?’
Eadred smoothed the table top with his fingers.
‘The Jordan is a river in Palestine,’ he replied.
‘What in God's  name, Sir Edmund, would that have to do with an abbey in Somerset?
And as for the Ark of Moses, this was the sacred chest fashioned at the foot of Mount Sinai to contain the sacred tablets of stone.
Where on earth would that be?’
Sir Edmund was not easily put off.
‘Yet you have a rose bush,’ he retorted.
‘Which, you claim, was planted by Joseph of Arimathea.
Don't play games with me, dear monk.
Your abbey proudly proclaims that this Joseph of Arimathea came here, bringing the Grail with him.
According to the book of legends you have just shown us, Arthur came here to drink from the Grail, whilst one of his knights, Sir Bedivere, reputedly took Excalibur down to Narepool which is only three miles from Glastonbury.
This is still owned by the abbey and, according to the annual accounts you submit to the exchequer, provides 5,000 eels a year for your kitchen.’
Sir Edmund half-raised himself from his seat and pointed a finger straight at the monk's face.
‘Before God, sir,’ he threatened hoarsely.
‘If I find even the vaguest reference to an Ark or to Jordan's water in this abbey or any place in your possession, I shall see you stand trial at King's Bench in London on a charge of high treason!’
‘Then, Sir Edmund,’ Eadred replied coolly, ‘discover such evidence.’
Mandeville shoved back his chair and walked to the door.
‘I shall inspect this abbey myself!’ he shouted over his shoulder.
‘Southgate, when you have finished with that manuscript, look around carefully.’
He left, slamming the door behind him.
Eadred seemed unmoved by Mandeville's threats.
‘Perhaps we should go,’ he whispered, glancing sidelong at Southgate who sat poring over the book.
‘Sir Edmund does not believe me, yet he'll find nothing in this abbey or elsewhere.’
We left the library, went round the north part of the  church and into the abbey church through the Lady Chapel, now covered in sheets and dust.
‘Abbot Bere,’ Eadred explained, ‘is now digging a crypt.
This will run under the Lady Chapel and Galilee porch.’
He pulled the sheets aside and led us down some steps.
The crypt was a high vaulted room, the roof being supported by thin ribs of stone which spread out from the centre, giving the impression of a bursting star.
The crypt was not yet finished and, strangely enough, was the only place in that entire abbey where Eadred seemed rather nervous and unwilling to linger.
We then returned to the Galilee porch, past another small chapel and into the great white-stoned nave.
We examined the north and south transepts, went under the ornate rood screen and into the sanctuary beneath which lay Arthur's tomb.
‘Is there any way,’ Benjamin asked, ‘that the tomb can be reached?’
Eadred shook his head.
‘Of course not.
The coffin is sealed in a great vault below.
Only the Holy Father can give permission for such a tomb to be opened.’
Eadred spread his hands.
‘And why should it be opened?
The Grail and Excalibur were seen centuries after Arthur's death and the monks who reinterred his body here would scarcely bury such sacred relics.’
We agreed and continued our tour out of the church, following the snow-covered, pebbled paths past the Chapter House, dormitory, rear dorter, monks' kitchen, into the abbot's garden; the latter was enclosed by a high brick wall and carpeted by snow but in the summer must have been beautiful.
My eyes, however, were continuously drawn to the great Tor which loomed high above the abbey and the small church of St Michael on its summit.
‘Could that contain anything?’
I asked.
Eadred smiled and shook his head.
‘Everyone who comes here thinks that, yet compared to the abbey, the church is  quite new.
You are welcome to go there but your climb would be fruitless.
I strongly recommend that we leave such arduous duties to your two companions, who will undoubtedly have asked themselves the same question.’
Chapter 11
We returned to the guest house, Eadred ordering mulled wine from the kitchen to warm us.
He and Benjamin soon became immersed in a discussion on alchemy and the philosopher's stone: the librarian also offered to take my master to see Narepool at the bottom of which, according to legend, Arthur's Sword still lay.
I became bored and wandered back to the library.
Thankfully, Southgate had gone.
Some of the brothers were busy in the scriptorium but I was greeted courteously and no one objected when I began to leaf through the manuscript Southgate had left upon the table.
Brother Eadred was correct.
The manuscript contained a collection of writings describing the legends of Glastonbury, Avalon, Arthur, the forging of Excalibur, and even the fanciful story of how, when Christ was a boy, Joseph of Arimathea brought him to Glastonbury to buy tin and precious oils from the natives.
The book also contained writings on topographical and biblical matters of a general nature; one entry caught my eye.
I remembered what Agrippa had told me and a faint suspicion stirred.
I closed the book hastily and sat thinking, trying to apply my discovery to the murderous maze I found myself lost in.
I resolved to keep silent on it.
(Oh, excuse me a minute, my little chaplain is jumping up and down, splattering the parchment with ink.
‘Tell me!
Tell me!’ he whines.
‘There are no clues, no indication, no resolution to the mystery.’
I pick up my black ash cane and rap him smartly across the knuckles.
Hasn't he read the Book of Ecclesiastes?
‘There's a time and place under heaven for everything.’
So let me tell my tale.
The little turd would never dream of standing up during one of Will Shakespeare's plays and shouting, ‘Tell us what happens!
Tell us what happens!’
He would be pelted with fruit.
In fact, that's not a bad idea…
If he's not careful, he'll get my empty wine goblet on the back of his little noddle.
Ah well, good, that settled matters.)
Suffice to say we spent two fruitless days at Glastonbury and left as we came with only two scraps of information: first, Hopkins had been a monk at the abbey, and secondly had discovered his famous riddle there.
Brother Eadred rode with us for a while, two or three miles from the abbey gates.
At the crossroads he bade us adieu and warmly clasped Benjamin's hand.
My master then turned to us.
‘Please ride on,’ he asked, ‘all of you.
I wish to raise a personal matter with Brother Eadred.’
I was a little hurt, Mandeville outraged.
‘What is it?’ he spluttered.
‘Sir Edmund,’ Benjamin quietly insisted, ‘it is a matter of conscience, a confessional matter!’
Well, who could object?
Sir Edmund made a sign and the soldiers, myself included, followed him further down the track.
I looked round and saw my master in earnest conversation with the monk.
Whatever he was saying clearly discomfited the librarian.
Even from where I stood, I glimpsed Eadred's agitation.
After a while Benjamin caught up with us.
‘What was it, Master?’
‘Not now, Roger,’ he whispered.
We continued on our journey to Templecombe.
No snow had fallen during our stay at Glastonbury but the sky was  growing overcast and threatening.
Once we were past the village on the road up to the major, Sir Edmund, recalling my story about the ambush, ordered the soldiers to fan out before us.
We made our way slowly.
A biting wind tore at our cheeks, turning our fingers to blocks of ice, whilst our horses scrabbled to maintain a secure foothold.
Suddenly, just as we rounded the bend and were able to glimpse the gables and turrets of Templecombe above the trees, one of the soldiers came riding back so fast his horse, slithering and clattering on the path, almost crashed into Mandeville's mount.
‘What is it, man?’
Southgate snarled.
The soldier's face was like a ghost's.
The fellow opened his mouth soundlessly and pointed back down the track.
Mandeville pushed his horse forward and we rounded the corner.
At first, in the fading light, we could see nothing but the icy path, the snow-covered trees on either side — but then the flicker of a candle flame caught our eyes.
It seemed to be standing in the snow, a little metal cap protecting it against the biting breeze, but as we approached closer, my stomach turned.
Our horses became skittish.
Mandeville and Southgate loudly cursed for the dirty white candle was held in the snow by a greyish-green, severed hand.
‘Witchcraft!’
Mandeville breathed.
‘I'm not passing that!’ one of the soldiers exclaimed.
‘Remove it!’
Mandeville ordered Southgate.
‘In this matter, Sir Edmund, I would prefer not to act.’
‘Come on, Roger,’ Benjamin ordered.
We both dismounted and went to examine the obscenity.
The hand was decomposing, the bloody stump of its wrist had turned into a black, congealed mess.
The nails were discoloured, the fingers beginning to flake.
The breeze shifted and we caught the stench of putrefaction.
‘What is it?’
Benjamin asked.
(Oh, I knew what it was!
Even though I was still an  innocent youth, Old Shallot had met the most fierce and sinister of warlocks, magicians and witches: men who used dark powers to unhinge the mind of their opponents.
You take Shallot's advice on this: the power of witchcraft lies in what you can make other people think.
I recently recounted such a theory when I met Will Shakespeare and Richard Burbage at the Globe.
Old Will, God bless his kind eyes, was really taken with the idea: in a play he is now busily writing, he has a scene where witches, on a blasted heath in Scotland, put insidious ideas into the mind of a murderous nobleman called Macbeth.)
On that frozen trackway, however, I just stared at the grotesque thing lying in the snow; the hand seemed to be thrusting up through the earth as if some ghoul was struggling to rise from its grave.
‘It's the Hand of Glory,’ I explained.
Benjamin looked puzzled.
‘A powerful talisman, Master,’ I continued.
‘The witch cuts the hand from a murdered man then fashions a candle out of human grease which is lighted and put into the hand.
It's a way of calling up demons, a curse as well as a warning.’
Benjamin edged nearer.
‘Do you think it works?’
I shrugged.
‘Oh, I could call Satan up from hell, Master.’
Benjamin glared at me.
‘But whether he'd come is another matter.’
(I once said the same thing to Will Shakespeare and, sure enough, it's in one of his plays.
I think it's Henry IV Part 1, where Hotspur and Glendower are talking about magic.)
‘Well,’ Benjamin got to his feet, ‘if it comes from hell, it can go back there!’
And he kicked both the candle and the hand into the undergrowth.
The flames sizzled out as Mandeville and Southgate dismounted and joined us.
Both he and his companion looked pale and I could see all joy had gone out of their task.
Mandeville stared into the darkness then up at the rooks cawing around us.
‘This place is hell-touched!’ he murmured, kicking the snow where the Hand of Glory had lain.
‘Perhaps we should leave it, go back to London and return in the spring with soldiers?’
He chewed his lip.
‘I could deploy all my agents in the area, root out what is really going on.’
‘And what will the King say?’
Benjamin asked quietly.
‘Above all, what will my dear uncle think if we now return, empty-handed, to report the deaths of Cosmas and Damien?
I want justice, Sir Edmund, and you want vengeance.
Murder is like a game of hazard.
So far this silent assassin has won every throw, but sooner or later he will make a mistake.’
(It just shows you how times have changed.
God rest them, Mandeville and Southgate could be wicked men, true minions of the King.
Nevertheless, they had some kind of conscience.
Not like Walsingham and the next generation of spies and ‘agents provocateurs’.
You take a man like Christopher Marlowe: I was with him when he was murdered in that private house.
He and his killers, men like Frizier and Skeres, not to mention Poley, were devils incarnate who feared neither God nor man.
Poor Kit!
A bad man but a brilliant poet.
He died far too young.)
We continued on our return to Templecombe.
The Santerres were waiting for us with Bowyer who looked as if he had really settled in, shirt open at the collar, stubby feet enclosed in buskins whilst his fat face was flushed with drink and his breath smelt like a wine press.
He and Sir John now appeared to be bosom friends and I secretly wondered if the Santerres had suborned this bumbling servant of the crown.
Mandeville, however, was not at all pleased and gave the sheriff a scathing look.
‘Was your visit to Glastonbury profitable?’
Sir John asked as we warmed ourselves before the great fire whilst Lady Beatrice and Rachel served spiced wine.
Mandeville just muttered a curse and Southgate would  have launched a vitriolic attack upon the abbey if Sir Edmund had not told him to shut up and drink his wine.
Sir John, full of himself, tried to humour them.
‘Tomorrow,’ he said, ‘let us take a break from affairs of state.
There have been no fresh falls of snow and I know where my dogs could rouse a fine hart.’
Bowyer and Southgate immediately brightened at the prospect of a good hunt.
Even Mandeville agreed and, from the discussion which followed, I gathered both agents were keen huntsmen with an inordinate love of the chase.
I also wondered if Sir John Santerre, despite his bluff bonhomie, was skilled and well-versed in seeking out a man's weakness and pandering to it.
Had he sought mine out?
I wondered.
Had Mathilda been deliberately sent to my room?
I stared at Rachel, whose fawnlike eyes were now smiling at Benjamin.
Did she, too, play a role?
Were we all being bought off?
I with Mathilda, Benjamin with Rachel, Bowyer with good food and drink, and the Agentes with the prospect of a good day's hunting.
I remembered Mandeville's words as we approached the house.
Was the sinister influence of the Temple beginning to work its effect?
Now, I tell you this, I am a rogue born and bred.
I have great difficulty in distinguishing between my property and anyone else's, or at least I used to, but I do not like to be dismissed as stupid.
True, we had discovered nothing at Glastonbury or of why Cosmas and Damien had been killed.
I stared around.
Bowyer was drunk, Benjamin lost in his own thoughts or seduced by Rachel's flattery, Mandeville and Southgate were revelling in the manor's hospitality whilst Santerre, whose conduct was suspicious to say the least, played the role of smiling host.
I slammed down my cup and stood up.
Bowyer's and Southgate's conversation about the coming hunt faltered and died as I went to stand and warm my backside against the fire.
‘Roger?’
Benjamin looked at me, puzzled.
‘What is the matter?’
I glared round.
‘I'm tired,’ I began.
‘I'm cold and I'm exhausted.’
I held my hand up, fingers splayed, and counted the points off like a teacher in front of a group of scholars.
‘Cosmas is dead.
Damien is dead.’
I stared at Santerre.
‘The old witch is dead.
If you send men into the forest you will find her frozen corpse in that cave she called her home.
Finally, on our return from Glastonbury, we were threatened with witchcraft.’
Santerre exclaimed in surprise.
Bowyer looked at me drunkenly.
I glared at Benjamin and the Agentes.
‘Well, aren't you going to tell him?’
‘Roger,’ Benjamin intervened, ‘it's best if you keep a still tongue in your head.’
‘Bollocks!’
I replied.
‘As we came up the trackway of your house, Sir John, we found a Hand of Glory with a lighted candle in its fingers.’
The Santerres just stared, open-mouthed, back at me.
‘I'm bloody frightened!’
I bawled.
‘In the stinking alleys and runnels of Southwark and Whitefriars, the Hand of Glory is a powerful talisman, a warning to us all.
Someone here wishes our deaths.
Someone at Templecombe or on the estates around.
And I for one don't intend to play coney in the hay!’
I stalked out of the hall, quite pleased with myself, and went back to my own chamber.
A few minutes later Benjamin joined me.
He slipped through the door and pulled up a stool as I lay on the bed.
‘Roger, why the outburst?’
I propped myself up on my elbow and looked at him.
‘Outside, it's dark, cold and more snow has fallen.
Bowyer's drunk as a lord, Mandeville and Southgate are scared, whilst you seem more absorbed in Rachel than anything else.’
Benjamin smiled and shuffled his feet.
‘Is that the problem, Roger?
Are you jealous?’
I threw myself back on the bed with a laugh.
He grabbed my wrist.
‘Tell me why you spoke Roger?
You usually keep a still tongue in your head.
The dutiful, sharp-witted servant who sees all and says nothing.’
I just stared up into the darkness.
‘Perhaps you are right, Master, but I am frightened.
We are threatened, attacked, two of our companions murdered.
We go chasing around this frozen, benighted countryside and discover nothing.
Yes, I wish Rachel would look at me as she does at you.’
I gazed at him beseechingly.
‘But here I'm like a duck out of water, Master.
If these were the alleyways of Paris or the runnels of London I could hide or strike back.
But what happens if we have been sent here to die, one by one?’
Benjamin shivered and folded his arms.
‘We have found something,’ he replied.
‘I saw the look on your face as we left Glastonbury.’
‘What did Eadred tell you?’
I countered.
‘I asked why Sir John Santerre had such close links with Glastonbury?’
‘And?’
‘At first Eadred tried to bluff, claiming Sir John was a local landowner, but then he confessed that Santerre was funding Abbot Bere's construction of the crypt but told me if I wished to know more, I should ask either Sir John or the abbot.
So,’ Benjamin smiled, ‘what did you find, Roger?’
I told him of my discovery.
Now, perhaps it was the poor light but Benjamin's face paled.
(Excuse me for a minute, my little clerk is again insisting I furnish such clues immediately.
No I will not!
As Shakespeare says, ‘Every tale has its own metre and beat.’
He'll have to wait!)
I'll be honest, at the time, I did not recognise the true value of my discovery but Benjamin did.
Master, I begged, ‘does it mean anything to you?’
‘Yes and no,’ Benjamin slowly replied.
‘When we searched Templecombe's rooms a vague suspicion of how Cosmas died occurred to me.
I also thought of something in the church the afternoon Damien was killed.’
He narrowed his eyes and shook his head.
‘But they are only pieces, Roger.
By themselves they mean nothing.’
He left me to sulk until a servant came to announce dinner was ready.
I went down to the hall and found Santerre still intent on lavishing hospitality on his guests.
The high table was covered in a silk sheet cloth, the best glass and silver had been laid out, whilst the savoury smells from the kitchen and scullery teased our nostrils and mouths with the sweet fragrance of roast duck, meat pies, quince tarts and the sugary odour of fresh marchpane.
Santerre had changed into a doublet and hose of grey-silver whilst his wife and daughter both looked resplendent in gowns of blue satin trimmed with gold.
Santerre bubbled like a stream in spring.
He assured the drunken Bowyer that he would always be welcome at Templecombe and I recalled the friendship formed between Pilate and Herod.
Southgate was in his cups though Mandeville looked subdued and stared speculatively at me as if my outburst had revealed a side of my character he had not noticed before.
The meal was almost over and I had downed at least four deep-bowled cups of claret when the small red stain appeared on the table cloth.
At first, I thought it was spilt wine but then it spread and I noticed little splashes coming down from the ceiling above.
I gazed up into the darkness but the rafters were cloaked in blackness.
You've drunk too much, I thought, but then Benjamin noticed the spreading pool and splattered drops.
‘Look!’ he cried, pointing to the widening scarlet stain.
The chatter and laughter died down.
We all sat watching the drops fall and the scarlet blot widen.
Benjamin was the first to recover his wits, standing up and pushing back his chair.
‘What's above us, Sir John?’
‘A small solar.
A chamber with windows looking east.
We only use it in summer.’
Benjamin ran out of the room and I followed.
Behind us the shouts and exclamations grew as the scarlet stain spread.
We ran upstairs, knocking aside startled servants.
I glimpsed Mathilda's white face then ran into the gallery, pushing open the door to the solar.
The room was cold and dark, the windows shuttered.
Benjamin cursed the darkness but, as in any good household, there were boxes right inside the door containing rushlights and candles.
Benjamin lit one of these and we walked into the centre of the room.
At first we could see nothing so crouched on our haunches, edging forward like crabs, feeling the soft woollen carpet.
I touched something wet and sticky.
Benjamin pushed the rushlight closer.
God forgive me, I could have screamed in terror.
Resting in the centre of the carpet, severed at the neck, eyeballs rolled up in their sockets, was the decapitated head of the witch.
Grotesque in death as it had been, now putrefaction tinged the face a greenish hue.
The congealing blood from the severed arteries of the snow-soaked head drenching the carpet and seeping down between the floor boards.
My stomach heaved.
We heard the door behind us open but Benjamin shouted for everyone to stay out.
‘Come on, Roger,’ he whispered.
‘There is nothing we can do here.’
Outside in the gallery Benjamin told the rest of the group what we had found.
Lady Beatrice became hysterical, crouching against the wall, covering her face, whilst Rachel tried to comfort her.
Santerre was shocked sober whilst Sir Edmund and Southgate were torn between a mixture of anger and fear.
‘Clean the mess!’
Benjamin snapped at Santerre.
‘Just roll up the carpet, take it and its grisly contents downstairs and  have it burnt.
The floor can be scrubbed.’
He looked at Sir Edmund.
‘Roger is correct.
The Angel of Death walks this accursed house!’
‘Who could leave such a thing there?’
Southgate murmured.
‘One of the servants, someone we don't know,’ Benjamin replied.
‘But the head and the Hand of Glory come from that poor hag.
Oh, by the way, where's our noble Sheriff Bowyer?’
‘Drunk as a bishop,’ Mandeville snarled.
‘Now sleeping like a baby in his cot down in the hall.’
Benjamin made to walk away.
‘Master Daunbey,’ Mandeville caught him up at the corner of the gallery.
‘For God's sake, man, what am I supposed to do?
My job is to trap conspirators, plotters…not stumble around in the dark after some secret assassin.’
Benjamin muttered something to himself.
‘What is it?
What is it, Daunbey?’
My master looked up, his face as hard as stone, the skin drawn tight.
‘I was just thinking of what you said, Sir Edmund.
This is not poor Buckingham, is it?
Or some pathetic tailor like Taplow being trapped in his little cage and taken off to the slaughter house.
And Templecombe is not some abbey where you can tap your toe and play the great lord.
So how does it feel, Sir Edmund, to be the hunted instead of the hunter?’
And spinning on his heel, my master stalked off to his chamber.
(My little clerk is muttering that Benjamin was acting out of character.
That's not true!
Benjamin was a kind, gentle man.
He always hated bully-boys and was correct to do so.
Mandeville and Santerre had arrived at Templecombe wanting to make everyone dance to their tune.
Instead, they had stumbled into a veritable snake pit.)
I wandered round the galleries for a while for the dinner  was both spoilt and finished.
Sure enough, after a while I caught sight of my quarry, little Mathilda, her chubby arms full of blankets, tiptoeing along without a care in the world.
I followed her up to one of the other floors and caught her by the elbow.
‘Mathilda, my sweet, a word.’
She whirled round but she was not frightened and I glimpsed the sparkle of triumph in her eyes.
I drew her into a shadowy window embrasure.
‘You weren't looking for gold, were you?’
She pouted prettily.
‘The money was secondary, wasn't it?’
I continued.
‘What were you looking for?
Did you kill that clerk in the fire?
What secret device did you use?’
She sighed and sat down in the window seat.
‘Master Shallot, you and your fellow clod-hoppers wander into Templecombe.’
She looked out into the icy darkness.
‘You are in a place hundreds of miles from London with a few paltry soldiers to guard your back.
The Devil and his assistant trapped my Lord of Buckingham, a man much loved in these parts.
He was hustled up to London to have his head cut off with less mercy than we would treat a chicken.
His lands are seized and the monks at Glastonbury bullied as if they are the inmates of some prison.’
She looked squarely at me.
‘Oh, yes, we have heard of that.’
She flounced the sheets in her hand.
‘And what do you expect?
To come tripping through without a by-your-leave?
These are ancient lands, Master Shallot.
Arthur and his knights rode here, or so Master Hopkins told us.
The Templars are much feared but also respected for their knowledge.’
Now, I can take a sermon from any pretty woman and Mathilda was no exception, but I also caught the threat in her words.
I clapped my hands mockingly.
‘So what does all this make you, Mathilda, my dear?
A thief looking for gold?’
Even in the darkness I saw the flush on her cheeks.
‘I am no thief!’ she snapped.
She drew herself up.
‘I am a poor widow.
My husband died two years ago from the sweating sickness.
Aye, Roger, we marry young in Somerset.
I have a child.’
‘You also have a father,’ I retorted.
She caught her lip between her teeth.
‘You do have a father,’ I continued smoothly.
‘A tall, grizzle-haired fellow who now walks with a pronounced limp.
Where did he receive his wound?’
‘It was an accident.’
‘Nonsense!’
I snapped.
‘Do you want me to call Mandeville and Southgate and have him dragged into the hall?
I'll wager a piece of gold that his wound resembles a sword cut.
Your father was one of those who attacked me.’
She mumbled something.
‘What was that?’
‘If they wanted to kill you,’ she whispered, ‘they would have done.
We have no quarrel with you or your master.
They simply wanted to frighten you.’
She grasped me by the hand.
‘Please, Roger, leave my father be.’
She stared through the window.
‘This place is full of ghosts,’ she murmured.
‘And the Templars?’
She lowered her head.
I pulled out my short stabbing dagger and held it between my fingers.
‘Nothing in life is free,’ I whispered.
‘You and your father are no threat to me but those you work for…’
Mathilda shook her head.
I sheathed my dagger and got to my feet.
‘Wait!’ she seized my wrist.
‘Roger, we are small fleas on a very big dog.
We take our orders, issued here and there in a whisper.’
‘And where does the dog live?’
I asked.
Mathilda peered fearfully down into the garden and got to her feet.
‘If you wish to meet the dog,’ she whispered, ‘you'll find him on the island.’
And she slipped like a ghost into the shadows and ran down the gallery.
I stood staring out of the window into the shifting, cloying mist and wondered about Mathilda's ghosts trooping back to their worm-eaten beds.
I had learnt enough so returned to my own chamber, secured the lock and, fully clothed, lay down for a fitful sleep.
Chapter 12
The next morning we rose early and broke our fast hastily in the hall for, despite the grisly warning issued the night before, Southgate was determined on a morning's hunting though Bowyer was still suffering the effects of being too deep in his cups.
Mandeville, imperious as ever, ignored us as he issued instructions to a bleary-eyed sheriff to send for more men.
His attitude towards Santerre was distinctly cool.
As we went out towards the stables I heard Sir Edmund whisper to Santerre that the matters at Templecombe were beyond his brief: he would plan his return to London where he would advise the King to send Justices into the area.
If he expected this to frighten Sir John he succeeded.
When the King's Justices came south they would arrive with troops and issue writs raising levies from the surrounding countryside, empanel juries, collect evidence, and not move away until the matter was settled.
Santerre was about to protest but Mandeville dismissed him with a curt move of his gloved hand.
‘These matters will wait!’ he snapped.
‘Today we hunt, tomorrow we go.’
The rest of the party were waiting for us in a courtyard full of yapping dogs; long, lean greyhounds, black, white and brindled.
They stood straining at their leashes whilst, on the other side of the yard, a pack of mastiffs whimpered in protest at the muzzles on their grizzled snouts and the  lash of their whippers-in.
Maids hurried round with cups of hot posset, stable boys and ostlers shouted as horses were brought out, saddled and made ready to mount.
Southgate's and Bowyer's were fiery, hot-tempered, rearing and kicking the air with sharpened hooves.
It took some time for their masters to curb them.
At last we all mounted, downing one final cup of posset whilst the huntsmen were sent on before us, the barking of the dogs shattering the silence of the cold country air.
No more snow had fallen, the sky was still overcast but the air was crisp and a little warmer.
We left by the back gate of the manor following a trackway through a wood.
At first, we rode together but the freshness of the horses, particularly Bowyer's and Southgate's, meant we had to break up.
We cleared the trees and stopped on the brow of a small hill which fell down to snow-covered fields, broken here and there by small copses and woods.
The trackers and beaters were already there and in a flurry of snow, shouts, cries and yelping barks, the hunters moved down to meet them.
Roger and I hung back on the hill, watching the rest of the party go into a wood.
There was a short silence then the dogs' barking grew into a raucous row; shouts and the shrill of hunting horns carried clear to us as a fat buck, together with two hinds, galloped from the trees and across the meadow in a flurry of snow.
Santerre sounded the horn and led the excited hunters down the hill.
The buck had already cleared one field.
Behind him the dogs raced like dark shapes against the snow.
The hunt was on.
It is difficult to describe exactly what happened.
We were a party of horsemen charging down the hill.
Santerre, the chief huntsman, Bowyer, Southgate, Mandeville, Benjamin and myself, Lady Beatrice and Rachel having declined to come.
Bowyer and Southgate were the first to break away from the rest, their horses fiery, eager for the exercise after close confinement.
We all spurred and whipped as we reached the bottom of the hill to keep up pace for the snow underfoot made the going heavy, when both Bowyer's horse and that of Southgate suddenly took on a life of their own.
They bucked, reared and shot forward like arrows from a bow.
Benjamin and I followed quickly afterwards for it was apparent both riders were losing control.
Now I realised something was wrong for, as you young men know, if a horse becomes uncontrollable the best thing to do is to dismount as quickly as possible.
Bowyer and Southgate tried this but seemed incapable of getting their boots out of the stirrups whilst both were losing control of the reins.
Southgate managed to move his left foot and swung his leg over but his right boot was still caught.
The horse reared, Southgate pitched out of his saddle and was dragged along, one boot still caught in the stirrup.
Bowyer's horse was galloping even faster, heading towards the trees.
Benjamin shouted at Santerre and Mandeville to follow the sheriff, whilst he and I raced after Southgate, now being dragged along like a rag doll.
Benjamin drew level and, in a feat of horsemanship, leaned down and slashed his dagger towards the horse's belly, cutting Southgate's stirrup loose.
We dismounted and crouched beside him.
God knows, he was a grisly mess: the back of his head and legs were a mass of wounds.
He groaned, opened his eyes and lapsed into a swoon.
Bowyer was not so fortunate.
His horse reached the trees where he was hit by a thick, low-hanging branch, knocked out of the saddle and, as his horse careered deeper into the wood, dragged through the brambles and undergrowth, his poor body smashing against each tree.
The hunt was called off: the whippers-in and the huntsmen despatched, Benjamin ordering them back to the manor and telling them to bring down two stretchers, wine and bandages.
Mandeville and Santerre soon returned from the trees; the latter had a crossbow in his hand, Bowyer's corpse sprawled across the saddle bow.
There was no need to ask: Bowyer's body was an open wound from head to toe, his face disfigured by a mass of bruises, and the slackness of his head showed his neck had been broken.
Mandeville had had to shoot his bolting horse to cut him free.
‘Southgate?’ he asked wearily.
‘He will live,’ Benjamin replied.
‘Or, at least, I think he will.’
He pointed to Southgate's left leg.
‘Broken cleanly, as is one of his arms.
God knows what other injuries he suffered.’
Mandeville crouched in the snow beside his lieutenant.
He looked pathetic.
‘Everything is finished,’ he groaned.
‘The King will not accept this.’
Benjamin forced a wineskin between his lips, urging him to drink.
Bowyer's body was immediately sheeted, placed in a pinewood box packed with snow, put in a cart and sent off to Taunton.
Back at Templecombe, now over his shock, Mandeville paced around like an angry cat, hurling abuse at Santerre, telling Lady Beatrice to stop screaming and order servants to go down to the village and bring wise women to attend to Southgate.
The injured man was taken up to his chamber.
Later in the day, two old women arrived.
Mandeville, pale as a ghost, promised them anything provided his companion recovered.
He then packed his belongings saying he would no longer stay in Templecombe and requisitioned carts and horses for a move to Glastonbury Abbey.
Any last vestige of merriment at Templecombe completely disappeared.
The Santerres stayed well away from Mandeville who stalked the galleries and corridors shouting orders at both servants and the dead sheriff's soldiers.
On one occasion he met Santerre inside the main hall.
Mandeville pointed an accusatory finger at him.
‘I'm leaving, Sir John, but I'll be back in the spring with His Majesty's Justices and a thousand pikemen!’
‘Sir Edmund?’
Benjamin approached him.
‘What is it, Daunbey?’
Mandeville snapped, not even bothering to turn his head.
‘You are leaving Templecombe for Glastonbury?’
‘Yes, I am quitting this hell-hole and recommend you do the same.’
‘Southgate cannot be moved.’
‘He'll die if he stays here,’ Mandeville hissed.
‘Then perhaps only to the village.
Perhaps to the priest's house where he can be guarded by soldiers.
Sir Edmund, I beg you, wait a while.
‘We can't leave here,’ Benjamin insisted.
‘Although no snow has fallen, the trackways are frozen hard.
Southgate will die before he even reaches the village.
Moreover, what will the King say?’
Mandeville stared into the flames of the fire.
‘I shouldn't have brought Bowyer here,’ he moaned.
‘I had forgotten about Buckingham.’
He chewed his lip and looked at Benjamin.
‘Bowyer was involved in the Duke's destruction.
He was a marked man.
But how?’ he asked bleakly.
‘How were those horses made to bolt?
If you discover that, Master Daunbey, I promise I'll stay until this business is done.’
‘Sirs!’
We spun round.
Rachel, beautiful in a dark purple gown, stood in the doorway of the hall.
‘Sirs,’ she greeted us and stepped forward, a determined expression on her face.
‘Sirs — especially you, Sir Edmund.
My father is distraught, my mother hysterical.
I object to you pacing round this house shouting at our servants like some freebooter.
We, too, mourn Bowyer's death, and Master Southgate's wounds are being tended.’
She looked  appealingly at Benjamin.
‘We are doing all we can,’ she continued gently.
‘Southgate will mend, God knows he was fortunate.
A broken leg, a fractured arm.
The rest are bruises which will quickly heal.’
Benjamin spread his hands helplessly.
‘But the deaths and injuries occurred here, Mistress.’
He tapped Mandeville gently on the shoulder.
‘However take courage, Sir Edmund, Master Hopkins's riddle may be about to unravel.’
Mandeville looked up, startled.
Rachel looked puzzled but-Benjamin shook his head.
‘Not now, there are other matters to deal with.’
He gestured at me and we left the hall.
‘What do you mean by that, Master?’
‘Everything in its own season, Shallot.
Now I want to look at Southgate's horse.’
We found the poor animal securely tethered and hobbled in a small, dank stable.
It had been unsaddled but its coat was still covered with a thick, sweaty foam though it was now quiet and placid.
Benjamin ignored my warnings: he went into the box, talking gently to the horse, smoothing its flanks whilst he examined its underbelly.
Then, still talking quietly, he inspected its side.
‘As I thought,’ Benjamin murmured, coming out.
‘Southgate spurred the horse.’
‘I did the same but mine didn't bolt like a shot from a sling!’
Benjamin looked round the busy yard where servants were pulling out carts and hitching up horses under the watchful eye of Bowyer's soldiers.
Benjamin pulled me into the shadows as Mandeville came out to issue curt instructions for the dead sheriff's body to be removed and informed the soldiers that he would stay at Templecombe for a while.
Once he had gone, Benjamin led me back to the stable.
He plucked an apple from his pocket, God knows where  he got it from, and gave it to the horse who munched it greedily.
Benjamin then dug his hand into the empty manger and plucked out the remains of the horse's feed.
He examined this curiously, ignoring my questions, and went into the adjoining stable where his own horse was stabled and did the same.
Benjamin muttered to himself, wiped his hands and shook his head.
‘Ingenious,’ he murmured.
‘Come on, Roger.’
He grabbed me by the arm.
‘One final call.’
He led me back into the house and up to Southgate's chamber.
The poor man now lay in a great fourposter bed while the two old beldames clacked and muttered to themselves as they fastened splints to his leg and carefully washed his naked, bruised body.
Benjamin ignored them as he looked round the chamber.
‘Southgate's boots,’ he whispered.
I saw one lying under the dresser and pulled it out gingerly lest the spur catch my finger.
Benjamin hid it under his cloak and hurried back to his own chamber like a schoolboy who has stolen a sweetmeat.
He bolted the door behind us, sat on the bed and carefully examined the spur in the light of a candle flame.
‘Perhaps it's washed off,’ he murmured.
‘But, as Pythagoras said, ‘Truth can only be found through experimentation.’
He lightly scored his finger on the edge of the spur, gasped and quickly dipped it in the bowl of water on the lavarium before bathing it in a little wine.
‘That hurt!’ he grimaced.
‘Master, you will tell me?’
I asked.
Benjamin, his wounded finger clasped in a wet rag, grinned from ear to ear.
‘Roger, Roger, isn't the human mind ingenious when it comes to plotting the destruction of another being?
When I examined Southgate's horse I saw the spur marks.
When I examined the manger where the feed had been put, I  found oats and bran.
When I examined my own horse's stable I found only traces of hay.
And finally, when I scrutinised Master Southgate's spur, I found its sharpness tinged with mercury.’
‘So?’
I began slowly, trying to assemble all the facts.
‘So,’ Benjamin continued.
‘I suspect Bowyer's and Southgate's horses were fed a rich diet of oats and bran both last night and this morning.
Now you know, Roger, how that would affect an excitable horse who has had little strenuous exercise?
It would become fiery and restless, something I noticed when Bowyer and Southgate left for the hunt.
However, can you imagine what would happen if such a horse was not only spurred but goaded by a spur tinged with mercury?’
‘It would bolt.’
‘Which is what happened.’
‘But, Master, Bowyer and Southgate, for all their faults, were expert horsemen.
Why didn't they just dismount?’
‘Ah!
But what if the stirrups of their saddle had been changed, each being given a narrower set?
Now, when you mount a horse, you simply push your boot in to the stirrup.
That's the easy part.
It's like anything else: you can get a small ring on your finger, the problem is getting it off.
Remember, Bowyer's and Southgate's boots were wet and so leather would swell a little.
Now, as they left Templecombe, the boots fitted snugly.
They would not object to such a tight fit, in fact it would help them keep their restless horses under control, but once they had set spurs and the horses bolted, murder occurred.’
He shook his head.
‘There's no proof.
Bowyer's and Southgate's saddles have now been returned to the stable and the original stirrups probably replaced.
Nevertheless, that is how I believe the trap was set.’
‘But the spurs would be kept in their own chambers?’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘I don't think that need bother us.
There are probably keys to fit every chamber in this house.
It would take only a few minutes to open a door, search out the riding boots and pour a little mercury over each spur.’
‘And the murderer?’
‘A vague suspicion as yet but I tell you this: if the murderer strikes again, it will be against us, Roger, so be on your guard!’
‘What about Mandeville?’
Benjamin peered at me.
‘He could be the murderer, Master.
He knew where those agents were in London and about Mistress Hopkins.
He could have killed his own men, Cosmas and Damien.
Above all, he survived the hunt.’
‘An allegation's one thing,’ Benjamin snapped.
‘Proving it is another.’
‘And the riddle?
Have you really resolved it?’
‘Perhaps.
I have remembered my schooling: baptism is often called ‘Jordan's water’ after the river where Christ himself was baptised.’
Benjamin grinned at my puzzlement.
‘But let's leave that for the moment.
More importantly, I can prove how Cosmas and Damien died.
No ghostly intervention but a most subtle assassin.’
He grasped me by the shoulder.
‘Listen, Roger, go for a walk in the grounds or try and pour more balm on Mandeville's troubled spirit.
Visit poor Southgate, flirt with young Mathilda, but come back here,’ Benjamin peered out of the window, ‘in about two hours.’
I did what my master asked, trailing around the house like a ghost though no one really wished to speak to me.
Rachel had gone to her own chamber.
Santerre and his wife were in close council with each other.
Mandeville still sulked in the hall whilst the old beldames in Southgate's chamber cackled with laughter and asked if I wanted them to wash me?
Of Mathilda there was no sight whatsoever and I  realised that Bowyer's death had panicked many of the servants into leaving Templecombe.
I went down to the lakeside and stared across at that mysterious island.
I wondered if I should climb into a barge and pole myself across but the mists still hung over the water, I was cold, frightened, and so, following Benjamin's instructions, returned to my own chamber.
I found the door unlocked as I had given my master the key before I left; the light was poor but I could see nothing had been disturbed so lay down on the bed, pulling the curtains around me.
I was half-dozing when suddenly I smelt something burning, followed by a small bang under my bed which shook me awake.
I pulled back the curtains and dashed out of the room to find Benjamin standing there, laughing at my shock.
‘For God's sake, Master, what are you doing?’
I bellowed.
Benjamin patted me on the shoulder.
‘Stay calm, Roger, I could have blown you up but I didn't.
Here.’
He walked back into the room.
‘Help me push your bed away.’
We did so, heaving and pushing until the bed moved a few inches and I saw the slight scorch mark on the stone floor beneath.
Benjamin pointed to it.
‘I think that's how Cosmas was killed: his door was locked but, before he retired, I suspect someone spread a coat of oil between the mattress and the bed support and then inserted a small bag of gunpowder.’
‘How did they light that?’
‘Oh, with a slow fuse.’
‘Oh, I see,’ I replied.
‘They just knocked on the door and asked Cosmas could they light a slow fuse under the bed?’
‘No, no, what they did was attach a slow fuse to the gunpowder and left it coiled under the bed.’
‘And?’
‘When the poor man was asleep, someone came upstairs and began to pull the thread attached to the slow fuse which  was left lying out on the gallery.
The slow fuse uncoiled like a snake, the assassin pulling it slowly across the floor until the end appeared under the door.
A tinder was struck, the fuse lit and Cosmas died.’
‘But they couldn't do that!
Cosmas would notice.’
‘No, he wouldn't.
No more than you did.
You came into the chamber, you were not looking for an almost invisible line of thread running from your bed underneath the door.
Even if, in the poor light, you did see it, you would dismiss it.
All the assassin had to do was take the piece of thread as I did, pull it very slowly, which hardly makes a sound, and murder is only a few seconds away.
Like you, Cosmas would not hear the fuse.
It's meant to burn slowly but very quietly.
The only difference with you is that I used two grains of gunpowder and no oil.
In Cosmas's case it was different.’
‘But we saw nothing.
Surely, as the slow fuse burns, it would burn the floor beneath?’
‘No, it splutters not burns.
And remember, Roger, the thread had been removed, the fuse destroys itself, and people coming in and out of the room, once the bed was on fire, would scarcely think it suspicious even if they saw the odd burn mark on the floor.
‘So how did you discover this?’
‘What really intrigued me was the scorch mark on the outside of the door facing the gallery, as well as the damage done to the heavy bedstead.
A brilliant piece of murder, Roger.
The assassin did not have to enter the room and, in killing Cosmas, destroyed all the evidence except for that small scorch mark on the other side of the door.’
‘The murderer could have destroyed the whole house.’
‘No, as you noticed before, the floors in all our chambers are stone and there was no combustible material anywhere near.
The bed would burn, its occupant die, but the fire would be discovered in time and the flames doused.’
‘Why didn't Cosmas just get out of the bed?’
‘Ah, now, that did intrigue me until I remembered the gunpowder.
There was probably sufficient to injure him badly.
Do you remember the corpse?
The bottom half of his legs had disappeared completely.
The gunpowder either killed the poor man or caused such grievous wounds as to send him into a swoon from which he would never recover.
Meanwhile, the oil was ignited.
The bed is old wood and would burn as quickly as stubble in the driest summer.’
I stared down at my own bed and accepted Benjamin's conclusions.
The fuse would destroy itself, the gunpowder explode, poor Cosmas's legs would be shattered, and even if he wanted to, the fire spread so quickly as to prevent his escape.
‘Well,’ Benjamin looked round the room, ‘all is safe here, eh?
No fire, no flames.
Now let us go to the church, and I shall show you how Damien died.’
We left the manor and went down to that silent tomb of a church.
Benjamin pushed me in, locking the door behind us, and lit two sconce torches.
The pitch spluttered and flared into life, making the place more eerie with dancing shadows.
‘Now,’ Benjamin murmured, ‘let's assume I am the assassin.
I have come into this chapel to commit murder.
Cosmas's body is laid out and his poor brother will come in for the death vigil.
Unfortunately, others arrive: Mandeville, Southgate and finally us.
Eventually we leave and the murderer, hiding on those steps leading to the tower, is granted an additional advantage by Damien locking the door.’
Benjamin walked over, past the baptismal font and stood looking down into the sanctuary.
‘Now I have prepared everything well.
The crossbow bolts and the arbalest have been hidden away.
I have also lifted the catch, both on the outside and inside of one of the windows.’
Benjamin, imitating the stance of an archer, pretended to fire a crossbow.
‘Damien is killed.
I make sure, then prepare to leave, but I want to make it appear that I entered and left the church like a ghost.
This is how I do it.’
Benjamin walked into one of the small transepts and stopped beneath the window.
He opened this and, from the darkness, picked up a long, narrow ladder, the type soldiers climb when scaling a castle wall, or a tiler might use when working on the roof of a house.
Benjamin pushed this ladder through, then hoisted himself up and, with a great deal of huffing and puffing, disappeared down the ladder.
I heard it scrape as it was lifted away and his voice sang out.
‘So you see, Roger, this is how the murderer left.’
‘Very good,’ I called out.
‘But how do you close the shutters, both from the inside and the outside?’
‘Oh, very easily,’ my master replied.
‘Stand back!’
I did so.
The shutters slammed shut and I even heard the catch fall.
I ran out.
Benjamin was standing a few yards away from the church, the ladder still in his hand.
It was apparent that he had used it both to slam the shutters and so knock the simple latch back into place.
I walked over to him.
He stood, as pleased as a school boy, grinning and clapping his hands.
‘You see, Roger, I used the ladder to get out of the church.
I leave no footprints under the window and use the same ladder to shut the window and force the catch back.’
He blew on his cold fingers.
‘I could have opened the outside latch in the same way.’
‘But what about the one inside?’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘That is neither here nor there.
Do you remember when we went into the church with Mandeville and the rest?
It was dark, anyone could have slipped along the transept and put the catch down.
And don't forget, Roger,’ Benjamin added, ‘with the window slamming shut, the inside latch might just have fallen into place.’
He took  the ladder and slung it into the snow-covered bushes.
‘What now, Master?’
He put his arm round my shoulders.
‘To be perfectly honest, my dear Roger, I don't really know.
But go back to your room and wait for me there.’
Mathilda was waiting for me in my chamber.
I grinned and seized her, but she was not in a playful mood.
She looked fearfully around and I wondered if there were eyelets or spy-holes in the wall.
‘Listen!’ she hissed.
‘You have not hurt my father, so listen to this.
Tonight, the Templars will meet on the island.’
I shook my head disbelievingly.
‘Yes,’ she persisted.
‘I tell the truth.
It's all I can or will tell you.
Go down to the lakeside.
There will be a barge waiting for you but don't cross unless you see the lights.
Study the island carefully and you will see.’
She pushed me away.
‘I'll do no more,’ she repeated, and left.
My master came back, slightly bemused, lost in his own thoughts and I had to repeat two or three times what Mathilda had told me.
He chewed his lip and looked at me.
‘How do we know it's not a trap?’
‘I don't think it is.
It stands to reason, Master.
That island, its awesome long house…
We both know it lies at the heart of this mystery.’
‘Does it?’
Benjamin asked.
‘Does it really?’ and wandered away.
Chapter 13
The mood in the Santerre household was not conducive to any more festive banquets or grand meals.
Mandeville kept to himself, fretting about Southgate and when the additional soldiers would arrive.
So we snatched mouthfuls of cold food and went back to our own chamber to wait until midnight.
It seemed an eternity in coming.
We carefully watched the flame of the hour candle eating away the wax from ring to ring.
When it reached the twelfth, Benjamin and I dressed in boots and cloaks, put on our sword belts and quietly left.
The house seemed asleep yet, as I have said, it had a life of its own.
Time and again we stopped, hearts beating, the hair on our necks prickling with fear at the eerie, creaking sounds which seemed to match our every move.
We crept down into the hall, through the kitchen and out by a small postern door.
The night was as black as the Devil would wish.
No moon, no stars, just a cold biting wind moaning, shifting the gaunt branches of the trees and throwing icy flurries of snow on to our heads.
I would have preferred to have lit torches but Benjamin was against this.
‘We hunt creatures of the night, Roger.
Let us become like them.’
We slipped and slithered out of the stable courtyard where horses moved and snickered, past the Templar church and  down to the gleaming lakeside.
We sat on our haunches, two black shapes against the snow, and peered through the mist at the faint outline of the island.
At first we could see nothing, our eyes hurting and smarting at the strain as well as the biting night air.
Then Benjamin stirred and seized my arm.
‘Am I seeing things?’ he hissed.
I stared through the bleak darkness.
Still I could see nothing but then I glimpsed the light of a torch.
One, perhaps two.
The flames seemed to flicker as if someone was moving about on the island.
‘Come on, Roger!’
Benjamin and I slithered down the bank.
We saw the barge, pole resting in its stern, as if some ghostly boatman was waiting to take us across.
We clambered in.
Benjamin sat in the prow whilst I grabbed the pole, brushing the ice away, trying to close my mind and senses to the chill wind and the lapping of the cold black lake.
At first I was clumsy but then my old skill returned.
(Don't forget, I was raised in Norfolk where the skill of punting barges is as natural as walking.)
Nevertheless, I make a confession: Benjamin and I were stupid.
Now and again we made such mistakes.
An excess of impetuosity, the rashness of youth.
Time and again it nearly cost us our life and that night, on the frozen lake, was no different.
I had made two, maybe three sweeps of the pole, when I felt a wet slippiness beneath me.
Benjamin spun round, his face a white mask in the darkness.
He, too, had felt the dampness seep in and yet, due to the broad sweeps of my pole and perhaps the motion of the lake, we had already travelled yards from the shore.
‘Roger, it's been holed!’
I let the pole slip and crouched, plunging my hand into the bottom of the barge.
My heart jumped in fear as I felt an inch of icy water.
I put the pole down and clambered on hands and knees round the barge, looking for the hole.
Now this is where my skill as a bargeman saved our lives.
You see, on the Broads of Norfolk and Suffolk such accidents are common and the unwary make one of two mistakes, or even both.
They try to reach the place they are heading for or else turn back to the shore.
Sometimes, due to panic and fear, they try both.
But take Old Shallot's advice: if you are in a boat or barge which has been holed, particularly one where the damage is malicious, stop rowing and block that hole for any further movement of the barge simply helps the water rush in.
At last I found it in the stern of the barge, a hole the size of a man's fist as if someone had taken a hammer and smashed through the bottom.
I took off my cloak and immediately began to thread the fabric through the hole.
My master, who had found a similar one on the port side, first tried his cloak but then cursed as it went into the lake and he had to stop the hole with the heel of his boot.
For a few seconds, and it seemed like hours, we just crouched, looking at each other, as the barge danced on the glassy surface.
I glanced quickly towards the island where the siren light still beckoned us on.
‘I am sorry, Master,’ I wailed.
‘Oh, shut up, Roger!’ he hissed.
I kept my hand pressed to the bottom of the boat, my fingers freezing in the icy water swilling round us, but I noticed it grew no deeper.
‘Master?’
‘Yes,’ Benjamin hissed.
‘Now, Roger, my friend, turn this barge round and pull us to the shore, swiftly, with all your skill.
If there's another hole and the water swamps us, we will not survive for long in these icy waters.’
Now you know Old Shallot.
My heart was pounding, my stomach spinning like a child's top.
I wanted to cry, weep and beg the Almighty for mercy.
I seized that bloody pole, swinging the barge round even as I felt the water beneath  me slop and gurgle as if maliciously laughing at me, waiting to embrace us in its frozen grasp.
The barge turned.
I closed my eyes and began to pole.
‘Roger!’ my master screamed.
‘You are going the wrong way!’
I opened my eyes and realised the barge had only half-turned and we were now running parallel to both the island and the shore.
I began to pole and pray with a vigour which would have astonished any monk.
In between snatches of prayer I cursed, using every filthy word I knew, until that bloody barge was heading straight back to the bank.
The water lapped round my ankles.
We had failed to discover a third or even fourth hole and still the water was rising.
My master manoeuvred himself round, using his hand to scoop out the icy water, shouting at me to pole faster.
We skimmed across the surface of that sodding lake whilst all around us gathered the dark hosts of hell.
The water rose higher but then, just as Old Shallot's courage began to crumble into blind panic, the barge shuddered to a stop; both my master and I ran ashore, grateful to fall sobbing on to the snow-soaked bank.
My master crouched, breathing in deeply to calm himself, whilst Old Shallot dealt with the threat in his usual formidable way.
‘Bastards!’
I screamed, jumping up and down on the bank, shaking my fist at the island.
‘You murdering, sodding bastards!
Come on, Master!’
I seized Benjamin by the arm.
He trotted breathlessly beside me as I strode like a madman through the snow, back to that accursed manor.
‘Roger, what are you going to do?’
‘I am going to slit that bitch's throat for a start!’
‘Roger, don't!’
‘All right, I'll cut her head off!
Master, I don't mind being shot at, hunted, trapped, attacked — but to die on a frozen lake at the dead of night!’
‘Roger.’
Benjamin grabbed me by my doublet.
‘Listen!
Mathilda will be well away now.
Do you think she's going to wait for you to come back?
There was always the possibility you might escape.
No, listen, I know who the murderer is.
I know where the Grail and Arthur's Sword could be.’
I stopped.
‘Why didn't you tell me this before?’
‘I had to wait.
I suspected the murderer would strike at us, and what happened on that lake proved it.
Now, Roger, I beg you, let us go back to our chamber, warm ourselves, snatch a few hours of sleep and tomorrow, as we break fast in the hall, I shall confront the murderer.’
Of course my master had his way.
Anyway, by the time we reached our chambers my anger had been replaced by sheer terror at the danger we had just escaped.
All the old signs appeared: I wanted to be sick, my knees kept quivering, and it took three deep-bowled cups of claret before I could even remember what day of the week it was.
Naturally, I taxed my master on what he had learnt.
He merely sat on the only chair in my room, shook his head and told me to sleep, and that it would be best if we shared the same chamber that night.
The next morning we woke none the worse for our terrible experience.
Benjamin insisted that we shave, wash and change our linen and doublets before going down to the hall.
On our way I looked for Mathilda but Benjamin was right, there was no sign of the little minx.
The Santerres were already at high table, Mandeville also.
My master waited until a kitchen boy served us, then suddenly rose, locking the great doors of the hall as well as those to the kitchen and buttery.
Mandeville broke free of his reverie.
Sir John Santerre stared, a ghost of his former self.
Lady Beatrice watched fearfully whilst Rachel sat like an innocent child waiting for a play to begin.
‘Daunbey, what's all this?’
Mandeville grated.
Now Benjamin had unmasked many a killer and brought numerous murderers to boot.
Sometimes he played games, drawing the assassins into verbal battles in which they would confess.
But this time it was different.
He walked once, twice round the table on the dais, pausing for a few seconds behind each chair.
Then he went round again and stopped between John Santerre and Rachel, putting his hand gently on the man's shoulder.
‘Sir John, are you the killer?’
Santerre shot back in his chair.
If a man's face could age in a few seconds, his did.
‘What do you mean?’ he stuttered.
‘On our first day here you claimed you left Templecombe to ride your estates.
You did not.
Instead you went to Glastonbury.’
‘There's no crime in that.’
‘And, just before we left London, why did the beggar give you that note?’
‘I…’
‘If you lie,’ Benjamin snapped, ‘these matters will be laid before the King's Council in London.’
Sir John stretched over and, despite the hour, filled his wine goblet completely to the brim.
He gobbled its contents like a thirsty man would the purest water.
Mandeville was now alert as a hunting dog.
‘Answer the questions, Santerre!’
Sir John put the wine cup down.
‘When I was in London I paid people to ascertain if the Templar church near Fleet Street contained anything resembling the River Jordan or the Ark of Moses.’
‘And did it?’
‘No.’
‘And Glastonbury Abbey?’
Sir John licked his lips.
‘Both Abbot Bere and I wanted an end to all this nonsense.’
He glanced at Mandeville.
‘No  offence, Sir Edmund, but no lord in the kingdom wants you or your sort prying round his estates.
I used my wealth to fund the building of a crypt at Glastonbury.
I thought that something might be found.’
‘And has it been?’
I asked.
‘Nothing whatsoever.’
Benjamin stepped beside Lady Beatrice, who sat rigid in her chair.
‘Lady Beatrice, what do you know of these matters?’
The woman's mouth opened and closed.
She shook her head.
‘Oh, yes, you know something.
Your first husband's name was Mortimer?’
Lady Beatrice nodded.
‘He came of a crusading line which has held the manor of Templecombe since time immemorial?’
Again the nod.
‘And the Mortimer family motto is ‘Age Circumspecte’ is it not?’
Benjamin glanced at me.
‘Shallot discovered that in the Book of Legends at Glastonbury Abbey.’
‘Yes,’ she whispered.
‘What's that got to do with us?’
Mandeville interrupted.
‘Was your husband a member of the Templars?’
Lady Beatrice's eyes, glassy with fright, stared down the hall.
‘I think he was,’ Benjamin continued, whispering in her ear.
‘When the Templars were dissolved some two hundred years ago, some escaped, assumed other identities, married and settled down.
Your husband's ancestor was one of these.
Nevertheless, the Templars continued meeting in secret, each coven acting like a small community, the mysteries of the Order being passed from one generation to another.’
He moved slightly and rested a hand lightly on Rachel's shoulder.
‘You were given these mysteries, weren't you, Rachel?’
Do you know, the girl just smiled and played with the ring on her finger.
‘You are a Templar, aren't you?’
Benjamin whispered.
‘Your father passed the secrets on to you.
In time you would have married and passed the mystery on to your first born.
For generations,’ Benjamin's voice rose, ‘the lords of Templecombe have been members of the secret Templar organisation.’
He paused.
‘Oh no, not you, Sir John, nor Lady Beatrice, but I think you both had your suspicions.’
‘Impossible!’
Mandeville shouted.
‘She is a mere chit of a girl.’
‘She's eighteen summers old,’ Benjamin retorted.
‘And if you remain quiet, Sir Edmund, I will tell you what happened.’
He went round the table, stepped off the dais and stood looking at all of us.
Santerre and his wife were like waxen effigies but Rachel, her face slightly flushed, leaned forward as if without a care in the world.
‘The Lords of Templecombe,’ Benjamin began, ‘were always Templars.
They kept the Order's secrets and in dark covens met their helpers, probably in the sombre house on that Godforsaken island.
Now in the main these Templars lay sleeping like seeds planted in the soil, though sometimes they would burgeon, quickening into life, particularly in any uprising or rebellion against our Tudor masters.
Nevertheless, they were content to sit, watch and wait.
Hopkins was one of these, though deranged in his wits.’
Benjamin paused to collect his thoughts.
‘The Templars always coveted the great relics, the Grail and Arthur's Sword, Excalibur, but these remained hidden.
They were content with that, provided no one else discovered them.’
Benjamin stared at Mandeville.
‘Hopkins began the drama.
He had a passion for the relics and believed their discovery would strengthen the Order.
My Lord of Buckingham, also a Templar, was drawn into the mystery.
He received a  message from Hopkins and came to Templecombe but then blundered into the trap My Lord Cardinal had laid for him.
Hopkins and Buckingham were killed.’
Benjamin glanced at Rachel.
‘But I suspect the Templars have a code.
No one strikes at their interests and walks away unharmed.
Moreover, there was a greater danger: His Grace the King was now interested in these relics and was insisting on a thorough search for them.
So the Templars struck.’
Mandeville tapped the top of the table with his knuckles.
‘You say Buckingham was a Templar?’
Benjamin smiled thinly.
‘Oh, come, Sir Edmund, he could have been a Cardinal of Rome and his fate would have been the same.
Don't play games.
Buckingham was baited, trapped and killed because my uncle hated him and because he had royal blood in his veins.’
Benjamin glared at him.
‘Hopkins was a traitor, perhaps deserved his death, but Buckingham was innocent.
His death was murder made legal.’
‘I will tell My Lord Cardinal your words!’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘Do so and dear Uncle will simply laugh and put it down to my youthful impetuosity.
I only say what thousands think.’
Mandeville glared down the table at Rachel who sat, hands joined, like some novice at prayer.
She seemed fascinated by Benjamin as if he was telling some mysterious tale on a cold winter's night and she was a spectator, not a party to it.
‘I cannot believe,’ Mandeville jibed, ‘that this girl garrotted two experienced agents, Calcraft and Warnham.’
‘Oh come, Sir Edmund,’ Benjamin replied.
‘I have heard how in Spain there are beggar children so skilled with the garrotte they can kill a fully grown man in a matter of seconds.
It would have been simple for Rachel.’
Benjamin spread his hands.
‘Calcraft, and on another occasion Warnham, were invited down to a meeting in some tavern  by the riverside where Mistress Rachel was waiting to talk to them.
After her coy glances and generous cups of wine, they were lured out into the dark so Rachel might speak where no spy could overhear.
Perhaps they sat down.
Mistress Rachel would find it so easy; a desolate spot, the garrotte cord in her hands, men in their cups.
Just a few seconds, Sir Edmund, and the cord slips round their throat; fuddled in their wits they would struggle but only briefly before lapsing into unconsciousness.
If the garrotte cord did not kill, the cold water of the Thames would.
Then Rachel would flit back along the alleyways to Richmond Palace.’
‘You have proof of that?’
Sir John blustered, though his eyes betrayed him.
‘Yes and no.’
Benjamin replied.
‘Except I was intrigued why a scarlet cord should be used.
So, before I left London, I took it to one of the maids at Richmond Palace, and do you know what she said?’
Santerre shook his head.
‘That it is a sort of material women might buy to serve as piping on their dresses, gowns or cloaks.
At the time I dismissed this but later it was a piece which fitted the puzzle.’
Rachel, her lower lip caught between her teeth, shook her head disbelievingly.
I felt a chill of fear at her complete imperviousness to what my master was saying.
‘Hopkins's sister,’ I intervened, ‘was also a victim of the garrotte.
Rachel, you see, overheard us as we left the hall in Richmond Palace.
She subtly covered this up by appearing to be concerned about what dangers might face us here at Templecombe.’
‘Why should she kill Hopkins's sister?’
Mandeville asked.
‘Because,’ I replied, ‘there was always a danger that Hopkins, who confided in so few people, may have said something to his sister which could have threatened her.
And it was so easy.’
I spread my hands.
‘Rachel slipped out of Richmond Palace and went hot foot to the house of Hopkins's sister who would, of course, admit her as a friend, the daughter of the lord whom her dead brother had served.
Rachel would reassure her, they even shared a goblet of wine, before Rachel slipped the garrotte round her throat.
The old woman died, Rachel searched the house for anything which might incriminate her, and then disappeared.’
‘That poor old woman was murdered,’ Benjamin declared, ‘not because she had said or done anything wrong but simply because of what she might know.
We tell the truth, I believe, Rachel?’
The girl stared back silently.
‘Once we left London,’ Benjamin continued, ‘the real dance began, didn't it, Roger?’
‘Oh, yes,’ I replied.
‘When we stopped at Glastonbury, Mistress Rachel sent a message, God knows how, to that old witch who was waiting for us with her prophecies.
Look, it stands to reason,’ I continued.
‘No man, or woman could read the future so clearly.
Even before we reached Templecombe our deaths were planned.
The old hag was really a mummer mouthing lines taught to her and, once her part was played, she too had to die.
An easy feat.
There must be secret passageways and entrances out of Templecombe.
Mistress Rachel used these, first to silence the witch; secondly, to cut off her hands and head in order to frighten us on our return to Glastonbury.’
‘And the deaths of Cosmas and Damien?’
Mandeville asked.
Benjamin gave a pithy description of how both men had died.
‘Cosmas was the easiest,’ he concluded.
‘On our first evening here, after you had all retired, Rachel allegedly left the hall to collect a manuscript.
I am sure she went up to the poor man's room, picked up the thread lying there, pulled out the slow fuse, lit it with a tinder and then came back down here.’
‘Was she so certain Shallot would be roused?’
Mandeville asked.
‘Oh, if Roger hadn't woken, she always had me.
After she returned, she could feign sleep and say she wanted to retire.
I would go to my chamber on the same gallery as poor Cosmas and, of course, notice something was wrong.
‘However,’ Benjamin stared at Rachel, his face betraying his hurt at being used by her, ‘only after examining the Templar chapel following Damien's death did I really begin to suspect Mistress Rachel.
You see, in the chapel, near one of the windows, I noticed bits of wood from a ladder which had been left there.
Only a member of the Santerre household would have access to such a ladder.
‘Secondly, when I simulated what she had done, I found the window was rather narrow.
Even I, slender as I am, found it difficult to squeeze through.’
He paused.
‘So it had to be someone young and supple and only Rachel fitted that description.
‘Finally, there was something else.
Did you notice, Sir Edmund, when we were trying to force the door of the church, how Rachel and her mother hurried along shouting for Damien through the window?
At the time I thought it was strange but, on reflection, Rachel was simply checking that no trace of her departure from the church remained.
Once we were inside, she was also most assiduous in accompanying us as we searched for any secret entrance or passageway.
I recall her being near one of the windows.
I am sure it was then she either brought the latch down or, if it had already fallen, made sure it was in place.’
‘But the snow?’
Mandeville interrupted.
‘You said someone who had been travelling through snow stood at the back of the church.’
‘No, that was just a clever ploy to tangle matters even further.
Rachel could have brought the snow in and let it melt so as to distract attention from herself.
She had  ostensibly stayed in the manor house all day.’
Benjamin paused and we all stared at the young woman now sitting back in her chair looking up at the rafters, tapping the table top and humming a tune to herself.
She was one of the most curious assassins I had ever met.
Benjamin had levelled the most serious allegations against her, yet never once had she protested, objected or interrupted.
Even my master seemed unnerved by her cool demeanour.
‘Daughter,’ Sir John grated, ‘have you anything to say against this?’
‘I am not your daughter,’ she replied flatly.
She then sat up straight and stared at my master.
‘Where's your proof that I lit the slow fuse?
Where is your proof that I garrotted two men, not to mention an old woman, in London?
Where is the proof that I lurked in a church and killed Mandeville's servant with a crossbow bolt?
Or that I killed and mutilated a half-mad witch?’
Benjamin pulled a face.
‘Aye, Mistress, you are correct.
Other people could have bought the scarlet cord.
Other people could have committed these terrible crimes.
But, think carefully.
Someone at Templecombe knew where to get gunpowder, oil and a slow fuse.
Someone at Templecombe knew where to hide both herself and a scaling ladder in the church, as well as how to use that poor hag; first to deliver messages and then, as a warning to the rest of us, as a victim.’
‘The same is true of Bowyer and Southgate,’ I interrupted.
‘Their horses were fed a meal of oats and bran to make them more fiery.
Who else but someone at Templecombe could manage that?
And then you changed their stirrups and tainted their spurs with mercury?’
‘So Bowyer's death was no accident?’
Mandeville interrupted.
‘Of course not!’
Benjamin replied, and gave a short description of what we had found in the stables and in  Southgate's chamber.
Rachel heard him out.
She placed her elbows on the table, resting her face between her hands, nodding approvingly as if Benjamin was some favoured pupil who had learnt a poem by rote.
‘But you have no proof,’ she repeated.
‘There's the proof!’
I snarled, pointing to her white-faced mother and the haggard Sir John.
‘They know!
They suspect!’
The young woman shrugged.
‘Then there's the servants,’ I continued.
‘Those who carried out your orders.
You dragged down everyone with you.
Rachel daintily arched one eyebrow as if I had mentioned inviting her servants to some feast or revelry.
Benjamin watched her curiously.
‘You are not afraid of death, Mistress?’
‘Why should I be frightened of the inevitable?’ she replied.
‘And why threaten me with death?
As I keep repeating, you have no proof.’
‘The King's torturers in the Tower will find it!’
Mandeville retorted.
Benjamin walked in front of Rachel and studied her carefully.
I watched, fascinated, for this was the first time he had confronted a murderer with a plausible explanation but very little proof.
The deaths of the agents, Cosmas and Damien, Bowyer and those terrible injuries inflicted on Southgate, would in a court of law puzzle any jury.
They might declare there was a case to answer, but what proof?
(Mind you, Mandeville was right!
Henry VIII cared little about evidence or the finer points of law.
I always remember him turning to Thomas Cromwell about the trial of an abbot who had refused to take the Oath of Supremacy.
‘Give him a fair trial,’ the fat bastard roared, ‘and then hang him from his own gate!’)
Benjamin beckoned Rachel.
‘Mistress, a word by ourselves, please?’
She rose, tripping round the table as if Benjamin had asked her for a dance.
They walked down the hall and stood near the fireplace.
Benjamin whispered to her and I heard her hissed reply, followed by silence.
She then spread her hands and Benjamin led her back to the table where she stood defiantly before Mandeville.
‘Master Daunbey is correct,’ she murmured.
‘I am a member of the secret Order of the Templars.
I am responsible for the deaths he has listed.’
She smiled obliquely.
‘I pay respect to his brilliance and subtle astuteness but I am proud of what I did.
My Lord of Buckingham's death is avenged.
Those responsible, except you, Sir Edmund, have received their just deserts.’
She lowered her voice.
‘But don't sleep easy, Mandeville, for your time will come.
Beware of every alleyway, of every drink and bite you swallow, of every horse you mount, every stranger you meet, because in time, when you least expect it, other Templars will finish what I have begun!’
‘And us?’
I shouted.
(Isn't it strange?
This mere slip of a girl responsible for at least seven deaths.
A self-confessed killer who could, even on the brink of her own destruction, still hold us with a threat.
And you know Old Shallot, I have a well-developed sense of my own preservation.
Yes, I will be honest, Rachel Santerre, or more correctly Rachel Mortimer, chilled my soul to the marrow.)
The young woman stared at me.
‘I like you, Shallot,’ she murmured.
‘No, for the moment you are safe.
What happened last night should never have taken place.’
Now Mandeville got to his feet.
‘Rachel Santerre,’ he intoned, ‘I arrest you for treason and the most horrible homicides.
You will be taken to London and stand trial for your life before King's Bench at Westminster.
Sir John, Lady Beatrice, you will accompany her.’
Mandeville walked to the door and called for some of Bowyer's soldiers.
‘Take this woman,’ he ordered, pointing to her, ‘to her chamber.
One man is to stay on guard in the room, two others outside!
She is to be chained hand and foot.
Do it!’ he ordered the surprised soldier.
The fellow grasped the unresisting Rachel and pushed her out of the hall.
Mandeville glared back at Santerre.
‘I will now search this house,’ he barked, ‘beginning with your daughter's chamber!’
And swept out of the room.
‘Roger,’ Benjamin whispered, ‘come with me.’
He hurried out of the hall.
The soldiers were already putting manacles around Rachel's wrists.
Her face was marble-white, Even then I knew she was determined not to become the plaything of the London mob.
‘Mistress Rachel,’ Benjamin asked, ignoring Mandeville's protests, ‘is there anything we can do?’
She forced a smile and shook her head.
Mandeville pushed her further down the gallery.
‘Sir,’ Benjamin intervened, ‘the woman is your prisoner, there is no need for such rudeness.’
Rachel shrugged off Mandeville's hand and looked once more at Benjamin.
‘Ever the gentleman, Master Daunbey.
I am sorry about last night.
I was ordered not to touch you.’
And without explaining that enigmatic remark further, she allowed the soldiers to lead her away.
Benjamin and I walked back into the hall.
Lady Beatrice was sobbing hysterically.
Sir John Santerre looked an old, beaten man.
‘Master Daunbey,’ he pleaded, ‘what shall we do?’
Benjamin climbed on to the dais and leaned over the table.
‘You have interests abroad, Sir John?’
Santerre nodded.
‘And gold with the Antwerp bankers?’
Again the nod.
Benjamin looked at Lady Beatrice.
‘You knew, didn't you?’
The woman's thin face was a mask of terror.
‘I couldn't stop her,’ she whispered hoarsely.
‘When I married my husband, I knew the legends, the stories, the whispers.’
She glanced round the deserted hall and glared at Santerre.
‘I hate this place!’
She spat out the words.
‘I asked Sir John to burn it to the ground but Rachel played him like a piece of string around her finger.
She could always do that!
Templars, ghosts, curses — and now we shall answer for it with our lives!’
‘Sir John,’ Benjamin replied briskly, ‘there are secret entrances and passageways out of Templecombe, are there not?’
Sir John nodded.
‘Yes, yes,’ he said absentmindedly.
‘Then, sir,’ Benjamin declared, ‘I would collect up all that is valuable, leave immediately, get to the coast and put as much distance as you can between yourself and the King's fury.
It's your only chance,’ he persisted.
‘Otherwise the King's lawyers will spin their web and have you hanged at Tyburn.
You'd best go now.’
Benjamin straightened up as if he was listening carefully.
‘Your servants are wise, Sir John.
They have already gone.
I suggest you do likewise.’