

3 Grain size determination and interpretation
JOHN MCMANUS
3.1 INTRODUCTION
The size of the component particles is one of the fundamental textural characteristics of all fragmentary deposits and their lithified equivalents.
From the earliest days of observation and recording of geological features, terms such as‘coarse’, ‘medium’ or ‘fine’grained have been applied to unconsolidated deposits.
Although considered a useful lithological discriminator for tracing individual horizons during geological mapping, little systematic study of grain size characterization and measurement occurred before the end of the nineteenth century.
By that time there was already an appreciation that very substantial currents of water were necessary to transport coarse sediments but, without systematic means of establishing precisely the sizes of particles and the range of particle sizes within a deposit, little scientific advance was made.
In general terms, ‘size’ of particles is not readily defined as it is a measure of the dimensions which best describe a specific group of particles.
At one extreme the particle dimensions may exceed one metre, but at the other are the very fine particles less than one micrometre in diameter.
A cube may be best described by its edge length, a sphere by its diameter, a rod perhaps by its intermediate axis and a flake by its projection area.
Thus ‘size’ is partly dependent on shape, a fact which was gradually recognized during the early years of the present century.
The methods used in determination of size vary widely from calipers on the coarsest fragments, through sieving and techniques dependent upon settling velocity, to those detecting changes in electrical resistance as particles are passed through small electrolyte-filled orifices.
No single technique of assessing particle size is applicable throughout the entire size spectrum, and each is suited to specific size ranges.
Although when measuring pebbles to determine axial lengths individually, relatively small numbers of grains are considered, in most methods large numbers of grains are examined so that a statistically meaningful set of numbers is obtained to characterize the sample.
The techniques of processing the data on grain size were largely explored during the 1920s and 1930s when a series  of textural classifications was introduced.
In their simplest forms these classifications indicate average grain size, and the degree and form of the spread around that average.
Statistical analysis is aided by means of a simple transformation of size from a metric scale to a logarithmic one which enables application of both graphic and moment statistical techniques.
Explored initially for sand-dominated  assemblages , the methods were refined during the 1950s and applied to thin section analysis of lithified sediments during the early 1960s.
Fresh techniques of exploring the information on grain populations with a view to interpreting depositional environment or transportation experienced by the deposits continue to be introduced with varying degrees of success.
Many have appeared, been explored and found applicable only under certain restricted conditions.
Even the most sanguine grain size enthusiast would agree that no universal solution exists as yet to enable the sedimentologist unequivocally to distinguish depositional environments in ancient deposits on grain size criteria alone.
Nevertheless, an enormous amount of information about a sedimentary deposit may be obtained from systematic examination of the multiple sub-populations of which most are formed.
Specific sub-populations may be source- or process-diagnostic, a factor which frequently emerges from regional surveys.
From the outset it is most important that the investigator should decide precisely what information is required from the sediments to be analysed (McCave, 1979a).
Analysis solely to obtain numerical assessment of the texture of a deposit is unlikely to satisfy the sedimentologist but this information may be all that is required to demonstrate to a fisheries expert the potential value of a site for the introduction of an economically important species  such as Nephrops (Scampi).
In assessment of the suitability of a deposit for supplying specific coarse concrete aggregates or finer mortar sands, very precise requirements are laid down by the construction industry.
These often demand restricted ranges of particle sizes in fixed proportions within the gravel.
In tracing characteristic source-specific sub-populations of sediment passing through a river system the closest possible spacing of sieves may be required.
In estimating the potential ‘activity’ of a soil it may be necessary to determine the maximum projection area of the particle surfaces of various sizes to assist in the assessment of potential cationic exchanges; scanning electron microscopy may be necessary.
In this chapter attention is devoted to the techniques used commonly by sedimentologists to determine sizes of particles, i.e. sieving, pipetting, settling and Coulter counting, coupled with optical microscopy.
Where other appropriate methods exist reference will be made to useful sources of information.
3.2 SAMPLE PREPARATION
The selection of materials to be processed is made in the field and usually collections comprising many samples arrive in the laboratory at any one time.
The initial procedure in preparing for analysis is the systematic checking of the materials to ensure that identification numbers and labels are all present and legible.
This is most readily achieved by laying out cores, sample bags, bottles or blocks of material sequentially.
Any internal numbering, unless engraved on indestructible material, may rapidly become obliterated, and relabelling with external labels is essential.
Gaps in numerical sequences may be identified and samples lacking clear labels may at this stage be returned to their correct sequential position.
If identification of misplaced samples cannot be completed with certainty at this stage the samples have little value for subsequent analysis and should be discarded.
Better to have no data than unreliable data.
Further preparation of all sediments relates to the form of size determination to be carried out.
Lithified materials may require little more than decision on the orientations of thin sections needed for later examination under the optical microscope, but special slide preparation and cementing media may be required, particularly if soluble minerals are thought to be present (see Chapter 4).
Prior to examination of large particles some cleaning may be necessary.
In unconsolidated materials washing in running tap water may be sufficient to remove unwanted muddy coatings (assuming data from the muds are not required).
Lithified coarse sediments frequently release large fragments once cements are weakened in warm dilute hydrochloric acid, but care must be taken that the clasts themselves are not susceptible to attack.
Sands derived from beaches, estuaries or the sea bed may contain quantities of salt within their interstitial waters.
Unless removed by washing the salts become deposited during drying before sieving, cementing adjacent particles together, to produce misleading analyses.
If no very fine grains are present in the sediment the sands may be freely washed in well-agitated water to remove the salts.
Normally three washings, each in one litre of distilled or deionized water, are needed to remove the salt from about 200 g of sediment with thorough stirring (Buller & mcmanus , 1979).
It is, of course, important that no particles are lost during each process of decanting the water after washing.
When fine materials are present it is necessary to separate them by wet sieving so that sands and the silt/clay fraction may be examined separately using different size determination techniques.
It is most important that separation of the fines be carried out before drying of the sediment for, on heating, silts and clays produce crusts or durable pellets.
Although these may be later broken down physically to release individual particles there is no guarantee that individual flakes of clay would become separated by purely physical means.
Division of the sediment into two fractions at an early stage is therefore recommended.
Each fraction must be labelled to permit later recombination of partial analytical results.
Silt and clay sized particles dominate many marine, estuarine and lacustrine deposits.
Frequently the behaviour of the finest size fractions is determined by the concentrations, identities and valencies of salts in the interstitial waters.
Whether the clays remain as discrete particles or cluster together to form flocs or aggregates with diameters much larger than the individual component particles is often a function of these waters.
Modification of the fluids through washing thus not only changes the salt concentrations, but may also induce separation or aggregation of the particles, so that subsequent size analysis may not indicate the natural interrelationship between the particles during deposition or  achieved since.
Interpretations of settling characteristics based on the most minute elemental particles, of which many thousands may combine naturally to produce flocs or aggregates, may give a very misleading guide to the energy levels in the depositional environment, for flocs settle at much greater rates than their individual component particles.
Size analysis of fine particles therefore presents problems, for the pre-analytical preparations may largely determine the ultimate results obtained.
Nevertheless, most investigators remove the salts before subjecting the samples to pipette, hydrometer or Coulter analysis, in all of which some dispersing agent is introduced to ensure separation of individual particles.
Removal of water salts from fine sediments is best achieved using dialysis.
The sample, placed in a dialyser bag, is suspended in distilled or deionized water, circulation of which encourages osmotic exchange of the salts over a period of several days.
Ideally many samples are dialysed simultaneously.
Once sample preparation has been completed the simplest analyses may be performed on the largest particles.
3.3 DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF GRAIN SIZE
The analysis of particle sizes of coarse unconsolidated sediments may be achieved through direct measurement of individual pebbles.
The lengths of representative diameters or axes are determined with the aid of vernier calipers (Briggs, 1977).
For every pebble several possible diameters may be recognized along the three principal axes of the pebble.
A nominal diameter may also be derived from the volume of the pebble.
The particle is placed on a flat surface and the length of the intermediate axis, 1, is determined as the shortest visible diameter.
The length of the largest axis, L, at right angles to I is next measured, and rotation of the particle by 90° about that axis reveals the shortest axis, S which may then be directly measured.
It should be noted that L is not the greatest possible dimension of the pebble but is quite strictly defined in geometric terms.
Thus three mutually perpendicular axes may be used to characterize the pebble (Fig. 3.1).
Addition of the three lengths, I, L and S, and division by three yields a mean diameter D M for the particle.
A second mean diameter is derived by immersing the pebble in water to determine the volume of water displaced, from which the volumetric diameter, D v is calculated using the expression .
Such measurements should be repeated for 100–400 pebbles at a site.
Thereafter some workers analyse the results according to the numbers of pebbles falling into specific categories.
However, because it is the weight distribution rather than the frequency distribution which determines sediment behaviour during transport and deposition the weight of the pebbles falling into each size class should be used for the purposes of comparison.
In most cases the length of I provides a useful assessment of the mean diameter, and if determinations are to be made in the field this diameter provides a useful measure of average size.
3.4 SIEVING
Although it may be advantageous for specific purposes to examine individual pebbles, under most circumstances the sedimentologist seeks to establish the character of an entire deposit, not simply the coarser fractions.
For such purposes a more general form of mechanical analysis to determine grain size, the sieving method, is used (Krumbein & pettijohn , 1961, Folk, 1974b, Buller & mcmanus , 1979).
With appropriate sieves, particles varying between 0·002 and 250 mm may be separated into regular size class intervals.
Most commonly sieving is used for size determination in the pebble and sand ranges, i.e. particles coarser than 0·063 mm.
For the coarser particles sieve screens are formed of plates or strong wire of stainless steel or brass, and finer wire meshes are used for smaller particles.
Between the wires are square openings, the numbers of which per unit length give the mesh number and the diagonal the nominal size.
The coarsest sieve required is placed at the top of a nest of sieves in which the screen openings become progressively smaller downwards.
A pan is placed beneath the lowest sieve to retain the ‘fines’ which pass through the entire column.
For the most detailed analysis the meshes are arranged at the closest possible intervals, but greater spacings by size may be used if less detail is required.
The sample for testing is placed on the uppermost sieve after weighing, the retaining lid closed and the nest of sieves arranged in a mechanical shaker (Fig. 3.2).
The nest is agitated by the shaker for a predetermined time interval, usually 15–20 minutes.
It is most important that the base of the sieve nest is arranged exactly parallel to the shaker base and is firmly held in position during agitation (Metz, 1985).
Not uncommonly only half of the sieves required may be mounted on the shaker at a time, so the pan residue from the coarser fraction is released into the upper sieve of the finer part of the nest in order to complete the analysis.
This nest also requires a terminal pan.
The material retained in each successive sieve is emptied in turn on to a sheet of glazed paper, the sieve tapped gently in a direction diagonal to the meshes and swept with appropriate sieve brushes (camel hair for fine apertures, brass for coarse screens) to dislodge particles which have become firmly held.
Each fraction of sediment obtained is weighed to () .01 g.
The material retained on each sieve screen is weighed in turn and the weight of any residue in the final pan is also determined.
Most workers find it convenient to record their sieving analysis data systematically on forms designed for the purpose.
The sieve mesh sizes, raw weights, weight percentages and cumulative percentages, finer or coarser than the specific sieve, may be displayed.
Likewise, further groupings such as percentage of coarse sand or of very fine sand may also be calculated.
An example of such a record sheet is provided in Table 3.1.
3.4.1 Dry sieving
Perhaps the most commonly used method of determining particle sizes, dry sieving, is subject to potential errors from many sources.
(a)
During the drying process particle aggregation may occur and it is most important that sieve residues should be checked, using a hand lens where necessary, to detect the presence of aggregates which form clusters considerably larger than the original single component grains.
(b)
Thorough cleaning of the sieve meshes is important as retained particles severely restrict the aperture spaces available for grains to pass through.
(c)
Overloading of the sieves restricts the opportunity for particles to progress down the nest to an appropriate mesh.
The greatest load on a sieve should not exceed 4–6 grain diameters (McManus, 1965).
Overloading may also cause mesh distortion, a factor which is most evident on coarse screens.
Distortion may be avoided by following the maximum sieve loadings recommended in BS 1377:1975 (Table 3.2).
Examination of the condition of the meshes in the sieve nest should always be carried out before undertaking a major sieving programme.
For most sands about 100 g of material is adequate for sieving analysis but larger weights are required for coarse gravelly deposits.
(d)
The ideal duration of agitation by mechanical shaker (Ro-tap or Frisch) is still a matter of discussion.
In most laboratories standardization is to 15 or 20 minutes but some researchers recommend only 10–15 minutes (Friedman & Johnson, 1982, Lewis, 1984) and still others suggest that significant changes in the final analytical figures obtained may be detected after 35 minutes of shaking (Mizutani, 1963).
For most purposes acceptable reproducibility of analyses is obtained after 20 minutes.
(e)
The sieving technique is strongly dependent upon sieve mesh shape.
Platey particles such as mica flakes may readily pass diagonally through meshes which more nearly spherical grains of identical intermediate diameters cannot pass as a result of the length of their short diameters.
Thus size determination using sieves is partly controlled by the particle shape (Rittenhouse, 1943).
Substantial deviation of  particle shapes from spheres may lead to underestimation of the characteristic intermediate diameter according to Ludwick & henderson (1968).
However, it takes longer for irregularly shaped particles to pass down a sieve column than grains which are smooth surfaced or equant (Kennedy, Meloy & durney , 1985).
Visual inspection of sieve residues should be undertaken to confirm the presence or absence of substantial proportions of strongly non-spherical particles in the sediment.
In a better attempt to define the intermediate diameter (I) of particles retained on sieves of specific nominal diameters (D sv ) Komar & Cui (1984) demonstrated that the relationship  provided a means of obtaining a more closely representative grain diameter than currently given by the sieve mesh itself.
This correction factor may be applied to metric measures of diameter.
3.4.2 Wet sieving
Since many sediments contain mixtures of gravels, sands and finer particles the dry sieving technique may be appropriate for examination of only part of the whole assemblage of particles.
The finer particles require other methods of analysis.
Separation of the coarse from the fine fractions is customarily made at 63 µm, which is the most commonly used lower limit of dry sieving.
However, it is not possible to analyse satisfactorily both the coarse and the fine fractions fully once the split has been achieved.
Some workers suggest that the entire sediment sample should be oven dried at 110°C and weighed to 0·1% before being immersed in water containing a dispersant such as sodium hexametaphosphate.
The sample is periodically agitated in the water for over an hour before being washed through 2 mm and 0·063 mm stainless steel meshes using wash bottles containing dispersant solution.
The fines continue to be washed through the sieve until the water runs clear.
The residue (not more than 105 g) on the 0·063 mm sieve is dried at 110°C and sieved as above.
The total fines content is determined as the difference between the initial and the retained material weights.
However, many clay sized particles, whether organic or inorganic, become structurally altered at temperatures approaching 100°C so if any further study is to be undertaken this  method is not recommended.
The satisfactory dispersion of initially oven dried sediments as recommended in BS 1377 is not guaranteed by this method.
If further size analysis is to be undertaken the best procedure is to use two identical sub-samples.
One is wet sieved as above, and both the mud and sand fractions dried and weighed to establish their relative proportions.
The second sub-sample is wet sieved with sand retention for drying and weighing while the mud fraction, whose proportional contribution to the whole sediment is now known, remains in a receptacle for further analysis.
3.5 SIZE ANALYSIS BY SEDIMENTATION METHODS
Grain size analysis of fine sediments depends not on direct measurement of the particles themselves but rather upon indirect computations of diameters based on observation of the grain behaviour in fluids or the response of the fluids to displacement by the grains.
The principal methods based on the speed with which particles settle through fluids yield settling velocities from which equivalent grain diameters are computed.
Characterization of particles in terms of their dynamic behaviour is thought by many to be more environmentally significant than direct measurement of particles with calipers or sieves.
In consequence the use of sedimentation columns or tubes to determine the fall velocities of sediment particles has become very popular.
The technique is relatively quick for coarse sediments and may also be relevant for silt sized particles, although time for completion of analyses increases greatly within the silt size range.
Computation of the diameters of grains from a knowledge of their settling velocities is dependent upon the exploitation of Stokes' Law of settling.
When a particle in static water settles at a constant velocity the gravitational force exerted on the particle is balanced by fluid resistances represented by viscosity and particle drag coefficient.
The balance is normally represented within the equation  where V s is the settling velocity, d the particle diameter, ρ s and ρ the densities of the grain and water respectively, g is the gravitational acceleration and µ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid.
Use of the equation is based on the precept that particles are dominantly spheres and are of identical densities.
The assumption that most are of quartz permits computation of equivalent grain diameters.
In practice natural sediments are rarely composed of spherical grains, and most contain assemblages of many shapes.
Particles of identical composition and diameter settle at greatly differing velocities if their shapes or surface textures differ, for the drag coefficients resisting passage through the water vary with both of these properties.
3.5.1 Pipette method
Inexpensive size analysis of naturally occurring fine sediments or of material obtained from wet sieving of a sediment containing significant fines is most satisfactorily achieved by the use of the pipette method (Krumbein & pettijohn , 1961; Galehouse, 1971b; Folk, 1974b).
In essence this technique relies on the fact that in a dilute suspension, particles settle through a column of water at velocities which are dependent upon their size.
If a material behaves according to Stokes' Law then, by repeatedly sampling at a fixed depth below the surface progressively finer and finer sediments are present at the sampling depth.
Temporal variations of solid concentrations at that level indicate the relative abundance of particles whose diameters may be calculated.
As particles decrease in diameter through the silt and clay sizes they become increasingly cohesive as surface ionic charges grow in relative significance.
In natural environments such as rivers and estuaries, these materials form aggregates or flocs within which interparticulate cohesion may be strong.
The size characteristics of the flocs may be examined by permitting settling in natural waters in which sediment and ionic concentrations may be high (Peirce & williams , 1966).
Likewise where organic particles play potentially important roles in sedimentation, settling in low sediment and ionic concentrations may be useful (Duck, 1983).
However, if the size of the smallest component particles in a flocculated sediment is to be determined, it is necessary to introduce a dispersing or peptising agent.
Under most circumstances this is one of the first stages in the preparation of material for pipette analysis.
Sodium hexametaphosphate solution is perhaps the commonest dispersing agent used sedimentologically.
It is prepared by dissolving 33 g of sodium  hexametaphosphate and 7 g of sodium carbonate in distilled water to give one litre of solution.
Although many variations of concentration have been tried that found most useful is 50 ml of the solution to 1000 ml of distilled water.
Alternative dispersants used in some laboratories are Calgon (2 g per 1000 ml water) and Teepol (4 drops per 1000 ml of water).
A sample of 20 g of fine sediment is suspended in a 1000 ml measuring cylinder charged with water containing dispersant, and thoroughly mixed through end over end rotation or by means of a manual  stirrer which travels from the base to the top of the fluid column.
As the suspension begins standing a timing device is started.
A pipette is inserted gradually into the fluid so that its inlet is 20 cm below the surface and a volume of 20 ml is withdrawn 58 s from the start of settling.
The fluid is released into a numbered 50 ml beaker and any particles retained within the pipette washed into the beaker using distilled water.
Successive 20 ml aliquots are extracted from the column at time intervals which calculations have shown reveal particles of known diameter (Table 3.3 after Krumbein & pettijohn , 1961).
The aliquots are withdrawn from specified depths at the time intervals shown for a full analysis of the fine particle content.
If no more than the contents of medium silt, fine silt or clay are required, aliquots may be withdrawn after the appropriate time intervals and the relative abundance calculated from differences in weights of suspension in each.
In establishing sand:silt:clay ratios of sediments it may be necessary to withdraw samples no more often than after 58 s at 20 cm (0·063 mm) and 123 min at 10 cm (0·004 mm).
In each case the pipette should be gently inserted and withdrawn from the fluid in order to minimize disturbance.
The lowering and extraction phases should each take about 10 s.
Fluid withdrawal is most readily achieved with the aid of a manually operated vacuum device (Fig. 3.3).
Beakers containing the fluids are placed in a ventilated oven and dried at 100°C for at least 24 hr, cooled in a desiccator, and weighed to 0·001 g
In calculating the weight of sediment retained in each withdrawn aliquot, allowance must be made for the dispersant.
The simplest computation is achieved by comparing the weights of successive   withdrawals.
As both contain the same quantity of dispersant the difference represents the weight within the size interval concerned.
Since each aliquot forms 2% of the original sample the full size distribution may be calculated through continued withdrawals to the finest required size.
The total weight of fine sediment undergoing analysis is fifty times the sediment extracted in the initial (58 s) sample.
Because the method depends on Stokes' Law the dynamic viscosity of the water is important.
Viscosity varies greatly with temperature and the table of timings provided is calculated for analysis at the standardized temperature of 20°C.
As full analysis may take several days to complete it is very important that it be carried out in a thermally regulated laboratory.
In many countries stabilization may be possible but not to the relatively warm 20°C.
Modified tables may be established for lower temperatures, the greater viscosities requiring extension of the sampling times as settling velocities decrease as the temperature falls.
The quantities of initial sample used in different centres varies from 4 to 35 g per 1000 ml but in practice the most satisfactory concentrations from the viewpoint of reproducibility have been found to be between 10 and 20 g per 1000 ml.
The higher the concentrations the greater the possibility of entering into the realms of hindered settling and settling convection in which upward motion of escaping waters impedes settling (Kuenen, 1968).
This time consuming analytical procedure has the advantage of simplicity and requires little specialist equipment.
It also provides sufficient time to permit several analyses to be carried out simultaneously.
Most workers find that four to six sets of analyses can be dealt with even if a very detailed withdrawal pattern is required.
If for any reason a withdrawal time is missed the entire pattern of settling may be restarted by restirring and allowing the material to recommence settling until the required time interval has elapsed.
Resuspension may also permit the analyst to leave the laboratory for sleep if the timings are carefully pre-arranged.
3.5.2 Sedimentation tube
The second widely used technique based on settling velocity is that of the sedimentation tube.
However, unlike the pipette technique, this method is not confined to analysis of silts and clays, but is commonly applied to the sand fraction of the sediments.
The earliest sedimentation tube widely used is the Emery tube (Emery, 1938).
Particles released simultaneously at the top settle through a broad tube which narrows into a smaller diameter tube at the base.
The heights of accumulation at known time intervals are measured by optical micrometer and the particle sizes calculated from these figures.
The introduction of a pressure transducer to determine the temporal variations of weight in the water column above a specific level permitted electrical recorders to be used.
Initially, this modification involved simultaneous comparison of the weights of identical columns of water with and without sediment (Woods Hole Rapid Sediment Analyser: Zeigler, Whitney & hayes , 1960), but improvements in transducer technology have since enabled the devices to be used in single tubes.
The gradual decrease of weight of material in the column through time as sediment passes the transducer levels during settling enables estimation of the particle size ranges involved.
A further variation introduced a balance pan within and near the base of the tube.
The varying weights of particles retained through time are recorded in the sedimentation balance method (Sengupta & veenstra , 1968; Theide et al., 1976).
In the sedimentation tube technique the particles are released simultaneously from the water surface, a process achieved by holding a 2–5 g sample on a  platen by means of a wetting agent and lowering it into the water surface.
The sample is kept small to minimize bunching of the cloud of settling particles.
If the concentration exceeds 1% hindered settling occurs and this may decrease settling velocities by 5% below those of individual identical particles (Richardson & zaki , 1954).
The diameter of the tube is important here, broad tubes being required for analysis of coarse sediments (Channon, 1971).
Since most sedimentation tubes are at least 2 m in height problems arise of ensuring static water, for such columns develop internal convection currents unless maintained in thermally stable conditions.
The reliability of the sedimentation tube methods, as determined by good reproducibility of results from repeated analysis of the same samples and by analysis of multiple sub-samples from individual sediments, has been recorded by many workers.
However, interpretation of the measurements obtained is less clear.
Although fall velocities of individual particles may permit confident calculation of particle diameters, the behaviour of clusters of particles  of a range of sizes is less easy to calculate.
In most cases individual tubes require to be calibrated against well characterized particles such as single spheres (Zeigler & Gill, 1959) or clusters of spheres of single sizes and combinations of sizes (Schlee, 1966) before their performance may be known.
Total calibration against the full range of particle size combinations and particle shapes is impracticable.
In practice the particle sizes in the sediment are computed from the weights settled at specific time intervals.
The measured settling velocities are converted into ‘equivalent sedimentation diameters’, or the diameters of spheres settling at the same rate as the natural particles being tested (Gibbs, Matthews & link , 1971).
One of the most relevant particle characteristics derived from sieve analysis is the size of the intermediate diameter.
Investigation of settling of natural quartz sands enabled Baba & komar (1981) to obtain a relationship: in which V s is the settling rate of the equivalent sphere of diameter, I, and V m is the measured settling velocity.
Combining this relationship with that of Gibbs et al.(1971) enabled Komar & cui (1984) to compute intermediate grain diameters rather than equivalent sedimentation diameters using the expression: in which ρ and ρ s are the densities of water and the grains, and µ the dynamic viscosity of water.
In early comparisons of sizes determined by sieving and settling techniques Sengupta & veenstra (1968) and Sanford & swift (1971) concluded that in general the results were very similar but that settling over-estimated fine particle sizes and under-estimated coarse particles.
Thus settling appeared to decrease the spread of sizes as estimated from sieving.
Following the application of correction factors to permit comparison of intermediate diameters from both sieving and settling techniques Komar & cui (1984) demonstrated extremely close similarity between the results from the two forms of analysis applied to sediments from a wide range of depositional environments.
However, they noted some deviations related to the presence of heavy minerals with densities considerably greater than quartz and also to mica flakes whose shapes differ from the spherical.
3.6 COULTER COUNTER
A second technique which provides the possibility of analysing sand, silt and clay sized particles in the size range 0·0005–0·85 mm depends on the detection of variation in electrical current as fluids containing the particles are passed through apertures of various diameters.
The principle on which the Coulter counter operates is that the particles are suspended in an electrolyte which is drawn through the aperture.
In the absence of particles an electrical current across the aperture remains constant, but when particles of low electrical conductivity, such as quartz, pass the aperture they cause current fluctuations, depending upon their volume.
The stream of particles generates a series of pulses of current, up to 5,000 s -1 , which may be automatically recorded as numbers and particle volumes.
The system was originally introduced for size determination of fine particles (Sheldon & parsons , 1967) but has been extended into the sand range (McCave & Jarvis, 1973).
Using suitable techniques very fine increments of size may be detected (McCave, 1979b) by what is a very rapid and highly reproducible technique.
Many samples may be processed in one day.
The method is simple, but depends upon a relatively expensive apparatus which is not, but should be, available in all sedimentological laboratories, particularly where fine sediments are to be analysed.
The Coulter counter is widely used in industrial laboratories and in medical situations but relatively rarely by academic sedimentologists.
3.7 GRAIN SIZE ANALYSIS OF LITHIFIED SEDIMENTS
Ancient sedimentary deposits which cannot be readily disaggregated present major difficulties to the potential size-analyst.
Any grain size estimation  must be undertaken from the rock itself or from polished or thin sections of the rock.
A thin section cut through a randomly packed set of spheres reveals circular outlines of a range of sizes.
Knowing that all were of uniform original size permits calculation of that size from the density distribution observed.
Without the knowledge that the grains were initially uniform it would have been impossible to reconstruct the original population (Krumbein, 1934).
In natural sediments the grains are rarely uniform in size and few are spherical, so that the unknown elements in the analysis render the mathematical problem of interpreting the original grain size populations from thin section insoluble (Blatt, Middleton & murray , 1980).
Nevertheless, sedimentologists dealing in the lithified materials frequently wish to make statements about the textural characteristics of their rocks.
In the only systematic study of this topic, Friedman (1958) compared thin section analysis of artificially cemented and sectioned sands with sieving analyses of the same materials.
The correction factors derived empirically were expressed in graphical form (Fig. 3.4).
Because there is a preferred grain orientation in most sediments, the particles lying with long and intermediate axes parallel to the depositional surface, thin sections for size analysis of such sediments should be cut parallel to bedding or cross-bedding surfaces.
The size of the smaller axes encountered, i.e. intermediate axes of the grains encountered at grid intersections as in point-counting, should be determined.
The use of gridded photomicrographs  printed to a convenient size permits analysis at the desk rather than down the microscope.
3.8 GRAIN SIZE ANALYSIS
3.8.1 Scales of size
Since sediment particles range in size from several metres to less than one micrometer, a scale using uniform divisions by size places too much emphasis on coarse sediment and too little on fine particles.
In consequence, a geometric scaling was introduced to place equal emphasis on small differences in fine particles and larger differences in coarse particles.
Although there is fairly general agreement on the terms to be applied to sediment particles of various sizes the definitions used for the bounding sizes is not uniform.
Most workers take values based on the Udden-Wentworth scale (Table 3.4), which is a ratio scale in which the grade boundaries differ by a factor of 2.
One grade coarser is twice the size of its predecessor and one grade finer is half the size.
The grade boundaries are established at 4, 2, 1, 0·5 and 0·25 mm etc.
Even with agreement on the form of the scale and grade boundaries in the coarser ranges different authors still place the silt-clay boundary variously at 2 µm (Briggs, 1977; Friedman & sanders , 1978), which is a size commonly used by soil scientists, or at 4 µm, as in the original Udden-Wentworth system (Tanner, 1969; Pettijohn, 1975) as is more normal amongst geological sedimentologists.
In order to plot the results of grain size analysis using the ratio scale it is necessary to use logarithmic scale graph paper for size so that visual equality is given to the scale divisions.
This led Krumbein (1934) to introduce the phi transformation, which recognized the logarithmic equality of scale divisions.
He expressed grain size such that where d is the grain diameter in millimetres.
This permitted the use of arithmetic graph papers for plotting.
According to the phi transformation a coarse particle 4 mm in diameter has an equivalent diameter of -2φ, whereas a finer grain 0·125 mm in diameter equates with a +3φ diameter.
The larger the particle phi number the finer the particle.
The relationship between metric and phi scales presented in tables by Page (1955) is illustrated in Fig. 3.5.
The arithmetic form of the phi scaling also potentially simplifies statistical analysis of grain size data, but confusion concerning the properties of the phi scale dimensions led to an accepted redefinition in which  where d o , is the diameter of a 1 mm grain.
This stresses that the phi system is one of dimensionless numbers and so may be correctly used for statistical analysis to derive factors such as the standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis of grain size distributions (McManus, 1963; Krumbein, 1964).
3.8.2 Graphic presentation
The simplest method of presenting grain size data graphically is by means of the histogram.
In this the  grain size is the independent variable, which is therefore plotted on the horizontal axis and the vertical axis is used for the dependent variable, i.e. the determined weight percentage.
The weight percentage of sediment retained on each sieve is plotted as a column rising to that value and extending from the relevant sieve mesh to the next coarser mesh used.
The output from most Coulter counters is also given in this format.
The resulting graphical construction is simplified if the size scale is represented by equal increments, usually represented by phi, half-phi or quarter-phi divisions.
A line graph, which is the unique frequency curve of the sediment, may be formed by linking the mid-points of the histogram columns (Fig. 3.6).
Ideally the frequency curve should be formed from the most detailed possible size analysis of the sediment.
When sieving is used the sieves are arranged at ¼ phi scale intervals.
The frequency curve approximates to a continuous functional relationship between grain size and weight percentage variation.
The resultant curve closely resembles the Gaussian or ‘normal’ probability curve of statisticians, with high values near the centre of the size range and low value tails in the coarse and fine ends of the scale.
Traditionally sedimentologists have regarded grain size populations as approximating to this form of distribution and have based their methods of data plotting and statistical analysis on this assumed relationship.
In that the size scale is logarithmic in reality the distribution approximates to log normal.
Because a limited amount of statistical   information may be extracted from the frequency curve the same facts are most commonly used to construct the cumulative frequency curve.
In constructing the curve of cumulative frequency by weight the abscissa retains its size scaling.
The weight percentage retained on the coarsest sieve is plotted at the appropriate grain diameter, the sum of weight percentages retained in the two coarsest sieves is plotted at the next finer mesh, the cumulative contents of the first three sieves at the next finer mesh and so on until the entire sediment has been accounted for at 100%.
Although the ordinate scale of such curves may be arithmetic a second scaling is more commonly used which assumes the normal probability distribution.
Plotting is therefore carried out on arithmetic probability graph paper.
The ordinate scaling is derived by dividing the area beneath a normal distribution curve into columnar segments of equal area.
Those near the centre of the distribution are long and relatively narrow whereas those towards the tails are low and proportionately broader (Fig. 3.7).
Since the spacing patterns are the same for all normal distributions the divisions are carried forward to provide the probability ordinate scaling for the arithmetic probability graph which is used for plotting cumulative size distributions.
Whereas plotting on the arithmetic ordinate scale generally yields ‘S’ shaped grain size distribution patterns, using the probability ordinate scale straightens the curve (Fig. 3.8).
Perfect log-normal grain size distributions plot as straight lines on the probability paper.
However, natural sediments  rarely conform to this pattern and the deviations from log-normality have provided much scope for discussion, interpretation and speculation.
By convention the geologist plots coarse grains to the left of the abscissa and fine to the right.
In computing values for cumulative distributions it is normal to consider values in terms of the percentage coarser than a given grain size.
Thus the higher values on the cumulative percentage by weight plot occur in the range characterized by the finer particles.
This is the exact opposite of and neither more nor less correct than the practise adopted in civil engineering analysis of soils and aggregates.
3.8.3 Curve characterization by statistical methods
Whilst data presented in graphical form have pictorial value, permitting crude general statements to be made about a sediment, they are of little value for detailed comparisons with other samples.
In consequence, simple statistical techniques are used to characterize the grain size distribution data.
An important difference between conventional statistics and statistics of grain size distributions is that in the former frequency is expressed as numbers whereas in the latter it is as weight percentage.
Two principal forms of analysis are normally used, graphical methods, in which values derived directly from plotted cumulative curves are entered into established formulae, and moment methods in which the characteristics of every grain in the sample analysed from the sedimentary deposit are used in the computation.
In all cases the numbers obtained serve to define the position of the distribution plot, its slope, and the nature of any irregularities.
The values of these parameters permit characterization of the curves, and enable numerical comparisons to be made between samples.
The parameters used fall into four principal groups: those measuring
(a)
average size,
(b)
spread of the sizes about the average,
(c)
symmetry or preferential spread to one size of the average, and
(d)
kurtosis or degree of concentration of the grains to the central size.
In discussion of particle sizes a standard form of notation is used.
The size of particle for which 25 or 32% of the grains are coarser, P 25 or P 32 respectively in metric units, or φ 25 and φ 32 in the phi system may be read directly from the cumulative frequency curve.
Grain sizes in φ corresponding to specified percentile values are entered into simple formulae to permit calculation of the various graphic parameters.
(a) MEASURES OF COMMON SIZE AND AVERAGE SIZE
Mode.
On a size frequency histogram the size class in which the greatest percentage of grains is represented provides the modal class.
On the size frequency distribution plot the highest point on the curve provides the modal value.
The modal size is, therefore, the commonest grain size in a distribution.
The frequency curves of many sediments exhibit several peaks, the polymodal distributions indicating the presence of more than one population of grains.
Some workers use modal values abstracted directly from the size frequency distribution by  weight (Friedman & johnson , 1982) but others advocate its derivation by recalculation from the gradient of the cumulative curve (Griffiths, 1967; Folk, 1974b).
Median (Md).
Half of the grains are coarser and half finer than the median diameter, whose size is most readily determined from the 50% line of the cumulative distribution curve.
Although useful for many unimodal sediments, in polymodal distributions the median may fall in the tails of two sub-populations of grains, in a size fraction which is scarce.
Mean (M).
The best measure of average grain size, the mean is computed from sizes of particles spread through a range of percentile values.
In its simplest form the Graphic Mean, M z is calculated from  which assumes that three values alone are sufficient to give a useful mean.
Where more confidence in the average value is required more percentage values may be used, e.g. M9 is computed by  provided the percentile values used are evenly spread through the distribution.
In practise this approximates to the mean of moment statistics.
(b) SPREAD ABOUT THE AVERAGE — SORTING (σ)
In many forms of analysis the full range of sizes present is of relevance.
However, it is rarely possible to define the size of the largest or smallest particles precisely in a size distribution.
Of more importance is an assessment of the spread of particles about the average, to define the dispersion or sorting of the sediment, as represented by the breadth of the frequency curve or the shape of the cumulative frequency distribution.
In all metric measures and their direct phi-based equivalents only the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles are used, so that attention is only given to the central half of the grain population present.
As a measure of the characteristics of the sediment they are of limited value, but as a method of characterizing the central segment of a curve the Trask Sorting coefficient  or its equivalent, the phi Quartile Deviation  may have some value.
Ideally a measure of sorting should embrace a broader spectrum of the grains present, and the graphic standard deviation σ φ, of Inman (1952), computed from  provides a measure of the spread of size of 68% of the population (one standard deviation on either side of the mean).
Further extension to include 90% of the curve yields the inclusive graphic standard deviation σ 1 ,(Folk & ward , 1957), which uses the 5th and 95th percentiles to define a spread corresponding to 1·65 standard deviations on either side of the mean.
Taking the mean of the contributions from the 68 and 90% population fractions produced the expression:
The best sorted sediments approximate to a single size and have low σ 1 , values (Table 3.5).
(c) PREFERENTIAL SPREAD — SKEWNESS (α)
In a normal distribution with a bell-shaped frequency curve the median and mean values coincide.
Any tendency for a distribution to lean to one side, i.e. to deviate from normality, leads to differences between the median and mean values.
These differences are used to characterize the asymmetry or skewness of the curve.
The skewness has a positive or negative value when more fine or more coarse materials are present than in a normal distribution, seen as tails to the right or left respectively on frequency distribution plots.
Again, although skewness may be computed for the central segment of the distribution, for most purposes broader spreads are used.
Effectively skewness is determined from the value of the mean less the median, all divided by the range used in defining the mean.
Many possible combinations of computation are available.
Expressed simply:
When laid out fully the inclusive graphic skewness is obtained from:
Skewness is a positively or negatively signed dimensionless number; it has neither metric nor phi value and lies within the range -1 to +1 (Table 3.5).
(d) CONCENTRATION OR PEAKEDNESS OF THE DISTRIBUTION KURTOSIS
Not widely used, although frequently calculated, the kurtosis is related both to the dispersion and the normality of the distribution.
Very flat curves of poorly sorted sediments or those with bimodal frequency curves are platykurtic, whereas very strongly peaked curves, in which there is exceptionally good sorting of the central part of the distribution, are leptokurtic.
The measure of kurtosis, which is a ratio of the spreads of the tails and centre of the distribution (and is therefore also dimensionless) is given by the expression:
A listing of commonly used formulae and verbal descriptions of the values obtained is presented in Table 3.5.
3.8.4 Moment methods
The second major approach to analysing grain size distributions, moment statistics, differs in concept but yields measures analogous to those of graphical methods.
Neither technique is ‘better’ than the other.
Graphic techniques are especially appropriate for analysis of open ended distributions whereas the moment methods should not be applied unless all grain sizes present lie within the defined grain size limits.
The principles of moment statistics are lucidly reviewed in Friedman & johnson (1982).
Effectively each grain in the population is taken into account in computing the characteristic parameters of the sediment.
Whereas in mechanics the moment is calculated as the product of a force and the distance of its application from a fulcrum, in statistics the moment is computed from the product of the weight percentage in a given size class and the number of class grades from the origin of the curve.
The first moment, the moment per unit frequency, is the mean,, of the distribution: where  is the mean, f the frequency in weight per cent and m φ is the mid-point of each class interval.
Once the position of the mean is defined the spread of the distribution about it is calculated by summing the moments of each class interval about the mean.
In each of the subsequent moment calculations the difference  is raised to higher powers.
The second moment has a value which is the square of the standard deviation of the distribution:
The third moment measures the symmetry of the distribution about the mean and yields a value which is the cube of the skewness:
The fourth moment yields a value for kurtosis raised to the fourth power:
Although the parameters obtained are analogous to those of graphical statistics their derivation employs the entire grain population and so they are more representative than the graphically derived values.
Once again it should be stressed that, because all grains are used, this form of analysis should not be used unless the size distribution is fully known.
Distribution of the ‘pan residue’ fraction from sieving among a specified number of phi classes ‘to permit application of moment methods’is not good practise and may lead to misleading, if not meaningless, results being obtained.
If a total of less than 1% of the population is undefined then the errors are unlikely to be great, but the reliability of the moments decreases sharply as the proportions of undefined materials increases, and the technique should not be used with a higher proportion of unknowns notwithstanding the convenience and availability of pocket calculators suitable to perform the arithmetic.
3.8.5 Alternative grain size distributions
The grain size distributions of some sediments yield linear log-normal cumulative plots, but others deviate from the linear patterns to a greater or lesser degree, especially in the tails of the distributions.
In consequence some authors suggest that the conventionally applied log-normal probability law is not suitable for universal applications in grain size analysis.
Early work by Rosin & rammler (1934) revealed that crushed coal exhibited regular grain size characteristics controlled by natural fracture patterns of the material.
They established expressions from which Rosin paper was introduced for plotting grain sizes of crushed particulate matter (Kittleman, 1964).
Some natural sediments such as pyroclastic debris, glacial tills and weathered crystalline rock products exhibit linear plots on Rosin paper, suggesting that they behave very much as crushed products, but the similarity vanishes swiftly with transport after which they rapidly come to resemble more commonly encountered materials transported and deposited from natural fluids.
Although Bagnold (1941) suggested that wind blown sands, which deviated from log-normality, might have some other probability function, it was not until recently that his suggested log-hyperbolic distribution has been closely examined as an alternative (Barndorff-Nielsen, 1977; Bagnold & Barndorff-Nielsen, 1980; Wyrwoll & smyth , 1985).
The log-hyperbolic distribution offers the possibility of a range of curve fittings, one limiting case of which is the log-normal distribution.
In practise the natural logarithm of the frequency curve is plotted against grain size (Bagnold, 1968), and the four parameters of the best fitting log-hyperbolic curve are computed.
Two of these relate to the curve position (grain size and peakedness) and the other two to inclination of the limbs of the curve.
The distribution has been examined principally within the context of wind blown dune sands (Bagnold & Barndorff-Nielsen, 1980; Christiansen, 1984) for  which it was claimed the hyperbolic function encompassed the extreme values of the size distribution tails better than the log-normal plot.
However, comparative studies of Wyrwoll & smyth (1985), who suggested that the ‘improved’ performance may be partly a function of shape-influenced deficiencies in the sieving technique, led to the conclusion that only a marginal improvement in fitting over the log-normal curve was achieved.
They also pointed out that substantial computational skills were required to obtain the best-fit log-hyperbolic curves from which the parameters could be derived.
3.9 ENVIRONMENTAL INTERPRETATION FROM GRAIN SIZE DATA
The methods of analysis and presenting data are standard descriptive techniques, but it is always the aim of scientists to derive more than simple descriptions of their materials.
The sedimentologist is no exception.
The prospect of a universally applicable technique of abstracting from sediment grain size distributions measures diagnostic of depositional environment has encouraged generations of sedimentologists.
The uncomfortable fact remains that though many have tried only modest success has been achieved and no overall method has yet been discovered.
Indeed, some consider the quest, though honourable, most unlikely to succeed (Erlich, 1983) and potentially wasteful of effort through diverting attention away from attainable research targets.
With this warning the reader is introduced to the final section of this chapter in which some of the approaches to the analysis of the distribution curves and the abstracted measures are outlined.
The simplest tool employed by the sedimentologist is the geographical map on which variations of individual parameters may be plotted, so that patterns of regional variation may be recognized.
Systematic variation of mean grain size with environmental dynamics is normally detectable, and systematic changes in standard deviation and skewness may also be detected in suitable areas.
Within a local or regional context recognizable patterns related to dynamics or supplied materials are not unexpected (Folk & ward , 1957; Allen, 1971; Ryan & Goodell, 1972; Cook & mayo , 1977).
Commonly, there are covariations of two or more measures, such as mean size and sorting, which Griffiths (1967) illustrated as being hydraulically controlled, so that in all environments the best sorted sediments had their mean sizes in the fine sand category.
This energy related universal relationship has been confirmed by many subsequent studies.
One of the earliest attempts to characterize depositional environments by means of bivariate scattergrams was that of Stewart (1958) who plotted median against skewness and standard deviation for sediments from rivers, wave dominant zones and quiet water environments, and defined envelopes within which his analyses occurred (Fig. 3.9): Also, using graphic techniques, Schlee, Uchupi & trumbull (1965) were unable to distinguish beach and dune sands from grain size data alone.
Following early studies by Friedman (1961, 1967) the use of scattergrams of sorting and skewness to provide discrimination between river, beach and dune sands has been repeatedly explored (Moiola & weiser , 1968).
The relatively fine grained unimodal sand deposits from many parts of the world yielded similar characteristics: beach sands were well sorted and negatively skewed, whereas river sands were less well sorted and usually positively skewed.
Dune sands also had positive skewness but were finer than beach sands.
However, the best separations reported were achieved using a combination of moment standard deviation and an unusual graphic skewness (Friedman & sanders , 1978).
Although general separation of points by environment was achieved there was always some overlap between adjacent fields.
No clear cut distinction has been found in most forms of bivariate plot.
Leaving the beach, dune and river sediments, which were mainly medium or fine sands, the greater spread of grain size enabled Landim & frakes (1968) successfully to distinguish till from alluvial fan and outwash deposits using moment methods.
In few studies have the higher moments been used to advantage, the principal exception being that of Sly (1977, 1978) who used the skewness — kurtosis interrelationships to recognize differing environmental energy levels in deposits of the Great Lakes (Fig. 3.1()).
Deposits without pebbles, essentially of muddy materials from low energy environments, fall in fields A, B, C and D whereas those with pebbles, either lag deposits or high energy beaches, lie in fields E, F, G and H.
In some of the simplest forms of analysis ratios of the sand, silt and clay contents may have value.
The     silt-clay relationship has been explored in an environmental energy context for lake and marine systems.
Pelletier (1973) demonstrated that the expected decrease of size with increasing depth of water was much stronger in lakes than in oceans.
Using information abstracted from the cumulative distribution curve, Passega (1957, 1964) suggested that the ratio of the coarsest one percentile, C, to the median diameter, M, could be used as an indicator of the dynamics of the depositional environment.
The strongest currents should define the largest stable particle size.
Counter-plotting gave the C-M diagram within which he defined envelopes typifying deposits from traction currents, from beaches or from various forms of suspension (Fig.3.11).
In separate plots, L-M diagrams, he also examined the role of L, the proportion of particles finer than 31 µm.
With deposits of limited size variations the technique has some success but better discrimination is achieved where there are large size differences.
Many sediments are composed not of one single grain size population, but rather of a combination of sub-populations.
Each sub-population may be defined by dynamic considerations or by supply characteristics.
In the natural environment individual sub-populations may be present in varying proportions from site to site.
Thus in allied localities it may be possible to trace material from one specific source using its modal size and spread, noting the increases and decreases in its contribution to local materials (Curray, 1960; McManus, Buller & green , 1980).
Elsewhere the effect of wave activity may be particularly intensely experienced by one size fraction which is either totally removed or greatly increased in proportion.
The combination of the sub-populations in different proportions determines the grain size characteristics of the overall sediment.
Following the work of Moss (1962, 1963) who    demonstrated three sub-populations of pebbles form most gravel deposits.
Visher (1969) suggested that cumulative frequency curves could often be sub-divided into two, three or four linear segments (Fig. 3.12).
Because log-normal distributions follow linear trends on the cumulative probability plot he considered each segment to represent a separate sub-population whose character was determined by the dynamics of transport: traction, saltation and suspension.
Many plots required a two-fold saltation load to be considered.
This apparently simplistic and attractive technique which has been readily espoused by many workers merits further attention.
Replotting data from the cumulative curve to the frequency curve shows that linear segments do sometimes coincide with recognizable sub-populations but in other cases inflexions where linear segments join also coincide with population peaks.
Experimentally combining two unimodal sediments produces not a two-fold linear pattern, but a three-fold one, the central segment forming in the size overlap zone.
Nevertheless, this form of analysis may still merit further exploration.
In a further non-standard bivariate plot, Buller & mcmanus (1972) suggested using the central sub-population, which frequently spans over half of the distribution, to provide a metric quartile deviation measure  to plot against the median diameter.
Using many hundreds of analyses they defined field envelopes each embracing 68% of all relevant data points from the river, beach, aeolian and quiet water deposits.
Many of the envelopes partly overlapped, particularly in the medium to fine sand range, but good separations were achieved outside those sizes.
Later envelopes for turbidites (Buller & mcmanus , 1973a), tills (Buller & McManus, 1973b), screes and pyroclastic (Buller & McManus, 1973c) deposits were added.
Plotting the graphic sorting characteristics of the same sediment gradients enables recognition of the sorting characteristics which may be expected to occur with sediments from each depositional environment (Fig. 3.13).
This method of analysis met with some success (Sedimentation Seminar, 1981) but has not been widely applied.
While the geological sedimentologist has developed one set of criteria by which sedimentary deposits are assessed, an entirely different approach to sands and gravels is taken by the construction industry which uses such materials for concrete, road metal aggregates, mortars and plastering.
The sedimentologist assesses materials with respect to their conformity to an ideal of sorting in which perfection is realized in a deposit in which all particles are identical.
In an extremely well sorted sediment all particles approximate to the same size.
For the civil engineer dealing with concrete design, sorting in the geological sense is undesirable.
The graded aggregate, in which a defined spread of particle sizes is represented, is considered ideal.
In a graded aggregate small particles occupy intergranular spaces, partly filling voids between larger particles.
This permits reduction in quantities of cement and water required to give desirable properties such as workability, strength and durability potential.
The poorly sorted sample of the sedimentologist may be the well graded material of the engineer.
In practice the engineer achieves design optimization by blending together ‘coarse’ and ‘fine’aggregates of suitable strictly defined grading characteristics.
As many of these are readily obtained by simple screening techniques applied to natural sedimentary deposits it is of interest to record the prescribed       limitations of the aggregate gradings.
The gradings recommended for coarse aggregates arranged according to specified nominal diameters in BS 882:1973 are indicated in Fig. 3.14 and those for the four zones of fine aggregates of BS 812: 1975 in Fig. 3.15.
Materials whose grain size distributions fall within the limits specified for zone 3 fine aggregates are well suited for certain tasks.
According to Connor (1953), only restricted gradings of sand produce good mortars.
Later, Swallow (1964) demonstrated that the best mortar sands had median diameters in the range 440–570 µm and graphic standard deviations of 200–275 µm.
Nevertheless, a broader range of potentially useful mortar sands is indicated in BS 1199: 1976.
A second property of sediments which is of economic importance is the porosity, the spaces between the solids, which may become filled with water or other fluids such as oil and gas.
The porosity of a deposit is expressed as the percentage of voids in a given volume of rock.
Two forms of pores are recognized, the primary pores, which develop during deposition of the sediment, and secondary pores, which develop after deposition, principally through solution of the rock particles themselves.
The former are important in unconsolidated or cemented siliciclastic rocks whereas the latter is more commonly considered in the context of carbonate sands and limestones.
The intercrystalline or interparticle voids are present in all rocks.
They are more open and better interconnected in most coarse clastic deposits than in fine sediments.
The efficiency with which fluids pass through the rocks depends heavily on the interconnections, the spaces available in the pore throats and the sorting of the sediment.
In very well sorted coarse uncemented sediments pore spaces are large and may have free interconnections whereas in poorly sorted sediments fine particles occupy void spaces, reducing the porosity and blocking many interconnections.
Early cementation serves a similar purpose and may lead to closure of the throat passages.
Compaction may cause fine particles to move into direct contact with their neighbours so a high initial porosity may become drastically reduced with burial.
Measurement of porosity is achieved by determining the volume of gas displaced from the pore spaces of a known bulk volume of rock.
The latter is determined by displacement using total immersion in mercury, the former using a sealed pressure vessel and measuring the increased volume of gas present when pressure is decreased by a known amount.
The associated property of permeability is important for this is the factor which determines the ability of a fluid to pass through a porous medium.
Measured as the rate at which fluids pass through cores of the rock or a bed of sand, the permeability is calculated according to Darcy's Law and the unit relevant in most natural sediments in the millidarcy.
Again the permeability is largely dependent upon sediment sorting and the presence of cements, or authigenic growths in the pore throats.
Particle shape may also be important.
As grain size decreases so does the permeability in most cases, due to an increase in the associated capillary pressure resisting passage of the fluids.
The general interrelationships between grain size, permeability and porosity are summarized in a ternary diagram of sand, silt and clay contents in Fig. 3.16.
The detailed impacts of sorting and grain size on porosity and permeability of unsorted sands is given in Fig. 3.17 (after Selley, 1985).
The analysis of sediment size distributions is thus not only of considerable academic interest but has highly practical significance to the construction industry, for extraction of water supplies and the production of hydrocarbons.
4 Microscopical techniques: 1.
Slices, slides, stains and peels
JOHN MILLER
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Since the pioneering work of Henry Clifton Sorby (1851), slices of rock ground thin enough to transmit light have been the staple material of sedimentary petrography.
Sorby's work simply involved examination of thin sections in polarized light on a petrographic microscope.
Today's sedimentologists are able to extract a great deal more information from thin sections by using special techniques to study fabrics, textures, mineralogy and geochemistry.
In order to recover so much extra information, thin section preparations must be of consistent high quality.
To achieve the required precision in thin section making, a considerable degree of mechanization is required, and this is expensive.
However, most laboratories which produce more than a modest number of thin sections are now equipped with appropriate automatic and semi-automatic systems.
This does not, however, mean that high quality results can be achieved only by such methods: where a small volume of sections is involved, many of the techniques described in this chapter can easily be adapted for manual preparation of thin sections.
A simple, manual slide-making process is outlined by Adams, MacKenzie & guildford (1984, p. 97).
Sections required for teaching purposes do not need to meet the stringent requirements of those used for research, but they should be of good standard; they are, after all, the primary material on which all geologists are trained.
Many workers proceed directly to examination of thin sections, but there is a great deal of information to be obtained from examining rock slices and cut faces, particularly in the case of limestones and sandstones.
First, the three-dimensional arrangement of grains can be better studied in slices, whereas thin sections are essentially two-dimensional.
Second, fabrics are studied more effectively at low magnifications and on faces larger than those possible on thin sections, where the microscope concentrates on detail by restricting the field of view.
Perhaps more importantly, examination of cut faces enables appraisal of which areas should be made into thin sections.
Careful selection of critical areas for sectioning saves time and expense, and allows subsequent petrographic study to be based on knowledge of the section's context.
Suggestions are given below for preparation and study of rock faces, slices and slabs, and the way in which these preparations support examination of thin sections in a broad-based approach to sedimentary petrography.
4.2 PROCESSING SAMPLES
At the outset of any petrographic analysis, it is wise to begin by planning the kinds of sample preparation which will be required, and what information is to be sought from them.
Samples can be collected which not only adequately represent the facies or lithosomes under study, but are appropriate in orientation, size, shape and freshness to the selected preparation techniques.
Processing is then designed to minimize wastage and maximize data collection.
A general scheme for processing samples for microscopical study is shown in Fig. 4.1.
This flow chart is fairly complete; not every petrographic study will need to be so thorough, but particular paths are easily selected.
4.3 Slices
In this section, I use the following terms: faced sample — a smooth cut across a rock sample, with the rest of the specimen left rough.
Slice — a section through the sample with two parallel cut faces.
Slices may be up to several centimetres thick.
Those less than about 6 mm thick are sometimes called plaquettes.
Usually, plaquettes are approximately the same area as thin sections: they may often be prepared as a first step in section-making.
4.3.1 Slice preparation
Large samples (above the size of two clenched fists) must first be trimmed on a saw with a large radius blade (steel impregnated with diamond or a compressed carborundum disc), lubricated with water.
Slabs or successive slabs with faces suitable for serial reconstruction of large-scale fabrics can be made at this stage.
Further trimming can be carried out on smaller diamond saws, which are capable of producing thin slices.
These saws normally use an oil water emulsion as lubricant.
One or more faces are then lapped smooth either by hand or by an automatic lapping machine, using fine carborundum (silicon carbide) powder (e.g. 600F grade).
Very coarse grits, e.g. 120F, should be avoided, because of their plucking and shattering effects, and their tendency to erode specimen edges preferentially, making it difficult to obtain true, flat faces.
At this stage, faces are suitable for general study by low power microscopy or for peel preparation (see Section 4.6), but better results will be obtained by washing and taking through 800F and even 1000F abrasives.
For even better finishes, lapping is continued with silica gel suspensions, Aloxite or fine diamond pastes to a good surface polish.
The secret of good, smooth surface finishes, particularly with polishing by hand, is careful washing and complete removal of abrasive from both specimen and lap before moving on to finer grades.
It is also vital to keep all abrasives dust-free, and if possible to work in a dust-free environment.
It is best to avoid cutting soft or friable rocks such as shales, evaporites, coals and chalks on a lubricated  saw.
With evaporites and coals, cutting usually produces bad fracturing, and for all three rock-types the effect of aqueous lubricants may be disastrous.
Slices are produced dry as in the early stages of thin section making (Section 4.4.2), with a glass backing.
They are left a few millimetres thick and lapped flat or polished, using a lapping compound with paraffin oil lubricant.
Poorly consolidated sediments, or those for which porosity information is required, must first be vacuum-imbedded in resin (see Section 4.5).
The resin may be stained to show the void space.
4.3.2 Examination of cut faces
Most of the techniques used to develop detail on cut faces of slices or plaquettes are non-destructive, so that a different technique can be used on the same face after washing or re-polishing.
SANDSTONES AND SILTSTONES
A light coating of clear mineral oil, even on polished surfaces, enhances contrast and increases resolution by filling surface irregularities.
If the surface is to be stained or etched (see Section 4.5), glycerol may be used, as even traces of oil will inhibit both these processes, but glycerol can be washed away with water.
With the aid of a zoom binocular microscope, small-scale sedimentary structures, such as graded bedding, can be viewed.
The depth of field at low power (× 1.5 to × 20 magnification) allows study of three-dimensional grain relationships so that packing and pore networks can be visualized, although fracture surfaces need to be examined for comparison.
Slices are also suitable for X-radiography.
Slices from 3 to 10 mm thick give good results because ‘soft’(5–50 kV) X-rays can be used for high contrast.
This technique is particularly valuable for fine-grained clastic rocks such as siltstones, revealing otherwise unseen small-scale sedimentary structures.
Very thin slices can be used to make radiomicrographs for examination on a grain-to-grain basis.
A discussion of these X-radiographic techniques is given by Hamblin (1971).
CARBONATE ROCKS
Because of the inherent translucency of their cementing mineral crystals, many carbonates display their features well with low power biocular microscopy.
Light coating of mineral oil (or glycerol if the faces are to be etched or stained later) can be used to enhance detail and contrast (Fig. 4.2a).
However, highly polished surfaces are easier to photograph than oiled ones, as reflections are more easily controlled.
Slices with two prepared faces give a three-dimensional context which aids identification of bioclasts and study of depositional and diagenetic fabrics.
The partial transparency of the rock allows focussing up and down to assess grain packing.
The determination of whether a fabric is grain- or mud-supported otherwise takes considerable experience to determine from thin sections, which are essentially two-dimensional.
Chalk fabrics are usually cryptic or apparently homogeneous when sliced normal to bedding.
Bromley (1981) has shown how abundant biogenic and inorganic sedimentary textures can be revealed by lightly brushing thin mineral oil on a dry chalk surface and allowing it to ‘develop’ over about 30 minutes.
Further enhancement of detail can be obtained from these surfaces by photographing them with Kodalith® or equivalent high-contrast orthochromatic line film.
Argillaceous, dark, fine-grained carbonates may also have cryptic fabrics.
A technique used for revealing flaws in metal casings is often helpful in such cases.
It relies on the preferential absorption on to clay minerals of an ultra-violet sensitive dye.
There are three reagents, conveniently supplied in aerosol cans.
A pre-smoothed face is gently etched with 5% hydrochloric acid.
Zyglo® Penetrant is sprayed on the surface until completely wet, and allowed to soak in for at least 10 minutes.
The surface is then flushed with Solvent spray, allowed to dry and then sprayed with Developer.
All these operations should be carried out in a fume cupboard as the vapours are harmful, and surgical gloves should be used to protect the hands from the dye.
Viewed under a low energy ultra-violet lamp, structures such as cross-lamination and bioturbation fluoresce bright blue and yellow.
Bockelie (1973), also working with cryptic argillaceous limestones, demonstrated how effectively a simpler technique combining light acid etching with photography using orthochromatic film could enhance fabric contrast and reveal burrow patterns.
Micritic carbonates such as those from mud build-ups and some calcretes may also have cryptic textures which can be revealed by gentle etching with a   dilute acid (e.g. 5% hydrochloric acid).
Geopetal sediments in stromatactoid cavities, for example, may be difficult or impossible to see on unetched, polished surfaces (Fig. 4.2a), but are clearly seen after etching (Fig. 4.2b), although other features are better revealed on the polished surface.
The techniques of polishing and etching are thus complimentary.
Smoothed or polished slices can also be observed directly under cathodoluminescence (see Chapter 6); they may be etched or stained for this purpose.
OTHER ROCKS
With translucent or transparent rocks, the depth of field of low power zoom binocular microscopes can be used advantageously for three-dimensional study of included bioclasts and replacement fabrics in cherts, and orientation of fluid and crystal inclusions in evaporites.
Various combinations of diffused transmitted light and bright incident light (delivered via fibre-optic tubes) can be tried.
Contrast can be optimized and specific features emphasized by experimenting with coloured filters on the light sources.
4.4 THIN SECTION PREPARATION
4.4.1 Requirements for thin sections
An acceptable rock thin section is of 30 µm nominal thickness, bonded to a glass slide.
Such standard thin sections (STs) can be produced by hand or with machine aid: they will usually be used for rapid bulk sample examination or in teaching collections where robustness outweighs their limited resolution.
However, much more information can be obtained from  sections made to a higher specification, with (1) both rock surfaces ground optically flat and polished, and (2) special care taken to produce an extremely thin and uniform bonding film between glass and slice.
These double-polished thin sections (DPTs) can only be satisfactorily produced by machine; they are the best sections for research work and critical petrographic studies.
Recent advances in the technology of section-making show clearly that the common practice of using coarse abrasives results in unacceptable damage to samples.
Diamond-impregnated buffing wheels, commonly used for rapid preparation of surfaces after cutting, cause just as much damage, shattering minerals and distorting grain/cement relationships.
This stricture about severe abrasion applies both to ST and DPT preparation.
In the following account, details are given for preparation of high quality thin sections by automatic and semi-automatic means.
The extra expense of making these sections is offset by their versatility: an uncovered DPT can be used for several different analytical purposes, and offers much more petrographic information.
Machine-based systems give a considerable increase in throughput compared with hand preparation.
A flow-chart for the process (Fig. 4.3) shows stages at which section-making can be simplified for less exacting requirements, or where special techniques can be followed for difficult rock types.
4.4.2 High quality section-making process
PREPARATION
Unconsolidated sediments, highly porous and friable rocks, as well as chips and cuttings, must be at least partially embedded in resin before slicing (also   see Section 8.5.5).
If the sediments are wet, a water-miscible acrylic or polyester resin can be used.
Otherwise, the specimen can be dehydrated by passage through successively more concentrated ethanol/water mixtures, through absolute alcohol into acetone, before placing in resin.
If oil is present, remove as described in Section 8.5.1.
Organic matter can be removed with chlorox or hydrogen peroxide.
Poorly consolidated sediments and porous sandstones may require impregnation with resin under vacuum.
Impregnation under pressure has been advocated, but comparative tests have shown that it may damage pores in sandstones, particularly those lined with delicate clay minerals.
Vacuum (strictly, low pressure: 10–15 mm Hg) impregnation has been found consistent and satisfactory for most sediment types.
Cold setting resins such as‘Epo-tek’ are convenient for impregnation as they have a low initial viscosity and thus penetrate very well.
It is also possible to dilute some Araldite resins with toluene for pre-casting soak.
Depending on the nature of the sample, a degree of experimentation with resins of different types may be necessary before  satisfactory results are achieved.
A simple method is described in Section 8.5.5, using a desiccator and mains water vacuum pump.
The more elaborate chamber illustrated in Fig. 4.4, which can be constructed quite cheaply, is designed to overcome some problems in simpler chambers, where either the resin is drawn into the chamber after the sample is outgassed, or the sample is placed in the resin and both are evacuated together (as in Section 8.5.5).
In the first case, the resin itself does not outgas thoroughly before coming into contact with the specimen, so gas and resin are both drawn into the pores; resin also solidifies in the inlet line.
In the second case, frothing may be produced as both the sample and the resin outgas together.
The apparatus shown in Fig. 4.4 is loaded with PTFE plastic pots, previously sprayed with a silicone release agent (e.g. silicone household polish) and containing the resin mixture.
Samples, trimmed to suitable size, are suspended above the pots on the blades of the cross-rails.
Evacuation is continued until the resin ceases to froth, when the samples will also have been outgassed.
The cross-rails are then rotated so as to tip the samples into the resin pots.
Samples can be left in the impregnation chamber overnight before curing under gentle heat.
At the end of the impregnation period, care should be taken to release the vacuum slowly so as not to cause boiling.
Following impregnation, small samples may have to be cast into blocks which are more convenient for the sawing or for hand-holding while grinding a face on abrasive paper.
Small moulds for casting blocks can be made from aluminium foil.
Estimation of porosity in rocks is aided by impregnation with stained resin.
Special resin-miscible dyes are required, such as Epo-tek Blue Keystone or Waxoline Blue, mixed in a 10% dye:epoxy ratio.
Blue resin areas in the final thin section depict the porosity clearly.
Generally speaking, the machine system of section-making is so gentle that only very difficult lithologies and loose sediments will need impregnation.
The following account details the section-making process for standard rocks, with special procedures for friable or soluble lithologies described in Section 4.4.3.
CUTTING AND TRIMMING
Several sizes of thin sections can be made, depending on equipment available and the area required for  examination.
Useful and fairly standard sizes are 25 x 76 mm, 28 x 48 mm (best for electron microprobe and cathodoluminescence work) and 110 x 75 mm (good for fabric studies and coarse sediments).
The selected area of a faced sample or hand specimen must be marked with water insoluble felt tip pen before cutting.
Slices from 4 to 6 mm thickness are cut on a saw with a diamond impregnated wheel (Fig. 4.5a), usually with water or an oil/water mix as a lubricant.
Cutting should be done gently (slowly) to minimize shattering, especially with crystalline or well-jointed rocks.
Several slices or plaquettes may be cut, which can be examined separately (see Section 4.2) or used as a back-up, should there be a failure at some subsequent stage in the section-making process.
These relatively thick slices give good mechanical rigidity and wide zones of waste for first face lapping and final finishing, so that the completed section is made from that part of the slice unaffected   by saw damage.
The slices are trimmed to avoid rock overhanging the slide.
This discourages mounting adhesive from oozing on to the lower surface of the preparation, where it would affect attachment on the lapping machine's vacuum chucks.
Each slice is marked in waterproof felt-tip pen with the corresponding sample number and any ‘way up’ information.
FIRST FACE LAP
The key to success of the whole process lies in the production of a first face which is as smooth and flat as possible.
This is accomplished on a precision free abrasive flat lapping machine (Fig. 4.5b).
The slices are mounted on chucks with a sponge backing to accommodate different thicknesses and irregular specimens (Fig. 4.6).
Completely omitting coarse abrasives, a face of the slice is ground with 600F Carborundum powder with water as a lubricant, for a minimum of 30 minutes (regardless of rock type), until the face approaches optical flatness.
At this stage, slices destined to become Standard Thin sections (STs) can be removed here for resin bonding to glass.
Otherwise, they are lapped for a further period using 8 µm diamond paste if required for Double Polished Thin sections (DPTs)(Fig. 4.3).
This extra lapping stage produces a polished lower surface, giving increased resolution in microscopy by reducing dispersion at the first face/resin junction.
The face has enough ‘key’ to ensure bonding with resin.
Higher degrees of polish produced by lapping with finer diamond pastes give no noticeable improvement in optical properties and can lead to adhesion problems, notably to lifting of the thin slice at later preparation stages.
With a properly maintained precision lapping machine, it should easily be possible to maintain a flatness of at least 2 µm over  100 mm.
Depending on slide size, up to about 24 slices can be flattened in one timed half hour run.
In all cases, the lap is run at a slow speed, 25–30 rpm, as opposed to the greater speeds recommended by the lapping machine manufacturers.
This gives more control over the process, with the advantage of keeping the sections cool, further reducing damage and enabling the preparations to be used for fluid inclusion work.
GLASS SLIDE PREPARATION
For the precision machine finishing process, the glass slides must be of a precise and standard thickness.
Commercial microscope slides rarely meet this requirement and so are first ground on the flat lapping machine as described above for rock slices.
For STs, polishing with 1 µm diamond paste is usual.
With DPT preparations, the 600F ground glass surface is used without final polish, as a slightly rough zone is required as a ‘key’ to ensure adhesion at the glass/resin interface.
BONDING SLICE TO GLASS SLIDE
Glass and rock surfaces must be cleaned of all abrasives, freed of grease by rinsing in acetone or petroleum ether, and dried.
The prime requirement then is to produce an extremely thin but uniform glass/rock bond (‘zero bond') with an adhesive whose refractive index is close to that of glass.
It is vital to produce consistent and minimum cement thickness, otherwise there will be unpredictable variations in the thickness of the finished section.
Canada Balsam and Lakeside 70C have long been used as slide mountants, but they cannot produce a reliable bond for machine finishing, particularly with polished first faces.
Moreover, they have poor stability, becoming brittle or discoloured with age.
Being thermolabile, these resins are also unsuitable for sections to be studied in cathodoluminescence or electron microprobe equipment.
Resins with all the required characteristics can be found in the Epoxy family.
Allman & lawrence (1972) give a useful discussion of the properties of Epoxy resins for geological use.
Araldite MY750 mixed with Versamid polyamide hardener (1:1) is an excellent all-round bonding resin with good high temperature stability and the correct refractive index.
If sections have been pre-impregnated in a cold-setting resin such as Epo-tek, then they should be bonded with the same material.
Glass sides are first marked with the specimen number of the sample and any ‘way up’ indications which have been preserved, using a diamond scribe near one edge of the obverse glass face.
A small amount of mixed low-viscosity resin/ hardener is applied to the first face, which is mounted on the lapped surface of the slide.
The assembly is then placed in a spring-loaded jig (Fig. 4.5d) under a pressure of about 1 kG cm -2.
At first, the section ‘floats’, but as the adhesive rapidly squeezes out, the rock locks on to the glass and no longer slips.
Bonds made in this way are extremely transparent, bubble-free and introduce no dimensional errors into final lapping.
Mounts must be left to cure under pressure.
With the resin combination used above, the jig is placed on a hotplate and curing carried out at 80°C for about 15 minutes.
For hand-prepared specimens, spring-loaded clothes pegs can be used to provide even pressure, and these are also very useful for large sections, where four or more pegs can produce a more even bond than the standard jig.
PRE-SECTION CUTTING
Bonded sections are next cut with a diamond blade to form a parallel second face, leaving a slice 300–400 µm thick on the slide.
This initial thickness allows the final 30 µm section to be entirely in the undamaged layer.
Cutting can be done automatically on a diamond-impregnated saw with a vacuum chuck, holding up to six slides simultaneously.
Precision is not important here, as there is a machine finishing stage to follow.
FINISHING
At this stage, ST preparations are returned to the precision lapping machine for lapping to a final 30 µm thickness with 600F or 800F Carborundum.
Thickness is automatically determined by pre-setting the vacuum slide-holding chuck (Fig. 4.5c); slides have reached the set thickness when they begin to ‘float’ on the lap, a process aided by the diamond-impregnated surround on the lower face of the chuck.
Slide thickness can be checked with a micrometer or, less reliably, on a microscope, looking for the required interference colours, e.g. quartz greys.
This optical method is of little use for limestones.
DPT polishing can be done on the same machine, using graduated diamond pastes, but in the Edinburgh workshop we have found that better results are obtained on a separate polishing machine.
This also has the advantage of freeing the precision lapping machine for preparing successive batches of slides, as the polishing stage can be protracted.
The polishing machine consists of a simple rotary polishing lap running at up to 30 rpm, on which is placed a precision lapping chuck (Fig. 4.7a) with several slides held by vacuum suction (Fig. 4.7b).
Polishing is carried out on adhesive-backed paper discs (Engis papers) attached to the lap.
It begins with a charge of 8 µm diamond slurry such as Hyprez compound.
This does not need replenishing unless the surface is very hard (quartzite or chert).
Any faults in previous preparation stages will show up here: if the section is not flat, because of a poor first face or incorrect bonding, polishing will follow the irregularity and a wedged slice with eroded edges will result.
Lapping is continued until the section reaches 30–35 µm (about 10 minutes for soft rocks, up to 30 minutes for harder ones).
As this is the stage at which material is actively removed, the sections should be watched carefully during this process.
After washing and change of lap paper, polishing is continued with 1 µm diamond.
Little or no material is removed during the final stages; the surface is being improved and so time is not critical.
For critical work, final lapping is done with 0.25 µm diamond paste.
This is needed for electron microprobe or back-scattered Scanning Electron Microscope work where a perfect surface is required.
Experiments have shown that the most flawless surfaces are produced by carrying out the final lapping stages on a lead lap.
This consists of a very flat sheet of metallic lead, about 8 mm thickness, bonded to a standard steel lap disc.
The lead is prepared by engraving a spiral groove several millimetres deep, pitched so that the lead strip is narrower than the groove.
Sections are lapped using paraffin oil as a lubricant.
No material is removed, but the surface is perfected, so lapping time is not critical.
This method can only be used for non-porous and crystalline rocks (particularly limestones), as the lead tends to be forced into any pores and, unlike powdered abrasives, it cannot be washed away.
Because of its very soft surface, truing and conditioning of the lead lap must be done frequently, and care taken to exploit the whole surface to avoid worn spots and dishing.
Ultra-thin sections are valuable for some purposes, particularly for very fine grained rocks, if it is necessary to measure grain size accurately (Halley, 1978) or to study fine structures such as algal filaments.
Such sections are produced by extending the 1 µm diamond finishing stage, at which material is slowly removed and thus more easily controlled.
Micrometer measurements must be made frequently, as it is very easy to polish the section away completely if the rock is soft.
Optical methods of checking thickness by examining the interference colours will not work for these very thin slices, which produce very bright, high order colours.
COVERING
For research purposes it is best to leave thin sections uncovered, as they may then be subjected to a variety of treatments including staining, etching, cathodoluminescence and microprobe work.
Cover-slips are, of course, required for thin sections destined for teaching collections.
DPT preparations need no oil for microscopic examination, but uncovered ST surfaces, being finished only to 600F or 800F Carborundum, require oil or glycerine before microscopic study.
All sections should be cleaned of abrasive residue before examination.
This may be done by wiping DPTs with a soft, damp tissue, or by brief immersion in an ultrasonic bath.
ST preparations may be left uncovered but sprayed with a polyurethane resin to give a protected surface for general microscopy (Moussa, 1976, 1978).
The best medium for attaching standard glass coverslips is Canada Balsam.
This has the required refractive index and the advantage that the slip can be removed if needed, after gentle heating on a hotplate.
Covered slides should be cured in a warm place for at least 24 hours before use.
LABELLING
Standard thin sections required for teaching collections or archive purposes can now be given self-adhesive labels on which can be written all the details of the sample.
However, paper labels should not be used for those sections destined for use in cathodoluminescence and scanning electron microscopes or microprobe, as they tend to char in the beam and may interfere with conductive coatings.
4.4.3 Variations in process for ‘difficult’ rock types
Certain rocks, such as shales, evaporites, coals, soft chalks and poorly-consolidated sediments require special treatment at various stages of the section-making procedure.
Initial impregnation and embedding, if required, will have been completed as  detailed above.
With such difficult material, cutting on the usual diamond trimming saw is inadvisable, and water-based lubricants cannot be used.
Flat faces are produced by hand grinding on carborundum-impregnated papers (‘wet and dry' paper) in the dry.
With harder samples, a hacksaw will produce a face ready for lapping.
The surface need not be perfectly flat or smooth.
Evaporites can then be taken directly on to the precision grinder for first face lapping using paraffin oil as lubricant, but other rocks need a further stage.
This involves mounting the ground face on to a glass slide of appropriate size, using epoxy resin: again this can be done quite crudely.
Using a dry trimming saw (with the operator wearing a mask), excess rock is removed.
This sawn surface will become the first face of the section, and it is lapped with paraffin oil and 600F Carborundum on the precision lapping machine.
After the best flat surface is obtained, the paraffin oil is removed by placing the preparation on a warm plate for some hours.
The sections are then zero bonded with epoxy as described in Section 4.4.2, to form a double glass mount with a few millimetres of rock sandwiched between.
If the first face is not satisfactory at this stage (wedged or with air bubbles), then one of the glass slides can be cut off and the section re-lapped and re-mounted.
Otherwise, the sandwich is placed on the saw and the first glass slide cut off.
The section is then returned to the Precision Lapping Machine with paraffin oil and 600F grit and taken down to 100 µm thickness, or 30 µm if it is to be covered.
For best results it is transferred, after rinsing in paraffin or kerosene (inflammable!), to the polishing lap for final surfacing as for DPTs (see Section 4.4.2).
Shale sections benefit from a long period with 0.25 µm powder, as this gives very slow removal of material without plucking of quartz grains.
Sections of evaporites are either glass covered or stored in a desiccator.
4.5 ETCHING AND STAINING
4.5.1 Etching
Etching involves selective partial dissolution of a cut face.
It may be done to emphasize certain textural characteristics or to prepare a surface for staining (see Section 4.52).
Hydrofluoric acid is the etching agent for silicate-rich rocks; carbonates can be etched with various weak acids.
In all cases surfaces to be etched must be grease-free (no fingerprints!).
Hydrofluoric acid treatment
HF is a dangerous chemical with a poisonous and corrosive vapour.
It attacks glass, metal and some plastics.
Severe burns result after skin contact even with dilute solutions; the burns may not appear until hours after exposure.
Splashes on skin should be neutralized immediately with a sodium bicarbonate solution, washed with copious amounts of water and treated with special HF Burn jelly, which should be available in all laboratories where HF is used.
All operations involving HF should be carried out in a fume cupboard, and the operator protected with gloves and goggles.
Surplus and discarded acid should be neutralized with alkali before disposal.
Etching vessels should be shallow, tightly-closing and made of polythene or similar soft plastic.
Small plastic food containers are suitable, with an improvised plastic sling-like support for plaquettes or thin sections suspended from the lid (Fig. 4.8).
Exposed surfaces of glass slides, especially the undersides, should be painted with paraffin wax before placing in the container.
This prevents HF from frosting the slide and reducing its transmissivity.
The HF needs to be a strong solution (52–55%), with the vessel filled to a depth of about 5–6 mm.
Etching times in HF vapour depend on the nature of the rock: feldspars, for example, require about 30 minutes etch before they are to be stained.
Stubborn cases can be etched directly in the HF solution.
Samples should be inserted and removed from the apparatus using plastic or rubber gloves, and care taken not to breath the vapour.
Copious washing under clean tap water is required before the samples can be treated further, and wax scraped from slides.
The latter process is   made easier by placing the slide in a refrigerator for a few minutes.
ETCHING LIMESTONES
Several reagents are available for etching carbonate minerals.
Hydrochloric acid (1–5% by volume) gives a vigorous reaction with a tendency to give a rather unselective etch.
It affects minerals other than calcite and aragonite, especially if the solution is warm.
Acetic acid (about 20% by volume) gives a more selective etch, bringing out details of grain textures and fabrics more subtly than HCl.
Disodium ethyl diaminotetracetic acid (diNaEDTA) is an even more subtle etching agent: it has a chelating (complexing) action with comparatively little effervescence, thus reducing gas bubble damage of delicate structures.
Miller & clarkson (1980) used saturated EDTA solutions to reveal ultra-structure in calcitic trilobite cuticles.
Etching is simply carried out by placing the slice or thin section face up in the chosen etching solution.
If the specimen is immersed face-down, bubbles cannot be released and remain attracted by surface tension to the surface, locally impeding further reaction and giving a very uneven etch.
The rate of etching varies according to the nature and strength of the solution, its temperature, and the grain size, crystallinity and mineral composition of the substrate.
Etching times may vary from less than a minute to over half an hour.
The optimum time must be determined by trial and error.
Gentle agitation of the acid, and slight tilting of the face prevents the formation of bubble trains which trench the surface.
For critical applications, the progress of etching can be observed with a binocular microscope (with a clear plastic bag tied over the optics to prevent corrosion from acid spray).
This works best with the slower and more easily-controlled action of diNaEDTA, and is ideal for studying the location of delicate organic matter, such as shell membranes or algal and fungal filaments.
Etching a thin section in a 10% solution of NH 4 Cl for 2 minutes is also good for revealing filaments, which are then best seen in a combination of reflected and transmitted light.
Thin sections for etching should be left a little thicker than usual, after being taken down to at least the 600F Carborundum stage.
In some instances, the complete removal of carbonate from a thin section can provide additional information (Lees, 1958).
This leaves the insoluble components available for observation in a dry state by reflected light or transmitted light with crossed nicols.
For this technique, the lower sample face is etched with 30% acetic acid for 5 min before rinsing, drying and bonding to the glass slide.
This preliminary etch ensures that a replica is formed in resin of the carbonate phases, and that the non-carbonate components adhere to the preparation.
The 30 µm section is then immersed in 30% acetic until all the carbonate is dissolved.
The replica shows details to at least 5 µm resolution.
4.5.2 Staining
While the mineralogical composition of rocks can be determined by optical study of thin sections, this can be a tedious, time consuming and error prone process.
For example, distinction between calcite and dolomite is difficult because they have similar optical properties.
For similar reasons, small untwinned feldspar grains and quartz grains cannot easily be distinguished.
Chemical staining involves a reaction which produces a coloured precipitate on a specific mineral surface and therefore makes that mineral more easily recognized.
Usually the surface requires some preparation, often etching, to receive and retain the precipitate.
The success of staining slices and thin sections depends, as does etching, on various factors: strength and ‘age’ of reagents, temperature, pre-treatment, grain size, orientation, fabric, grain interactions, cleavage and surface finish.
To achieve consistently good results with any staining procedure requires a considerable degree of skill.
Much patient experimentation may be required.
Staining times in particular are highly variable, and those given herein should only be used as a starting point.
Detailed guides for staining are given by Allman & lawrence (1972) and Friedman (1971).
In this section only the most successful techniques for common sedimentary minerals are given, with an emphasis on those which have been recently refined.
FELDSPARS
Houghton (1980) gave a method for staining plagioclase and alkali feldspars which is much more reliable than previous recipes.
Reagents:
(a)
Potassium rhodizonate (0·01 g K-rhodizonate in 30 ml distilled water, filtered before use).
Maximum useful life one hour.
(b)
Sodium cobaltinitrate (saturated solution; about 50 g per 100 ml distilled water).
Six months shelf life in dark bottle.
(c)
Barium chloride (5% solution in distilled water).
Stable.
Procedure:
(a)
Etch over HF vapour (55% HF solution, see Section 4.5.1) for 25–35 s: increase time if HF is loosing potency.
(b)
Remove slide from etching box with polythene forceps and drop into beaker with Na-cobaltinitrate solution.
Leave for 45 s.
(c)
Rinse slide twice in distilled or de-ionized water.
Gently shake off excess water and blot end of slide by touching to a paper towel.
(d)
Dip slide quickly into beaker with BaCl 2 solution for no more than 2 s.
(e)
Dip slide immediately in distilled water and agitate for about 10 s.
(f)
Place several drops of the rhodizonate solution on the wet surface of the section, tilting back and forth to spread the stain; leave until plagioclase grains become pink, then rinse in water.
(g)
Dry with compressed air and examine with a microscope.
If plagioclase is light grey or pale pink, dip in distilled water and repeat rhodizonate stage.
The intensity of the pink plagioclase stain is proportional to the amount of calcium in the molecule: albite/oligoclase will stain lighter than a more calcic plagioclase.
Pure Na-albite will not take up any of the rhodizonate stain.
Alkali feldspars are stained yellow.
The accuracy of the method decreases according to grain size: with finer grained specimens, the pink stain tends to pervade the surface and obscure the quartz grains.
Cathodoluminescence is a much better way of detecting feldspars in fine sands and siltstones (see Chapter 6).
GYPSUM AND ANHYDRITE
Hounslow (1979) gave a method for staining these minerals, useful in the field as well as on drill cores, soil samples, slabs and sections.
Reagents:
(a)
1:1 nitric acid solution (10 ml concentrated nitric acid slowly added to 10 ml water in a 50 ml beaker).
(b)
10 g mercuric nitrate in 100 ml de-ionized water.
Stir until dissolved.
A fine, milky precipitate will form.
Caution!
Mercuric nitrate is extremely poisonous and may be absorbed through the skin.
(c)
Slowly add the 1:1 nitric acid to the mercuric nitrate with constant stirring until the milky precipitate just dissolves or is just about to — approximately 8 drops of acid is usually sufficient.
(d
) Test the reagent by adding a few drops to small crystals of Na 2 SO 4 or K 2 SO 4 in a watch glass.
A yellow precipitate should form immediately.
If not, the reagent is too acid and a further gram of mercuric nitrate added to produce a slight cloudiness should produce the yellow precipitate.
(e)
Filter the solution when the test is successful and store in a dark bottle.
Procedure:
(a)
Immerse the section, slab or plaquette in the reagent contained in a suitable dish or tray for a few seconds or until the yellow precipitate forms.
(b)
Gently rinse the stained face in de-ionized or distilled water and allow to dry before microscopic examination.
Both minerals are stained yellow; other minerals are unstained.
ARAGONITE
The most sensitive stain for aragonite was developed by Fiegl (1937).
Despite its sensitivity, it is not always reliable.
Reagents:
(a)
1 g commercial grade Ag 2 SO 4 is added to a boiling solution of 11.8 g MnSO 4 .7H 2 0 in 100 ml distilled water.
(b)
Cool and filter the suspension; add 2 drops 10% sodium hydroxide solution.
(c)
Stand for 2 hours and then filter into a dark storage bottle.
Procedure: Immerse the plaquette or thin section in the Fiegl's solution for about 10 min at 20°C.
Sometimes a hot solution works better.
Aragonite is stained black while calcite remains unstained.
DOLOMITE
Dolomite is often distinguished from calcite by its failure to stain with solutions which react with calcite (see below).
It can also be recognized after etching, especially on a universal stage: dolomite remains at 30 µm, giving fourth- and fifth-order pinks and greens, while calcite is reduced to 10 µm or so, giving second- and third-order reds, blues and yellows (Dickson, 1966, p. 491).
Titan yellow in alcohol and alkaline Alizarin red S are two reliable  specific stains for dolomite, but have the disadvantage for thin sections of needing to boil.
Titan yellow — reagent:
(a)
0·2 g Titan yellow is dissolved in 25 ml methanol in a small beaker over a hot water bath.
Replace any alcohol lost by evaporation.
(b)
30 g sodium hydroxide pellets dissolved cautiously in 70 ml distilled water.
Titan yellow — procedure:
(a)
Add 15 ml of the 30% NaOH solution to the Titan yellow solution and bring to the boil.
(b)
Immerse the thin section or plaquette in boiling Titan yellow reagent for at least 5 min until a deep orange-red colouration is formed.
Add a few drops of methanol to compensate for evaporation.
Alkaline Alizarin red S — reagent:
(a)
Dissolve 0·2 g Alizarin red S in 25 ml methanol in a small beaker over a hot water bath.
(b)
Carefully dissolve 30 g sodium hydroxide pellets in 70 ml water.
Alkaline Alizarin red — procedure:
(a)
Add 15 ml of the 30% NaOH solution to the Alizarin red solution and bring to the boil.
(b)
Immerse the section or plaquette in boiling reagent for at least five minutes.
Add a few drops of methanol to compensate for evaporation.
(c)
Rinse the section in distilled water.
Dolomite is stained purple, calcite is unstained in the alkaline solution.
MG-CALCITE
Choquette & trusell (1978) devised a method of making an alkaline Titan yellow stain permanent, enhancing the value of this technique.
The stain can detect the presence of Mg-calcite containing more than about 3% MgCO 3 .
Reagents:
(a)
Stain: 1·0 g Titan yellow powder, 8·0 g NaOH and 4·0 g diNaEDTA dissolved in 1 litre distilled water at room temperature.
Store in dark bottle; shelf life at least two years.
(b)
Fixer: 200 g NaOH pellets dissolved slowly in 1·0 litre distilled water.
Caution! heat and fumes and evolved, so best carried out in fume cupboard.
Solution is corrosive to flesh.
Store in polythene bottles as 5 M caustic soda etches glass.
Shelf life indefinite.
Procedure (Caution! use surgical gloves as solutions are corrosive):
(a)
Thin sections must be epoxy mounted: Lakeside and Canada Balsam are soluble in the stain solution.
(b)
Etch uncovered, grease-free thin section or faced sample for about 30 s in 5% acetic acid solution.
(c)
Dry surface in stream of warm air.
(d)
Immerse specimen in stain solution for about 20 min.
(e)
Dry stained surface in stream of warm air; do not touch surface in any way.
(f)
Immerse stained surface in fixer solution for about 30 s.
(g)
Air dry again and cover.
As the residual caustic would attack Lakeside or Canada Balsam, epoxy cement is required for cover slips.
Choquette & trusell (1978) found that the intensity of the stain was proportional to the Mg content of calcite.
Calcite with 5–8% MgCO 3 takes on a pink to pale red colour, and ‘high-Mg’ calcite takes on a deep red colour.
c-axis normal sections of crystals stain more vividly than parallel sections, as do very fine-grained substrates.
This stain is very valuable for its minute selectivity on a scale discernible with a petrographic microscope.
CALCITE
Friedman (1959) gave a number of stains for calcite.
One of the simplest and most reliable is Alizarin red S. Many carbonate workers routinely acid etch one-half of a thin section and stain it in acidified Alizarin red S solution before covering.
While this helps to distinguish between red-stained calcite and unstained dolomite and quartz, it gives very little other information about diagenesis and mineralogy.
It also makes microphotography of that slide difficult.
A far more valuable scheme was given by Dickson (1965, 1966) which in one operation differentiates between ferroan phases in calcites and dolomites, and is capable of revealing subtle growth zones in cement crystals.
Dickson's method — reagents:
(a
) Etching solution — 15 ml of 36% HCl dissolved in 500 ml distilled water, then topped up to 1000 ml with distilled water.
(b)
Staining solution
part 1
: 0·2 g Alizarin red S dissolved in 100 ml 1·5% HCl solution.
(c)
Staining solution
part 2
: 2 g potassium ferricyanide crystals dissolved in 100 ml 1·5% HCl solution.
This solution must be freshly made for each staining session.
(d)
Mix staining solutions parts 1 and 2 in the ratio 3 of dye to 2 ferricyanide.
The combined solution lasts for only one staining session.
Dickson's method — procedure (Caution! use rubber gloves):
(a)
Immerse thin section (grease free surface) or faced sample in etching solution, face uppermost, for 10–15 s at 20°C (times are only approximate, and may vary widely with grain size etc.).
Cold solutions give very poor results.
Experimentation is necessary to achieve the optimum etch.
Weak etching gives a thin, patchy stain.
Overetching, particularly with Alizarin red S, produces a very dense stain which tends to spread a precipitate even over dolomite and quartz if they are present.
(b)
Immerse specimen in the combined solution for 30–45 s (again experimentation is required).
For thin sections, best results are obtained if the stain is warmed.
As HCN fumes can be evolved from the mixed stain, the safest way of doing this is to immerse the slide in a dish of hot water before placing in the bath of stain which is at room temperature.
Avoid skin contact with the stain: ferricyanide is poisonous.
Dickson suggested a further stage, briefly dipping the stained slide or surface into Alizarin red solution alone, but this is not often needed and indeed may detract from the first stain.
(c)
Wash the specimens gently in two changes of distilled water (not tap water, which contains Fe and Ca) for only a few seconds at a time — the stains are relatively soluble.
(d)
Dry the specimen surface quickly in a stream of warm air (from a hair drier or equivalent).
Handle carefully; the stain is a thin surface film and is easily damaged.
This method produces the following colour differentiation in carbonate minerals:
Calcite
Varying through very pale pink to red.
Ferroan calcite
Varying through mauve, purple to royal blue with increasing Fe content.
Dolomite
No colour.
Ferroan dolomite
Pale to deep turquoise with increasing Fe content.
Dickson (1966) pointed out some useful features of this stain coupling.
Alizarin red S can differentiate slightly different types of calcite: for example, different kinds of bioclasts stain with differing intensities depending on their crystallite size and structure.
The optic orientation of sparry cement crystals can be discerned, as sections normal to the c-axis are stained very pale pink, whereas sections parallel to that axis stain deep pink.
This is due to different rates of etching.
The potassium ferricyanide component is very sensitive, and will detect iron in calcite with 1% ferrous carbonate in solid solution.
Although it is convenient to stain sections by Dickson's method before microprobe analysis so that the mineral phases can easily be distinguished, Sommer (1975) showed that microprobe determinations of iron in carbonates stained with potassium ferricyanide showed depletion by an order of magnitude compared with unstained crystals.
CLAY MINERALS
Stains for particular clay minerals usually require powdered and acid-extracted samples (Allman & Lawrence, 1972, pp. 109–111) and are therefore beyond the scope of this chapter.
It is often useful, however, to be able to visualize the distribution of clays in a sandstone or argillaceous carbonate, since clays are often related to otherwise obscure fabric in these rocks.
The Zyglo® ultra-violet sensitive dye described in Section 4.3.2 is useful here.
A simpler, but not always predictable, technique is to soak grease-free surfaces in aqueous solutions of 0·5 g malachite green, congo red or methylene blue in 250 ml water.
The surface is lifted out of the solution occasionally and gently washed until the stain is found to be satisfactorily developed.
The dye colour chosen should be complementary to the rock colour so as to provide the greatest degree of contrast.
An alcoholic solution of dye (equal parts ethanol or methanol and water) of methylene blue works well on limestones, including chalks, with the alcohol acting as a wetting agent and aiding penetration.
POLYSACCHARIDE STAIN FOR BIOTURBATION
Burrowing in sandstones and siltstones may often be cryptic, and sometimes difficult to distinguish from water escape structures.
Risk & szczuczko (1977) developed a reliable method for enhancing the morphology of burrowing in siliciclastics.
It is based on the tendency of many burrowing organisms to secrete polysaccharide mucus as a burrow lining.
The presence of this carbohydrate can be detected by a periodic acid — Schiff (PAS) reaction.
The method is not suitable for use with carbonates because of the HCl in the Schiff reagent.
Procedure:
(a)
Cut a face or slice using water only as a lubricant; avoid all grease and oil; do not touch the cut face with uncovered hands.
Massive, unjointed  material is best in order to avoid carbohydrate contamination.
(b)
Polish with 600F or 800F Carborundum, again using water only.
(c)
Wash the slab thoroughly with tap water.
(d)
Place the face downwards in l% periodic acid (by weight) in distilled water.
Support the slab in a dish with glass rods at the edges.
Gently swirl the liquid.
Leave for 30 min.
For very large blocks, the solution can be painted on.
(e)
Rinse thoroughly for 30 s in running water.
(f)
Place face down in Schiff's reagent (commercially available) for 30 min, in the dark.
(g)
Wash for several minutes in running water.
(h)
Examine with binocular microscope.
Store specimens in the dark, where they will remain unfaded for at least several years.
The PAS reaction is not porosity-controlled.
Specimens which are bioturbated will have a light purple background with dark stains marking the burrows.
Arthropod burrows do not stain as they do not normally have mucoid linings.
4.6 PEELS
Making a replica of an etched surface on transparent plastic film is a very rapid and cheap way of preparing a sample for microscopic examination.
A solvent is flooded on to the prepared face.
The lower side of the film is softened and, as the solvent evaporates, the film settles down into the irregularities of the etched face and produces the replica.
There is very little sample wastage.
Serial peels can easily be produced by re-grinding surfaces after each peel, to a fixed distance if required.
This is much quicker than making serial thin sections for three-dimensional visualization of fabrics like void spaces or for reconstructing fossils in full relief.
Peels are mostly used for limestones and calcite-cemented clastic rocks, although cherts and siliceous clastics can be successfully treated.
Best results are obtained with non-porous samples; surface cavities cause the film to bulge into the void, causing blisters and a risk of tearing the completed peel.
Porosity can be reduced by vacuum impregnation with resin before facing the samples (the resin used must not be soluble in acetone when cured).
Larger holes should be filled with decorator's filler paste (such as Polyfilla), which is allowed to harden before the face is rubbed down.
Replicas can be made of quite large surfaces, even up to hundreds of square centimetres in area, but the difficulty of producing good surfaces (and satisfactory solvent distribution cross them) increases rapidly with samples larger than about 0·5 m × 0·5 m.
Although simple in principle, manufacture of good peels is a craft learned only through considerable experience.
Beginners should not be satisfied with their earliest efforts, but should persevere, using a single rock sample and experimenting with etching times, pre-polishing, staining etc., until high quality peels can be consistently obtained.
4.6.1 Peel material and solvents
Davies & till (1968) advocated making peel sheets by pouring solutions of ethyl cellulose in trichloroethylene on to glass plates.
While very thin sheets can be prepared in this way, they are fragile, non-uniform in thickness, and tedious and time-consuming to prepare.
Commercially produced cellulose acetate is now available in sheets and rolls in a wide range of thicknesses.
It is uniform in thickness and free from blemishes and density variation.
0·1 mm thick film (polished on both sides) is suitable for making peels from a wide range of rocks and produces excellent resolution.
Thicker films, while less liable to crinkle and curl on porous or high relief specimens, are much more difficult to mount flat, and give lower contrast and microscopic resolution.
The film is vulnerable to the collection of static charges and therefore to contamination.
It should be stored in the roll or interleaved with tissue paper in a dust-free (and preferably slightly damp) drawer.
Film left lying around the laboratory becomes dusty and scratched, and makes poor quality replicas.
Acetate sheets are soluble in methyl acetate, ethyl acetate, ethyl lactate, diacetone alcohol and tetrachloroethane.
However, the cheapest and most useful solvent for laboratory use is commercial grade acetone.
Acetone has a damaging effect on cell membrane lipids, and inhalation of the vapour should be minimized.
It also dissolves fat from the skin with extreme rapidity, leading to dermatitis, so hands should always be protected by surgical gloves.
4.6.2 Stained peels
Katz & friedman (1965) demonstrated how effective stained peels were in carbonate petrography.
No special preparation is required: dry, stained  surfaces are taken immediately to the acetone flooding stage (see below).
Different stains can be used on the same specimen since earlier stains are removed by re-polishing.
This provides a very quick way to obtain a set of peels representing many of the mineralogical and fabric properties of a specimen.
4.6.3 Procedure
PREPARING THE CUT FACE
Sawn faces should be lapped to at least 600F Carborundum stage.
For greater detail, further smoothing by polishing with 1 µm Aloxite or diamond abrasives is recommended.
Etching such a polished surface gives a relief which is more subtly fabric selective than etches controlled by an imperfect surface.
ETCHING THE SMOOTHED FACE
Limestones can be etched with hydrochloric acid, acetic acid or diNaEDTA depending on the degree of detail required (see Section 4.5.1).
Large slabs are conveniently etched (and stained, if required) in plastic photographic developing trays; the cut face preferably being uppermost in the solution unless the sample is too large, in which case the face is held downwards and gently swirled to remove bubble trains.
Price (1975) showed that good peels could be made from cherts and other siliceous rocks after etching with HF.
The rock slice is placed face down in a polythene tray into 30% HF solution for 3 or 4 min.
The vapour alone does not give a deep enough etch for replicas, but is sufficient for stain preparation.
All the usual safety precautions for using HF must be observed (Section 4.5.1)
WASHING THE PREPARED SAMPLE
Hold samples in a bath with slowly running water for several minutes.
In hard water areas, use distilled or de-ionized water only, to avoid residues after drying.
If HF was used, the specimen must be totally immersed.
Avoid touching the etched face, or agitating violently, as the delicate relief may be damaged.
Drain the sample and dry in a stream of warm air.
Drying may be accelerated by flooding the surface with acetone several times; this carries off some water when it evaporates.
Dried and etched surfaces should be peeled immediately, as they collect dust rapidly.
ORIENTATION OF THE SPECIMEN
The specimen should be supported so that the etched face is almost horizontal, tilting by only a few degrees.
Some workers use a sand tray to hold specimens, but this should be avoided because of the likelihood of contaminating the surface.
 Plasticine is a good medium for supporting all sizes of specimen as it is easily moulded and re-used.
PREPARATION OF FILM
Cut a fresh piece of acetate film, free of scratches, to a shape which allows about 1 cm overlap beyond the specimen edge.
If the sheet is heavily charged with static, this can be removed by discharging with a piezo-electric antistatic pistol available from audio equipment shops.
The discharged sheet is much easier to manage and does not attract dust and lint.
APPLYING THE ACETATE FILM
The specimen should be cold and in a cool room, otherwise the acetone will evaporate too quickly from its surface.
Gently flood the etched face with acetone from a washbottle.
Too much acetone will cause wrinkling, too little will cause air bells.
Place the acetate film gently across the lower margin of the specimen where a pool of acetone will have collected.
Holding the sheet in a curve (Fig. 4.9), unroll it   across the specimen, pushing the solvent in front of it.
Extra liquid exuding from the far edge can be evaporated away quickly by blowing across the specimen; this avoids wrinkling at the edge of the film, which would make it difficult to flatten the peel for subsequent study.
For a few moments, the film should just float on the liquid, then it will draw down as evaporation starts.
If there are wrinkles or silvery air bubbles at this stage, do not try to remove the film, as a very messy, sticky surface will be left.
Discard the bad peel after it has dried, then repolish and etch the face.
DRYING THE PREPARATION
The specimen should be left for at least half an hour for the acetone to evaporate.
This time can be shortened by blowing warm (not hot) air evenly across the surface: uneven drying causes premature lifting.
A 250 W infra-red reflector bulb placed about 0·3 m above the specimen dries the film in about 10 min.
TAKING THE PEEL
Gently lift back the film from one edge of the specimen and steadily pull it off the surface in one continuous motion.
If a tear develops, peel from the opposite corner and work towards the damage.
Films which have been left to dry too long (e.g. a day or more) may be very difficult to remove without tearing.
It is a matter of experience to judge the best time to remove a peel, but flicking the edge upwards immediately releases the peel slightly when ready, producing a diagnostic ‘dry’ sound.
TRIMMING AND MOUNTING OF PEELS
With a sharp pair of scissors, trim the excess film from the peel (but leave a small area as a finger-hold), and immediately either mount it between two sheets of glass, or mark it with specimen number and store it between the leaves of a thick book.
The slightly damp, hygroscopic pages of a book provide excellent storage for peels which are either awaiting permanent mounting or are only needed for temporary examination.
With some materials, coal balls for example, part of the rock surface is actually incorporated in the peel.
Dipping the peel briefly in 2% HCl ‘clears’ the film before mounting.
Do not leave peels lying about in the laboratory before mounting or filing them: they attract dust and lint and are easily scratched.
While it may be difficult to keep them flat, examining peels unmounted has the advantage of being able to use oblique incident and transmitted light combinations to increase contrast, and for viewing the relief more effectively to gain a three-dimensional effect.
Unmounted peels can also be examined with high power objectives which have smaller working distances than glass mounting plates.
However, small peels, or cut-out sections of large ones, can be mounted between two standard microscope slides for examination with a low power binocular or stereomicroscope.
Larger glass mounting plates can be obtained from photographic dealers.
Very large peels may have to be mounted between specially cut pieces of thin window glass.
In all cases, the glass should be thoroughly clean and grease free before sandwiching the peel and binding the edges with adhesive plastic tape.
The best tape to use is matt ‘invisible’ mending tape, as standard Sellotape rapidly becomes brittle and splits.
Handle the peels only by their edges to avoid grease marks, and lay them on clean, lint-free paper or cloth while they wait for mounting, to avoid dust and scratch collection.
Mounted peels should be stored in a dust-free box or drawer, and stained peels are best kept in the dark.
Peels and thin sections should be regarded as complementary.
Some peels show no signs of the ‘phantom textures’, e.g. in recrystallized limestones, which are otherwise visible in thin sections.
On the other hand, the etched surfaces of peels frequently reveal details not seen in thin sections.
Stained peels, when made with great care, have very high resolution and can be as good as a DPT for point counting and studies of diagenesis.
4.7 EXAMINATION OF MICROSCOPICAL PREPARATIONS
Having gone to some trouble to obtain high quality sample preparations, it is important to realize their potential by using appropriate techniques when studying them.
Many workers begin immediately with detailed study under medium to high power on a petrographic microscope which has a very small field of view.
There is much to be gained from  preliminary survey of the whole preparation at low power, to provide a context for later detailed work.
4.7.1 Photographic map
A suggested first step in the use of any preparation, be it peel or thin section, is to make one or more photographs of the entire preparation (Fig. 4.10).
This ‘map’ has many advantages: it preserves a record of the sample in its initial state before treatment; it gives an overall view of the section or peel which can be used as a guide for subsequent detailed work, and it offers a convenient and rapid way of comparing samples.
The simplest and cheapest way of photographing a slide or peel is to use it as a photographic negative.
Place the slide or peel mount into the negative carrier of a photographic enlarger and project the image on to an international A4 size sheet of printing paper of appropriate grade, determine the exposure and print two copies.
One of these can form part of a reference archive, the other is a working   copy, upon which notes and details can be written, or over which can be placed transparent overlays to mark grains, microprobe analysis sites etc.
Small thin sections will fit into the carrier of a 35 mm enlarger: larger preparations and peels require a plate enlarger.
The negative print obtained has the advantage of increased contrast, enhancing many details in the preparation.
If a positive image is required, a whole plate negative film sheet can be substituted for photographic paper at the first stage: this intermediate negative is developed and then contact printed.
Alternatively, the thin section or peel can be placed on the stage of a 35 mm transparency copying machine, and a black and white or colour photograph taken by flash for later printing or projection.
With very large slices or bulky faced samples, a very simple method of producing a ‘map’ image is to place the face carefully on to the glass of a xerographic machine (Ireland, 1973).
The image can be produced on a transparent sheet or on paper as required.
Contrast can be adjusted by varying the toner applied.
4.7.2 Low power examination and drawing
Lees (1962) drew attention to a noticeable gap which existed in the instrumentation for examination of transparent thin sections or surface replicas such as peels, particularly with sizes larger than a standard thin section.
He advocated the use of an industrial measuring projector for this purpose.
The Watson Manasty ‘Shadomaster’ Model VMP (no longer in production) was chosen as being the best (Fig. 4.11).
Viewers for microfilm are a good substitute, but lack the dimensional stability for accurate measurement which is a feature of the ‘Shadomaster’ projectors.
In the ‘Shadomaster’, samples are placed on a viewing stage and illuminated from above with a quartz-halogen projection lamp and a condenser.
Below the stage, one of several interchangeable magnifying lens systems focusses the image on to an inclined plane mirror at the base of the instrument.
The final image is formed on a large frosted glass plate held at a convenient viewing angle.
The resolution is good, and grains less than 10 µm can be seen at × 100.
For work at these magnifications, the frosted glass plate can be replaced by clear glass with a matt drafting plastic film taped over.
Accurate measurements of grains can be made if the stage is fitted with a vernier mechanical stage.
This instrument has many advantages.
Several people can examine a preparation at the same time.
Very large peels or sections can be scanned at low magnifications.
Tracings of fabrics and grains can be quickly and accurately made at a range of magnifications.
Point counting can be done by preparing transparent overlay coordinate grids at various sizes; eye strain is found to be less than with a petrographic microscope.
Grids can also be prepared for determination of roundness and sphericity.
Polarizing filters can easily be interposed.
Photographs may be prepared by placing negative sheets or printing papers face down on the glass viewing plate.
One disadvantage is that the viewing room must be darkened while the instrument is in use.
An alternative for viewing and drawing small peels or segments of larger peels is to mount them in 35 mm transparency mounts (preferably with glass both sides) and to project them on to white paper or card, on which tracings can be made.
Larger peels can be sandwiched between two glass plates and placed in an episcope for projection.
4.7.3 Petrological microscope
In order to optimize viewing conditions, the microscope should be correctly adjusted and all optical surfaces clean.
In particular, care should be taken to set the condenser correctly — this is probably the single greatest cause of poor results in microscopy.
Curry, Grayson & hosey (1982) gave details of how to adjust substage condensers for standard and Kohler illumination.
The next important factor is adjusting the contrast to suit each specimen.
Thin sections of carbonate rocks in particular require a high contrast, and this may be obtained by stopping down the substage iris somewhat.
Complete stopping-down, however, produces spurious interference effects at grain edges and reduces resolution.
Neutral density filters should then be interposed to reduce light intensity.
Reducing the illuminator lamp intensity may not be desirable as this alters the colour temperature of the incident light.
Highly recrystallized and dolomitized carbonates present particular difficulties.
Delgado (1977) noted that details  such as bioclasts and voids visible in hand specimens or peels of such rocks vanished under the petrological microscope.
He discovered that diffusing the transmitted light resulted in a dramatic increase in the resolution of such cryptic features.
The best diffuser was produced by coating the undersurface of a thin section by burning magnesium ribbon some 0·2 — 0·25 m below the slide.
At this distance, a 0·07 m length of Mg ribbon produces a coating of about 20 µm thickness.
The coated glass surface is protected by another glass slide before mounting on the microscope stage.
(Caution! use goggles — the bright flame of burning magnesium can cause retinal damage!)
Experiments need to be done with and without the condenser in place, depending on the specimen.
Best results are obtained with magnifications of × 10 or less.
In all cases, it is advantageous to take time to experiment with lighting, filters, iris and condenser setting etc., so as to optimize the results from each rock type and method of preparation.
4.7.4 Photomicrography
Most research petrological microscopes have photomicrographic attachments, while simpler microscopes can be used with 35 mm SLR cameras fitted with appropriate adaptor rings.
Curry et al.(1982) give useful hints about using these systems.
In general, the most appropriate films are fine grained, high contrast types.
This usually means they have slow speed and concomitantly long exposure times, so it is necessary to ensure that the microscope is free from vibration, best done by working on a stone or concrete optical bench.
The photomicroscope should be rigidly supported.
Since the optics of the microscope are arranged for white light, where each wavelength is brought to a slightly different focus, optimum resolution in monochrome photographs is obtained by employing a medium density green filter (selecting a wavelength in the middle of the range).
This also has the effect of producing some differential contrast within the specimen.
Stained peels or thin sections may be enhanced by using a complementary filter on the illuminator.
Correct colour photographs are difficult to achieve.
One of the main problems is to match the colour temperature of the film with that of the incident light, assuming correct exposure.
The problem is particularly acute with pictures taken with crossed polars, where often the identification of the minerals depends on the subtle rendition of characteristic interference colours.
Daylight colour film (around 5500 K colour temperature) can only be used directly with daylight and a substage mirror.
If a substage illuminator is fitted, then a colour compensation filter is required (Kodak Wratten no. 80A).
With tungsten light film (3200 K), no filter is needed if the substage illuminator has a tungsten lamp.
That does not, however, guarantee that exact colour rendition will be obtained, as the colour temperature of tungsten lamps depends on the voltage at which they are run and on the age of the lamp.
For critical applications, a colour temperature meter should be used, or the manufacturer's graphs consulted.
5 Microscopic techniques: II.
Principles of sedimentary petrography
GILL HARWOOD
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Sedimentary petrography is the analysis of both depositional and diagenetic fabrics from thin sections, and includes mineralogic composition, grain and sediment provenance, fabric studies and determination of the sequence of diagenetic events.
Petrographical studies of thin sections form the basis of much modern research on sedimentary rocks, whether siliciclastic, volcanic, carbonate or evaporitic, and the information gained can greatly supplement data from field- or core-based studies.
Perhaps the first question to be answered is why do so many sedimentologists concentrate on sedimentary petrography?
A brief literature review of the popular sedimentological journals indicates an increasing emphasis on petrography within Europe, whereas within the United States and Canada sedimentary petrology has for long been a necessary component of integrated sedimentological research projects.
Many such studies are related to hydro-carbon evaluation — both for source rocks and for reservoir potential.
A summary of the interrelationships together with some of the applications of aspects of sedimentary petrography is given in Fig. 5.1.
It should be emphasized that much information gained from petrofabric research can be used to back up field studies and forms an aid to provenance studies, including facies analysis and construction of depositional models; these applications are commonly lost amongst an ever-growing number of papers solely on aspects of diagenesis.
5.1.1 Techniques and tools
Although some techniques used in sedimentary petrography are quantitative, many are solely qualitative and are principally descriptive.
Many research projects concentrate on either siliciclastic or carbonate sediments; few investigate combined carbonate-siliciclastic systems and fewer yet reference volcanogenic sediments, mudrocks or evaporites.
This chapter attempts to portray fabrics which may develop within any sediment, independent of mineralogy.
Although some specific fabrics are included, the aim is to produce a general ‘guide’ for all sedimentary petrographers, with references leading to more detailed texts.
Examples used in photomicrographs are predominantly from ‘grain-supported’ rocks (sandstones, grainstones/packstones) as many petrofabrics are more readily apparent within these sediments.
This is not to say that these features are not present within more clay-rich or carbonate mud-rich sediments.
They are, however, commonly more difficult to discern, and to photograph, in clay-rich and mud-rich sediments.
Their examination profits from the use of ultra-thin sections (Chapter 4), employed initially in studies of carbonate diagenesis (Lindholm & dean , 1973), so that initial research into mudrock diagenesis can now be carried out with a good petrological microscope.
A good petrological microscope is the essential tool for sedimentary petrography, with refinement by the addition of subsidiary components where necessary.
One tool commonly ignored by many sedimentary petrographers is a Shadowmaster®, or similar equipment, where a thin section is projected on to a ground glass screen to produce an image (a shadowgraph).
This can be extremely useful for overviews of a thin section, grain shape and size determinations and for fabric analysis.
At this point a word of warning should be included: it is little use spending days/weeks describing and analysing one thin section if you are not sure whether this section is representative of the sedimentary sequence you are evaluating.
It is always tempting to sample the more ‘interesting’ sections of a sedimentary sequence and to find, on return to the laboratory, that you have few or no samples of the more mundane lithologies which comprise the greater portion of the sequence.
In practice it is very difficult to decide what is representative; perhaps the best method is to make a general study of several sections from the same sequence before proceeding to detailed description and analysis.
In most cases it is more important to note the regional trends; thus   care must be taken to ensure that these are not obscured by local variations.
5.1.2 Components and petrofabrics
The general fabric of a sedimentary rock will depend on three major components:
(1)
the original detrital grains,
(2)
authigenic minerals, both cements and replacive minerals, which have formed since deposition, and
(3)
pore spaces.
Detrital grains may be of any size (from clays to pebbles or larger) and of varying shape.
Sand or larger sized grains commonly form a framework within the sediment (Fig. 5.2a, b) between which the finer matrix (silt and clay sized particles) may have accumulated (Fig. 5.2a).
In well-winnowed sediments there is generally little or no matrix, leaving resultant pore spaces which may be partially or totally occluded (or filled) by cement during diagenesis (Fig. 5.2b).
Where there are higher proportions of matrix the grains do not form a framework, but float within the finer grained matrix, forming a matrix-supported sediment (Fig. 5.2c).
Whereas these may appear to be easy to recognize in theory, in practice it can be difficult to determine whether a sediment is grain supported or matrix supported in a hand specimen, but particularly when seen in two dimensions within a thin section (e.g. Fig. 5.2d).
Authigenic minerals grow after sediment deposition, during diagenesis; they include both cements and replacive minerals.
Cements are the crystals which grow into existing pore spaces.
They may, or may not, totally occlude the available pore space (e.g. Fig. 5.2b).
The form of many cement crystals can be indicative of the environment in which they grew (see Section 5.3.3).
Replacive minerals grow, as their name suggests, in the place of pre-existing minerals and not into pore spaces.
They are commonly alteration products of the primary detrital grains, but may also form from the introduction of additional ions by circulating pore fluids, as in many instances of dolomitization of a precursor carbonate.
Pore spaces are the voids not filled by grains or matrix within a sediment.
Impregnation of the sample with a coloured epoxy resin (commonly blue) makes the pore spaces more easily visible in thin section (Chapter 4) and allows distinction between a true pore space and a void where a grain or crystal has been plucked out during the process of making a thin section.
The combination of these three components forms the fabric of any sedimentary rock.
Using a more genetic approach, however, petrofabrics are divided into two major types, each the result of different processes:
(1)
Depositional fabrics — fabrics which result from processes which were active during deposition of the sediment.
These include grain mineralogy, grain morphology, grain orientation and provenance studies.
(2)
Diagenetic fabrics — fabrics which result from processes which occurred after deposition of the sediment.
These include compaction, cementation, mineral replacement and dissolution of pre-existing phases, and their study can lead to the construction of a diagenetic history of the sediment.
5.2 DEPOSITIONAL FABRICS
5.2.1 Grain identification
Mineral identification in thin sections can be backed up by XRD analysis of powdered rock samples (Chapter 7).
There are many excellent texts on mineral identification, all with much more detail than can be included here.
The properties of some commoner minerals in sedimentary rocks are given in Table 5.1; examples of these minerals in thin sections are shown in modern coloured guides to sedimentary constituents (Scholle, 1978, 1979; Adams et al., 1984) plus the older standard descriptive texts (Carozzi, 1960; Krumbein & pettijohn , 1961; Milner, 1962a, b; Pettijohn, 1975).
A minor, but important constituent of many sandstones are the heavy minerals, with a specific gravity in excess of 2.9.
These are usually studied by separating them from a crushed rock with heavy liquids, notably tetrabromoethane, which is extremely toxic.
The procedure is well described in Krumbein & Pettijohn (1961), Hubert (1971) and Friedman & johnson (1982).
It is also possible to use a magnetic separator.
Identification of the heavy minerals is by microscopic examination of the mounted grains (see references cited above for properties of the minerals).
The value of the heavy minerals is in the information they give on a sediment's provenance, although their dissolution during diagenesis may result in modification to the original assemblage (Morton, 1985b).
5.2.2 Modal composition
The modal composition of a sediment is a measure of the proportions of the different major depositional components.
These have three end members;
(i)
detrital, dominantly siliciclastic (or terrigenous) components derived from outside the depositional area,
(ii)
allochemical components produced within, or adjacent to, the depositional area, and
(iii)
ortho-chemical components resulting from chemical precipitation within the area.
Five major classes of sedimentary rock are defined using a triangular plot of these components (Fig. 5.3; Table 5.2)(Folk, 1974b).
This classification is based solely on composition immediately after deposition; cements and authigenic minerals are not included.
Difficulties are encountered where considerable dissolution has taken place during diagenesis of the sediment (Section 5.3.5).
To obtain the modal composition of any sediment one needs to know
(i)
the nature of the contained grains and
(ii)
the proportions of these grains present within the sediment.
The nature of the contained grains can be obtained from grain mineralogy (Section 5.2.1) plus the origin of lithic clasts (Table 5.3).
The proportion of the different grains present is more difficult to ascertain and is done using two main techniques, point counting and visual estimates.
Several systems of computer enhancement and image analysis which can be used with a petrographic microscope are beginning to come on the market and promise relative ease of modal composition evaluation.
POINT COUNTING TECHNIQUES
Point counting is the most accurate method of establishing the modal composition of a sediment, albeit a time-consuming method (Chayes, 1956; Galehouse, 1971a).
Point counting of many thin sections is tedious; however, its uses generally outweigh the time spent in data accumulation.
There are various methods of point counting, the most obvious being the spot identification of each grain as it appears under the cross wires of the microscope (e.g. Van der Plas & tobi , 1965; Soloman & green , 1966).
However, in a sediment with a large proportion of lithic clasts this may involve changing many times to a different magnification (generally larger, to identify the whole clast).
One method (Ingersoll et al., 1984) obviates this by identifying minerals within the clast, rather than the complete clast, although this produces a modal composition based on total mineralogy rather than based on detrital grain mineralogy.
During point counting, the thin section is placed on a mechanical stage screwed to the rotating stage of the microscope, which is then clamped.
The  mechanical stage is connected to a counting unit, which, when a master key is pressed, moves the section a given distance along a traverse.
This distance can be varied, dependent on the grain size of the sediment.
Six (or more) additional keys can be marked for different components within the section.
One of these keys is pressed each time that component is visible under the cross hairs of the microscope.
The master key both advances the stage and records the total number of points counted.
Grains present, but not encountered under the cross hairs, are noted as additional minerals (Table 5.4).
Several traverses are made for each thin section, and a total of some 250 — 300 points per section need to be counted to obtain sufficiently accurate percentages of the components present.
All data are rigorously tabulated (Table 5.4).
The position of the traverses should be noted as this enables the counting of additional points, should this be necessary; it also enables checking of the original data.
Although point counting is time consuming, any petrographer should practice this method on several thin sections before proceeding to much more rapid methods, such as the use of visual estimates.
VISUAL ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES
Many petrographic texts include visual comparators to be used in estimations of modal composition/mineral percentages, etc.
These may include grains of different shapes and sizes (Terry & chilingar , 1955), or be computer-generated random percentages (Folk, Andrews & lewis , 1970)(Fig. 5.4).
Care must be taken in making visual estimates, and results are usually much less accurate than with point counting techniques.
The method is both simple and quick, but should only be used for estimations and not where accurate results are required.
Computer-aided techniques will help by providing higher accuracy results, but will not bypass the need for previous detailed petrographic study.
ABUSES AND USES
With both visual estimation and point counting techniques it must be remembered that values are being computed from the two dimensions of the thin section into the three dimensions of a sediment for modal composition.
For inhomogeneous sediments, particularly those with a distinct fabric, total measurement of modal composition should be a combination of the measurements from three perpendicular thin sections.
It is also important that the thin sections counted are representative of the sequence studied, thus necessitating preliminary overviews of the thin sections.
Each of the major components of a sedimentary rock (Fig. 5.3) can be further subdivided during detailed modal analysis (Table 5.3).
Expression of modal composition is commonly shown on a triangular diagram, using three appropriate major   components (Fig. 5.5a, b).
Care should be taken that the same classification method is used for all samples plotted, particularly if data are obtained from other, workers, as different classifications can result in variation of the position of plotted points (and hence composition)(Zuffa, 1985).
Modal compositions have commonly been used by sandstone or carbonate petrographers but Zuffa (1986) has demonstrated the importance of consideration of siliciclastic plus detailed carbonate components.
It is also important to note the presence of later dissolution (McBride, 1985) as this can greatly affect the resultant modal composition (Section 5.3.4).
The use of multivariate analysis (common in igneous geochemistry) has been little applied to modal compositions of sediments, although it offers considerable potential.
This lapse may be due to the lack of point counting in recent years, concomitant with lack of communication between various branches of the geological sciences.
In addition to modal composition, point counting can be used to assess the relative proportions of grains and matrix, grains and cement and cement or grains and porosity.
5.2.3 Grain morphology, size, sorting, measurements and orientation
Several authors have considered the difficulties of evaluating these parameters from thin sections of lithified sediments as opposed to those of unconsolidated or disaggregated sediments (Rosenfeld, Jacobsen & ferm , 1953; Friedman, 1962; Klovan, 1966; Folk, 1966, 1974b).
Although these parameters are commonly measured for unconsolidated or disaggregated sediments, the geological significance of the difference in grain size within sediments is not fully understood (Folk, 1,974b).
In addition, disaggregation of sediments may lead to inaccurate results if overgrowth cements are present (Section 5.3.3).
The size of detrital grains within a sediment is proportional to the available materials and to the amount of energy imparted to the sediment.
The degree of sorting of a sediment is dependent on the size range of the supplied grains, the mode of deposition (for example, whether wave reworking or current deposition), the current characteristics (predominantly strength) and the time   involved in deposition.
Field or core studies can give information on some of these features and thin section petrography can aid further evaluation, but care must be taken to avoid diagenetic fabrics in any such analysis.
Shadowgraphs are particularly useful in grain morphology and orientation studies, as they enable overviews of a large area of the thin section.
GRAIN MORPHOLOGY
Recognition of detrital grain morphology (form, sphericity, roundness and, in some cases, surface textures) in thin section is only possible where grain surfaces have not been modified during diagenesis.
Parameters such as roundness and sphericity are   readily measurable from thin section.
Form (or shape), however, is dependent on the orientation of the thin section; determination of grain form therefore involves measurement of shape of many grains in different orientations within one thin section, and, preferably, the use of three perpendicular thin sections.
GRAIN SIZE AND SORTING MEASUREMENTS
A thin section is a random two-dimensional slice through a three-dimensional solid.
Any slice through a solid comprising spherical grains of equal size will show spheres of many, apparently, different sizes (Fig. 5.6).
Both grain size and sorting cannot, therefore, be measured directly from a thin section and can only be estimated.
This can be done by direct measurements of the maximum dimension of a hundred grains through a calibrated eye piece graticule, or on a screen, followed by calculation of the standard deviation of these dimensions and application of a conversion equation which adjusts this value for the effects of random sectioning (e.g. Harrell & eriksson , 1979).
Alternatively, visual estimation using a comparator can be used, a procedure which is considerably less time consuming and much easier, although such estimates may lack accuracy.
Harrell (1984) compared actual and apparent sorting images for sets of spheres with log normal distribution, and demonstrated that the apparent sorting is less accurate for well sorted sediments, but, that using his visual comparators (Fig. 5.7), the apparent sorting is very nearly the same as for actual sorting within the sand and gravel size ranges.
It   should be emphasized that use of sorting and grain size comparators is only valid for sediments which have not undergone compaction (see Section 5.3.2).
Abnormal sorting or textural inversion (e.g. Fig. 5.8) are common in sediments and indicate unusual environmental conditions, possibly mixing of sediment from two different environments, storm mixing of material in a high energy environment or multiple sources of sediment supply.
These conditions are not always apparent from field/core studies and   illustrate the uses of the additional information obtainable from thin section petrography.
In interpretation, it should be remembered that there is very little size reduction of quartz sand grains during transport, but that selective sorting may mean that the small grains are carried farther, or are winnowed and deposited by weaker currents (Folk, 1974b).
GRAIN ORIENTATION
Measurement of grain orientation (e.g. Fig. 5.9) necessitates the use of oriented field samples plus measurements from three perpendicular thin sections.
The orientation of the long axis of the grains can be measured directly from the microscope or shadowgraph, or it can be measured by a photometric method which integrates the extinction behaviour of all the grains in the field of view (Sippel, 1971).
Orientations determined can be plotted on rose diagrams, balloon diagrams or, better, stereonets as for field palaeocurrent analysis (Chapter 2).
Compaction after sedimentation may have considerably reduced any angle of cross lamination measured from grain orientation; the significance of this can be estimated from compaction features visible in the same thin sections (Section 5.3.2).
More detailed accounts of grain orientation methods from thin sections are given in Bonham & spotts (1971) and Gibbons (1972).
5.2.4 Provenance studies
Provenance studies of sandstone sequences are possible using the modal composition plus maturity indicators (Fig. 5.10; Table 5.5)(Valloni & maynard , 1981; Dickinson, 1985; Valloni, 1985).
Sandstone sequences are the result of both provenance and tectonic environment, modified by climate, depositional environment and later diagenetic events.
Such broad groupings are only possible when many separate thin section analyses are grouped together; they are not applicable where the study is of one sandstone sequence from one particular area of a sedimentary basin.
In addition to studies using the modal composition of a sediment, other provenance determinations can be made from individual quartz grains.
This technique was initiated by Krynine (1940, 1946) and can detail sources not recognized in more regional composition-based provenance studies.
QUARTZ PROVENANCE STUDIES
Quartz grains may be single crystals (monocrystalline) and show straight extinction or undulose extinction (best measured on a universal stage).
They may also be composite (or polycrystalline) with straight or undulose extinction within individual subcrystals and may, or may not, show elongation within the subcrystals.
Quartz grains may also contain trails of inclusions, commonly fluid or gas filled.
Subparallel trails of very small inclusions, or Boehm lamellae, are the products of intense strain, and indicate strain to have occurred within the quartz lattice, either in situ or before incorporation in the present sediment.
The two may be distinguished by measuring the strain directions in several quartz grains; a random strain direction indicates strain prior to deposition, whereas a constant strain direction indicates stress was applied to the sediment.
Quartz grains may also contain solid inclusions, the mineralogy of which may give evidence of provenance (e.g. sillimanite inclusions are excellent evidence for a metamorphic source area).
A summary of quartz grain features is given in Fig. 5.11 and photomicrographs in Fig. 5.12.
A more detailed discussion of quartz grains as indicators of provenance is given by Folk (1974b) who includes further references.
5.2.5 Depositional fabrics — a conclusion
In conclusion to this section on depositional fabrics it can be seen that a considerable amount of information can be gained from petrographic studies which can be used to supplement field studies and gain insight into the origins of the sediment.
In particular provenance studies, both from modal compositions and from quartz grain variations, are not possible without petrographic analysis; these form an important aid in the interpretation of ancient sediments and their depositional environments.
Grain size, form, roundness and sphericity     data are supplemented from grain orientations measured and mineralogical composition established.
5.3 DIAGENETIC FABRICS
Sedimentary rocks exhibit a vast range of diagenetic fabrics from compaction to cementation, dissolution to complete replacement.
These diagenetic fabrics can be important indicators both of the depositional environment of the sediment and of the chemistry of a variety of fluids which have been flushed through the sediment during burial.
Mineralogical changes can also be used to indicate temperature and depth of burial; this is of particular importance when correlated with organic temperature/depth indicators in studies of petroleum generation and migration.
The sequence of diagenetic events within a sediment governs its potential as a hydrocarbon reservoir, as a host for mineralization, as a conduit for mineralizing fluids/hydrocarbons, or as a source for hydrocarbons.
Research on diagenetic fabrics supplements information from field/core based work and from studies of depositional fabrics.
Diagenetic fabrics can be subdivided into two major types — those due to compaction and those due to chemical alteration, whether cementation, dissolution or replacement (Fig. 5.13).
A sediment may exhibit one or more phases of any, or all, of these processes; the task of the sedimentary petrographer is to unravel the different events, place these in a paragenetic sequence and then build on these in interpreting the burial history of the sediment.
Sound petrographic interpretations are essential before geochemical or isotopic analysis of the different diagenetic components is attempted.
Increased research into diagenesis has resulted in the introduction of many new terms; to aid the reader a brief review of general nomenclature relating to diagenetic environment and to porosity fabrics is included here before description of the various diagenetic fabrics.
5.3.1 General nomenclature used in diagenetic studies
DIAGENETIC ENVIRONMENTS
Three major diagenetic regimes were defined by Choquette & pray (1970)(Fig. 5.14) and are summarized, with slight refinements, in Table 5.6.
In most texts, simplification has led to the terms ‘eogenetic’, ‘mesogenetic’ and ‘telogenetic’being replaced by ‘near-surface’, ‘burial’and ‘uplift’(or ‘unconformity-related’).
Near-surface diagenetic environments are further subdivided depending on whether the pore spaces are saturated with fluids, within the phreatic zone, or whether they lie above the water table so are partially fluid filled and partially gas filled, within the vadose zone (Fig. 5.15).
The origin of the pore fluids, whether marine or meteoric (or fresh), also controls the diagenetic reactions which take place within these zones (Sections 5.3.3, 5.3.4 and 5.3.5).
POROSITY NOMENCLATURE
Porosity nomenclature is based on two classic papers: Choquette & pray (1970) and Schmidt, McDonald & platt (1977).
Porosity within a sediment may be primary, a result of depositional voids between or within grains, or secondary, the result of dissolution, shrinkage or fracturing within the sub-surface (Choquette & pray , 1970).
Primary porosity is commonly intergranular (or interparticle)(Fig. 5.16a), although rare intragranular porosity may be present within rock fragments, skeletal material and other detrital grains (Fig. 5.16b); intracrystalline primary porosity can be significant within clays and clay coatings and some dolostones.
Secondary porosities can be due to the dissolution of detrital grains (Fig. 5.16c, d), of cements and authigenic minerals (Fig. 5.16e) plus shrinkage of certain sediments (particularly glauconitic sediments), and fracturing after cementation.
Both primary and secondary porosity types may be mutually interconnected (Fig. 5.16a), therefore resulting in high permeabilities, or isolated (Fig. 5.16b), with consequent low permeabilities.
The effective porosity of a sediment is dependent on the degree of interconnection of the pore spaces, which are thus utilized during fluid migration through the sediment.
Submicroscopic porosity (in places mistakenly termed ‘chalky’ porosity) is present in chalks, mudrocks and some altered detrital grains.
Efficient impregnation with coloured resin within these sediments will demonstrate the presence of submicroscopic porosity under a good petrographic microscope; further   research on its fabrics and genesis requires electron microscopy.
5.3.2 Compaction fabrics
In thin section grainy sediments commonly show evidence of compaction, the result of progressive increase in overburden during burial.
Before cementation, compaction takes place dominantly by mechanical processes, with slippage between individual grains, grain reorientation and subsequent fracture of some grains.
With increase in overburden pressure, more stress is placed on the grain to grain contacts and compaction starts to proceed by chemical processes.
COMPACTION BY MECHANICAL PROCESSES
Compaction by mechanical processes involves movement by slippage between grains and the breakage, or fracture, of individual grains; as such it is sometimes termed brittle compaction.
Any increase in overburden pressure in an unconsolidated sediment tends to result in a denser configuration of that sediment by movement between the individual       grains and the consequent grain reorientation.
Most spherical, cylindrical.
disc-shaped or ellipsoidal grains (the regular grains of Vinopal & coogan , 1978) simply slip against each other.
However, any larger grains within the sediment commonly form bridges between the smaller grains creating a shelter porosity (Fig. 5.17a).
If these larger grains are platey or concavo-convex (the radical grains of Vinopal & coogan , 1978), brittle fracture may take place with continued increase of overburden pressure, resulting in destruction of the shelter porosity and tighter packing of the grains (Fig. 5.17b).
The combination of grain size plus grain morphology therefore dictates which grains are susceptible to brittle fracture; these grains are commonly thin walled skeletal fragments (Fig 5.1 8a), including bryozoans (Meyers, 1980), mica flakes (Fig. 5.18b) and plant material (Fig. 5.18c)(Ting, 1977).
Such mechanical compaction is common during early diagenesis, prior to cementation.
Mechanical compaction and brittle failure may also take place after cementation, both as a result of shrinkage, expansion, and subsequent fracturing beneath a soil zone (Fig. 5.16e), and, commonly, as a   result of secondary porosity creation during burial diagenesis in both carbonate and siliciclastic host sediments (Fig. 5.18d, e).
Mechanical compaction is relatively easy to envisage in near-surface regimes and can be readily demonstrated experimentally (Vinopal & coogan , 1978; Shinn & robbin , 1983).
It is, however, more difficult to envisage the formation of a substantial amount of secondary porosity followed by fracturing during deep burial; this may necessitate a reduction in hydrostatic pressure (perhaps a relaxation of overpressuring), a change in pore fluid chemistry (cessation of secondary porosity formation) allowing subsequent fracture, or slight tectonic movement.
Little research has yet been carried out on controls of brittle fracture within the subsurface, although Bj  rlykke (1983) attributed cement dissolution (and consequent secondary porosity generation) to overpressuring, with subsequent cementation in the overlying strata a consequence of pressure release.
COMPACTION BY CHEMICAL PROCESSES I: SOLUTION COMPACTION BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL GRAINS
Compaction by chemical processes, or pressure solution, takes place in two ways:
(i)
in an uncemented sediment, by dissolution at isolated stressed grain to grain contacts and
(ii)
within a cemented sediment, by dissolution being concentrated along a particular surface, usually irregular, termed a stylolite.
Pressure solution has been defined as the preferential dissolution of mineral material at points of stress (Wanless, 1979).
Once the grains within an uncemented sediment have assumed their densest configuration by slippage on grain surfaces, grain reorientation and fracture of radical grains, overburden pressure is transferred through grain to grain contacts, commonly point contacts (Fig. 5.19a).
Progressive increase in overburden pressure increases the stress at grain to grain contacts, with resultant deformation of the crystal lattice at these contact points plus changes in the chemical potential within the immediate area of the contact (Fig. 5.19b).
Continuation of stress causes dissolution of the contact area.
Pressure solution is controlled not only by the degree of crystal strain, but also by the solubility of the specific crystal, its orientation, the saturation state of the surrounding fluid, the thermodynamics and kinetics of dissolution and ion concentration gradients in addition to the mechanism of solute transport (whether by diffusion or fluid flow)(Wanless, 1983).
Progressive solution compaction leads to alteration of the grain to grain contacts, from the original point contacts, through planar (or tangential) contacts to inter-penetrating (concavo-convex) and sutural grain to grain contacts (Fig. 5.19c-e).
In sediments with monomineralic, or monocompositional, grains, the grain to grain contacts in, or near to, the principle stress direction commonly show similar degrees of solution compaction, with, for example , planar or interpenetrating contacts (Fig. 5.20a).
However, sections transverse to the principle stress direction may exhibit a much lesser degree of solution compaction (Fig. 5.20b).
The amount of solution is partially dependent on the orientation of the grains, as many anisotropic minerals dissolve more readily         along a certain crystallographic axis (Fig. 5.20c).
Solution amounts are also dependent on the relative stability of different grains; stabilities may differ between mineral grains (Fig. 5.20d), or between grains and mudrock clasts where the clasts undergo ductile deformation so that, in places, they simulate a dispersed clay matrix (Scholle, 1979, p. 162).
Solution compaction between grains reduces the effective intergranular porosity within a grainy sediment (Fig. 5.19b) and is therefore important in    reservoir evaluation; in some cases solution compaction may account for most of the overall porosity reduction.
Considerable solution compaction between grains indicates that cementation did not take place until relatively late in the diagenetic history of the sediment.
This may be a factor of environment of deposition, or a consequence of rapid sedimentation rates, particularly in carbonate environments.
The relative timing of solution compaction and cementation is important in reservoir evaluation (Fig. 5.21).
During solution compaction, the area immediately adjacent to the stressed grain to grain contact is taken into solution and may be flushed away from the immediate area by pore fluid migration.
These solutes are thought to be the origin of cements within the subsurface, either as quartz overgrowth cements (e.g. Sibley & blatt , 1976) or as calcite cements.
They may be precipitated locally (Thompson, 1959) or carried for some distance in solution (Bathurst, 1975; Wanless, 1979).
For example, Moore (1985) attributed the formation of zoned burial cements to be the result of former grain to grain solution compaction within the surrounding Jurassic grainstones, whereas James, Wilmar & davidson (1986) concluded that the Nugget Sandstone is an overall exporter of silica, despite the development of some quartz overgrowth cements.
As cementation proceeds in clean sandstones or grainstones, or the matrix in clayey-sandstones and packstones becomes lithified, pressure is transmitted through the whole rock and there is no excess of stress at the grain to grain contacts.
Solution compaction between individual grains therefore ceases, but continues over a much wider area along stylolites, seams and sutures within the sediment.
Stylolites are commonly formed within carbonate sediments where cementation takes place early in the sediment's diagenetic history.
COMPACTION BY CHEMICAL PROCESSES II: SOLUTION COMPACTION IN CEMENTED SEDIMENTS
Stylolites and solution seams are present within many sediment types (Heald, 1955,1959; Thompson, 1959; Weller, 1959; Trurnit, 1968; Brown, 1969; Bathurst, 1975; Logan & semeniuk , 1976; Mimran, 1977; Wanless, 1979; Gillett, 1983 and others).
Both stylolites and solution seams transect the cemented sediment and develop perpendicular to the axis of maximum stress, which may be either overburden pressure or tectonic stress.
Because stylolites and solution seams are zones of preferential solution within a sediment, small fragments of less soluble minerals tend to accumulate along the solution seam.
Thus, in immature sandstones and carbonates, clay minerals may become concentrated along a seam.
Both Weyl (1959) and Oldershaw & scoffin (1967) documented how stylolites and solution seams preferentially develop in clay-rich layers in carbonate sediments, with the solution residue accumulating in stylocumulates (Logan & semeniuk , 1976)(Fig. 5.22a).
Wanless (1979) proposed that there were three basic styles of solution compaction, dependent on the maturity of the sediments and the responsiveness of the various units (Fig. 5.23).
He demonstrated that pervasive (or non-seam) solution compaction may result in considerable reductions in thickness (commonly up to 50% and more, rarely as much as 80%) of finely crystalline carbonate units.
The more visible solution seams (whether high-amplitude stylolites, microstylolite swarms, or fine clay seams) may also represent considerable amounts of dissolution in the subsurface.
With high-amplitude stylolites, the minimum dissolution is equivalent to the maximum amplitude of the stylolite (Fig. 5.22b, c).
Until the last ten years most authors thought that   solution seam and stylolite formation took place during deep burial diagenesis.
Recently, however, Shinn & robbin (1983) have demonstrated the formation of stringers, superficially very similar to solution seams, forming in Recent Bahamian muds under relatively low pressures (6,784 psi, equivalent to burial depths of approximately 2,000 m) over short periods of time.
These stringers were composed of organic matter, principally sea grasses.
In Mississippian carbonates of the United States, Meyers (1980) and Meyers & hill (1983) have demonstrated mechanical and chemical compaction at less than 2,000 m burial depth with initiation of chemical compaction at depths of ‘tens to hundreds of metres’.
Earlier, Beall & Fischer (1969) had observed that the transition from mechanical compaction to solution compaction occurs at around 250 m sediment depth in some North Atlantic DSDP sites.
Harris (Meyers, 1984 personal communication) has found that high amplitude stylolites formed at burial depths of less than 1,000 m in the Burlington Formation (Mississippian).
This combined evidence indicates that some stylolite and solution seam formation can take place during shallow burial; these solution features should not, therefore, be used as evidence for deep burial.
The timing and mode of formation of stylolites remains an area of contention in sedimentary petrography, although many stylolites show evidence of at least some component of their formation relatively   late, if not necessarily deep, in the diagenetic history of their containing sediment (Fig. 5.22d).
However and whenever they form, stylolites and solution seams are important in reservoir evaluation.
Koepnick (1985) has demonstrated how stylolites act as migration barriers; dense stylocumulates in particular are barriers to fluid migration.
Stylolites with little insoluble residue and high amplitudes may, however, be pathways of preferential fluid migration, and may remain open, or be later filled by cements.
Solution compaction along seams may involve dissolution of considerable volumes of minerals, commonly quartz and calcite; these solutes may locally source cementation, lessening the permeability of the zone surrounding the solution seams (Wong & oldershaw , 1981).
However, some authors (notably Scholle, 1971 and Wachs & hein , 1974) are of the opinion that pressure solution is too late to account for the origin of most burial cements.
More recently, Scholle & halley (1985) concluded that, although solution compaction features are widespread in many rocks, as is evidence of late cementation, connecting the two processes in most instances requires a ‘leap of faith’.
ESTIMATION OF AMOUNTS OF COMPACTION
Although there are many qualitative studies demonstrating the wide distribution of mechanical and chemical compaction fabrics, published quantitative results are considerably rarer.
Measurement of stylolite amplitudes (Fig. 5.22b, c) or of solution seam thickness provides only a minimum estimate of the amount of sediment removed (Stockdale, 1926; Mossop, 1972) and becomes more difficult with low amplitude stylolites and solution seams (Fig. 5.22f).
Volume reductions in carbonates of approximately 40% were detailed by Dunnington (1967) and Park & schot (1968, p. 72); similar calculations are lacking for other sediments.
Perhaps a future valid contribution to this field could be made by a combination of experimental simulation of mechanical and chemical compaction in conjunction with the use of computer imagery in volume reconstruction; at present we only know compaction is extremely effective at reducing both absolute volume and porosity in many sediments.
5.3.3 Cementation
Many different minerals form cements.
Quartz and calcite are perhaps the most common but chlorite, clay minerals, hematite, dolomite, siderite, aragonite, phosphates and evaporite minerals (particularly halite) also occur as cements, as do zeolites, particularly in volcanogenic sediments (Table 5.1).
More rarely, hydrocarbons may also form a cement.
Although the mineralogy may differ, the relationships between the various generations of cements and their adjacent grains enable the timing of cementation relative to other diagenetic events to be evaluated (Fig. 5.21).
Many cements can be clearly recognized using a combined transmitted-reflected light petrological microscope.
However, cathodoluminescence (Chapter 6) can give additional information on crystal growth directions and can aid elucidation of many cement relationships; it is an important adjunct for the study of many carbonate, quartz and feldspar cements.
Staining (Chapter 4) and blue light emission spectroscopy (Dravis & yurewicz , 1985) may also aid evaluation of some diagenetic sequences, particularly in carbonates.
In addition, scanning electron microscopy, both of solid specimens and of etched thin sections (e.g. Sandberg, 1985), can be used to confirm further deductions based on thin section petrography (see Chapter 8).
Conformable cements may form as an overgrowth on existing grains within a sediment, in many places growing in optical continuity with a substrate of the same mineralogy (e.g. Fig. 5.21c).
Alternatively, cements may nucleate on grains as separate, or disconformable, crystals (Fig. 5.24a), or they may grow from a few nucleation points so that they enclose the grains as poikilotopic cements (Fig. 5.24b); they may be the same mineralogy as the grains they enclose.
The morphology of these separate, disconformable crystal cements is, in many cases, dependent on the diagenetic environment and contained fluids in which they form (e.g. Folk, 1974a; Longman, 1980), although growth kinetics (Given & wilkinson , 1985) are also an important factor.
A summary of the many descriptive terms used in petrologic identification of cement morphology is given in Fig. 5.25.
CEMENT TYPES I:GRAIN OVERGROWTH CEMENTS
Grain overgrowth cements (or conformable cements) commonly develop on quartz and feldspar detrital grains and on some skeletal carbonate fragments (Fig. 5.26).
Quartz overgrowth cements can be clearly recognized using a petrological microscope if clay- or hematite-rich coatings (commonly inaccurately termed ‘dust’ rims) are trapped between overgrowth cement and grain (Fig. 5.26a, b).
More rarely, two coatings may become trapped, indicating two stages of development of the overgrowth cement.
Where no such coatings are present, quartz overgrowth cements are much more difficult to recognize.
Such cements are, however, typically inclusion-free (or, at least, inclusion-poor) and thus, with care, may be distinguished from the parent grain.
Further, if sufficient intergranular pore space is present within the sediment, the overgrowth cements will develop planar euhedral crystallographic faces (Fig. 5.26c, d), although it should be remembered that continued enlargement of the overgrowth cements will lead to compromise boundaries between the cements.
Such compromise boundaries may be difficult to distinguish from compacted fabrics: cathodoluminescence can, in some cases, be used for this purpose (Sippel, 1968).
Scholle (1979, pp. 112–3) used photomicrographs and SEM photographs to demonstrate the progressive development of quartz overgrowth cements with  concomitant reduction of porosity.
Quartz grains with overgrowth cements may be reworked into younger sediments (see Fig. 5.11) where their importance is commonly underestimated (Sanderson, 1984).
Reworked grains with overgrowth cements are recognized by the lack of interlocking overgrowths, the presence of quartz overgrowth cements on isolated grains and, less commonly, the presence of rounded or broken terminations (Scholle, 1979).
Caution also has to be expressed where thin sections contain possible volcanic quartz grains; these can exhibit zonation and rounding which closely mimic quartz overgrowth cements.
However, the presence of microlites and vacuoles in the outer rim distinguishes these volcanic fabrics from those of overgrowth cements.
Overgrowth cements on feldspars and carbonate echinoderm fragments are similar to quartz overgrowth cements in that they contain few or no inclusions or are commonly in optical continuity with the parent grain (Fig. 5.27a, b).
Chemically, feldspar overgrowth cements are commonly the pure sodium or potassium feldspar end members and are rarely calcic; clear overgrowth cements may surround partially altered feldspar grains (e.g. Heald, 1956).
Echinoderm grains contain a regular pattern of internal pores which contrast with the surrounding, inclusion-free overgrowth cements (e.g. Figs 5.21 and 5.27a, b).
The echinoderm grains may also contain small solid inclusions of dolomite, euhedral or subhedral, the microdolomites of Meyers & lohmann (1978), which result from the alteration of the original high Mg calcite skeleton to low Mg calcite and dolomite.
Overgrowth cements on echinoderm fragments are commonly a relatively early phase in the diagenetic history of a sediment, both in shallow water carbonates (Fig. 5.27a, b)(Meyers, 1980) and in deep water carbonate turbidites (Fig. 5.27c)(Schlager & james , 1978; Reid & mazzullo , 1985, personal communication).
In both shallow and deep water examples the origin of the overgrowth cement calcite is generally thought to be from aragonite dissolution during early diagenesis, although modifications of sea water chemistry with ocean depth and with shallow burial may be in part responsible.
Overgrowth cements also form on some more complex carbonate grains, including planktonic foraminifers (Fig. 5.27d).
It is noticeable that overgrowth cements only develop on biogenic carbonate grains, and do not form where the skeletal wall has been heavily bored by fungi or algae (thus forming a ‘micrite’ envelope).
The timing of the development of quartz overgrowth cements is more variable.
Many sandstones with overgrowth cements exhibit little solution compaction at grain-to-grain contacts (Fig. 5.26c, d); the source of silica in such sediments can only partially be derived from the solution compaction and may largely result from the dissolution of opaline silica.
In other sandstones, quartz overgrowth cements do not form until after considerable solution compaction; here the solution compaction can be the major source of silica, although reactions between clay minerals in immature sandstones may also contribute silica (Fig. 5.28)(Bjørlykke, 1983).
CEMENT TYPES II:DISCONFORMABLE CRYSTAL CEMENTS
Disconformable crystal cements nucleate as separate crystals on sediment grains and, as such, are distinct from overgrowth cements.
The size and number of these crystals are largely dependent on    the composition of the enclosing pore fluids and on the availability of the substrate to provide nucleation sites.
Thus circumgranular (or rim) cements (Fig. 5.24a) form where there are many nucleation sites on a sediment grain, whereas poikilotopic cements (Fig. 5.24b) are the result of few nucleation sites and, in general, slower crystal growth.
Characterization of the diverse morphologies of cements formed in modern diagenetic environments of rapid cementation has aided recognition of ancient analogues, particularly for near-surface carbonate diagenetic environments (for summaries see Longman, 1980; James & choquette , 1983, 1984; Harris, Kendall & lerche , 1985).
These, plus the carbonate cements formed during burial diagenesis are summarized in Fig. 5.29 with examples in Figs 5.30, 5.31 and 5.32; relevant additional comments on these diagenetic environments are included below.
VAD0SE AND SHALLOW MARINE CARBONATE CEMENTS
Although the cement morphologies summarized in Fig. 5.29 occur principally in carbonate sediments, quartz meniscus cements have been described from sandstones (e.g. Scholle, 1979, p. 114) and may comprise partial overgrowth cements.
Near-surface carbonate cements also occur in quartzose sandstones but do not, however, form so readily on quartz grains (Fig. 5.30b, c).
This may be partly a factor of reduced possible nucleation sites and partly a result of the decreased supply of calcium carbonate.
Siliciclastic sediments in general remain almost uncemented until buried to depths of 1000 m or more, whereas carbonate sediments are commonly cemented at or near the sediment-water interface, or in subaerial environments.
Indirect evidence of vadose diagenesis in carbonates comes from ‘fitted textures’(Fig. 5.16e), where expansion and or dissolution around grain margins has occurred beneath a soil zone.
A note of caution needs to be added concerning cementation in the meteoric vadose zone.
Although there is an ever-increasing literature on cement morphologies and diagenesis within this zone, especially within soils, it is important to remember that many such cements are the exception rather than the rule.
In many modern examples, diagenetic reactions in the meteoric zones are minimal.
Both modern and ancient zones show intense reaction within a few centimetres of the soil surface, perhaps the area with least preservation potential, but very little alteration of the original sediment below that depth.
Thus the presence of many ancient meteoric vadose zones may be difficult to determine from petrographic evidence and from field/core or geochemical techniques.
A further complication arises as many ancient shallow marine carbonate cements were of different mineralogies to those occurring in modern carbonates (e.g. Figs 5.24a, 5.30d, 5.31b, c).
However, although the mineralogies may differ, the cement morphologies are commonly similar, thus enabling interpretation of ancient early diagenetic environments.
BURIAL CEMENTS
Carbonate burial cements are commonly coarsely crystalline, and include baroque dolomite and calcite spar (Fig. 5.31f), in places zoned.
Burial cements in other sediments are composed of a complex range of mineralogies, not all of which are readily distinguishable with a petrological microscope (Table 5.1).
Some are finely crystalline (clay minerals, hematite, limonite), others are coarsely crystalline (similar to carbonate burial cements) and commonly poikilotopic, whereas yet others are both coarsely crystalline and, to some extent, appear to replace the host sediment (anhydrite, halite, phosphates, glauconite)(Fig. 5.33a).
Quartz overgrowth cements are a further common burial cement, although their presence alone is not an indication of deep burial.
In siliciclastic sediments careful attention to petrographic detail, particularly the compaction history, is necessary to determine whether a cement formed during deep burial (>2,000 m) or at an earlier stage in the diagenetic history.
At whatever stage in the diagenetic history of the sediment they form, cements are a record of the fluctuating pore water history of a sediment.
Numerous, clearly identifiable stages of cementation in a sediment are evidence of changes in pore water chemistry and saturation states, even if all the precipitated phases are of a single mineralogy (e.g. Fig. 5.33b).
More important, perhaps, is the evidence given by the termination of precipitation of a cement phase, indicating a decrease in saturation, or supersaturation, of that phase within the pore fluid and, in places, dissolution of pre-existing cement phases when undersaturated pore fluids are introduced into a sediment.
Analysis of the chemistry and isotopic compositions of the various cement phases can give         clear indications of  concomitant variations in the nature of the pore fluids (Chapter 9)(e.g. in a carbonate system, Dickson & coleman , 1980).
5.3.4 Dissolution fabrics
Dissolution in the subsurface generates secondary porosity (Choquette & pray , 1970)(Section 5.3.1).
This may not necessarily be large-scale dissolution (e.g. Fig. 5.16d), but may result only in slight corrosion of the detrital grains or pre-existing cements in the sediment.
Dissolution may be very subtle, with dissolution of calcic plagioclase whereas albite and potassium feldspar are not affected (Boles, 1984).
In carbonates preferential solution of some grain types (e.g. Harris & kendall , 1986) occurs in what would otherwise appear to be a chemically homogeneous sediment.
The delicate textural changes commonly encountered in studies of dissolution fabrics emphasize the importance of effective impregnation of the sediment prior to thin section making; this is not only essential to identify plucked grains, or grains   partially plucked from their matrix as opposed to secondary porosity, but is also necessary for reflected light petrography of grain and cement margins when investigating corrosion fabrics.
Common dissolution fabrics (based on the work of several authors, e.g. Schmidt et al., 1977; Hayes, 1979; McBride, 1980; Shanmugan, 1985) are shown  diagrammatically in Fig. 5.34.
CORROSION FABRICS
Initial dissolution leads to the corrosion of grain margins and cement terminations.
This is common in many sediments and takes place adjacent to pore spaces as the result of flushing by undersaturated pore fluids and not, as is sometimes mistakenly stated, as the result of ‘corrosive’ growth of a later mineral phase (Section 5.3.5).
Such corrosion may be selective, only  affecting certain mineralogies, or non-selective, so that all existing minerals adjacent to pore spaces are corroded.
Corrosion fabrics show grain margins and cement terminations to have a pitted or corrugated character (Fig. 5.35a) which in ore mineralogy is termed a ‘caries’ texture.
If there is no later cementation, corrosion produces a more effective connection between pore spaces and thus  enhances existing porosity, whether this be primary or secondary.
More commonly, however, the adjacent pore space is later occluded by cement (Fig. 5.35b) which may render the corrosion, if minor, more difficult to distinguish.
Corrosion may also take place during the precipitation of what, superficially, appears to be a single cement phase; in carbonates this can be detailed using cathodoluminescence petrography (Chapter 6).
Corrosion fabrics are very common in evaporite sediments, or sediments where there is a phase of evaporite mineral cementation, as these minerals are very soluble and hence susceptible to slight changes in fluid salinity (e.g. Schreiber, 1978).
PENETRATIVE DISSOLUTION FABRICS
More progressive selective dissolution of cements and grains within a sediment leads to attack of the whole mineral, commonly commencing by corrosion along cleavage planes (Fig. 5.35c, d).
As dissolution proceeds, a honeycomb texture may result, particularly where a mineral has near rectilinear cleavages.
Slight changes in mineral chemistry are also prone to selective dissolution (Fig. 5.36a), as are zones of less stable mineralogies (e.g. Ward & halley , 1985).
Continued dissolution will result in collapse of remaining grain fragments (Fig. 5.36b) and, in time, may remove the entire detrital grain (Fig. 5.16c), forming oversized pores.
In addition, subsequent collapse of grain coatings, whether original or produced by earlier diagenetic alteration, may occur (Fig. 5.18d).
Selective dissolution is restricted to less stable mineralogies and, in places, to strain boundaries within grains (McBride, 1985); it results in intragranular, or partial intragranular, secondary porosity (Schmidt et al., 1977).
This enhanced porosity will only be effective if there is either a considerable proportion of the mineral, or minerals, susceptible to dissolution, so forming a connection between isolated intragranular pore spaces, or if there is an existing intergranular porosity.
For example, the common dissolution of isolated evaporite minerals forms isolated, secondary pore spaces (Fig. 5.36c) which rarely enhance the effective porosity of a sediment.
This contrasts with Fig. 5.36(d), where selective dissolution of some ooids, together with subsequent brittle collapse of the supporting framework, has formed an interconnecting fracture porosity.
It is very important to detail the amount of mineral dissolution that has taken place in the subsurface, especially where measurements of modal composition (Section 5.2.2) or provenance estimates (Section 5.2.4) are being made.
McBride (1985,1986) detailed dissolution and grain modification from the zone of weathering to the deep subsurface of heavy mineral grains, rock fragments and feldspars, resulting in an apparent composition very different from the original (Fig. 5.37).
Dissolution of diagnostic minerals, together with alteration of others, can significantly modify original grain composition, particularly as the original grain can rarely be confidently identified (e.g. Fig. 5.36b).
Modal composition and provenance studies can therefore only be partially accurate in many siliciclastic formations.
Furthermore, the amount of dissolution/alteration must be assessed separately for each formation studied.
5.3.5 Alteration and replacement fabrics
Dissolution in the subsurface is commonly associated with mineral alteration and replacement.
Within the subsurface, many minerals are altered to form either new minerals, or a new suite of minerals (commonly clay minerals) which grow on, or adjacent to, the site of the precursor grain or cement   (e.g. Fig. 5.28).
In contrast, replacive fabrics result both from the growth, during diagenesis, of individual, isolated crystals, or clusters of these minerals, and from large-scale or complete replacement of a pre-existing fabric.
Replacement fabrics also result from the recrystallization of the alteration products of metastable minerals.
These fabrics result from temperature and pressure increases and from interaction with migrating pore fluids, although alteration does not necessarily require the introduction of additional ions within these fluids.
ALTERATION FABRICS
During the temperature and pressure increases through burial and during migration of pore waters, many previously-stable minerals, or minerals which were deposited and buried too rapidly to become in equilibrium with surface temperatures and pressures, are brought into a regime where they are unstable in the prevailing conditions.
These minerals break down to form more stable products, generally in the site of the original mineral (e.g. Fig. 5.16c); common examples are heavy minerals where, in US Gulf Coast sandstones, the degree of alteration has been related to burial depths (Fig. 5.38)(data of Milliken in McBride, 1985).
Alteration of feldspars to clay minerals (Fig. 5.16c) and of aragonite to low Mg calcite (Fig. 5.39a) also occurs.
Unless later modified (e.g. Fig. 5.18d), alteration fabrics are recognizable as they mimic the form of the precursor mineral, even although the original texture is commonly destroyed to some extent.
INDIVIDUAL MINERAL REPLACEMENT FABRICS
Replacive minerals grow in the place of earlier mineral phases.
They commonly cut across preexisting grain and cement boundaries (Fig. 5.39b) and thus can be seen to post-date all phases they traverse.
Most individual replacive minerals have euhedral, planar crystallographic faces although they may contain inclusions, remnants of their precursor phases (e.g. Figs 5.12d and 5.39c, d).
Many have crystal forms much larger than their precursors; they therefore destroy the original fabric (Fig. 5.39b)(e.g. Assereto & folk , 1980).
However, some fabric retention may be achieved through abundant inclusions, although this is not always immediately apparent (Fig. 5.40a, b).
True fabric retention is rare with individual replacement minerals, although it    does occur where the replacive phase mimics the precursor mineral.
LARGE-SCALE REPLACEMENT FABRICS
Large-scale replacement can be either fabric-retentive (Fig. 5.40c) or fabric-destructive (Fig. 5.4()d).
Large-scale replacement occurs where sediments are reactive; it is common in evaporites (where fabrics are similar to many metamorphic textures), carbonates, volcaniclastics and, to a lesser degree, greywackes.
Volcaniclastic sediments are extremely susceptible to alteration and dissolution.
Mathisen (1984) documented secondary porosity enhancement of 40% in Plio-Pleistocene volcaniclastic sandstones from Indonesia in addition to alteration of many of the original grains and cements (e.g. feldspars, volcanic fragments, zeolites); this has occurred in burial depths of only 400–900 m.
In greywackes there is commonly little secondary porosity generation, but considerable mineral alteration and recrystallization takes place within both rock fragments and matrix (Brenchley, 1969).
Where there is a monominerallic, or near-monominerallic, precursor fabric, as in carbonates and evaporites, replacement is commonly by a single mineral.
Replacement within evaporite sequences is common, especially where potassium-rich minerals are present.
Evaporites also replace large amounts of adjacent carbonate sediment (Fig. 5.40e), although the volume of carbonate replaced is difficult to ascertain.
Harwood (1986) estimated that some 2–3 m of the uppermost Permian Cadeby Formation has been replaced by (former) anhydrite within the subsurface of Yorkshire, but in other carbonate formations within the Zechstein Basin more considerable amounts of replacement have probably taken place.
One common form of large-scale replacement in carbonate sediments is dolomitization (Fig. 5.40c, d).
TIMING OF DISSOLUTION, ALTERATION AND REPLACEMENT
The timing of dissolution, alteration and replacement can be established relative to other diagenetic events.
For example, Loucks, Dodge & galloway (1984) demonstrated feldspar dissolution to have taken place after the formation of quartz overgrowth cements in some US Gulf Coast Lower Tertiary sandstones, whereas, in similar sandstones, Siebert, Moucure & lahann (1984) showed feldspar dissolution occurred after calcite cementation but before hydrocarbon maturation and migration.
Moore & druckman (1981) detailed late, non-selective dissolution of carbonate sediments, in advance of hydrocarbon migration.
Although existing carbonate phases may be dissolved by non-organic acids within the pore fluids, feldspar dissolution necessitates aluminium complexing, only possible with some organic constituent of the pore fluids (Surdam, Boese & Crossey, 1984; Ednam & surdam , 1986; Meshri, 1986).
Such dissolution related to hydrocarbon migration has been documented to take place within the deep subsurface, but other selective and non-selective dissolution can take place at various depths, depending more on the efficiency of pore fluid migration and pore fluid chemistry.
Considerable dissolution is unconformity-related, where active meteoric circulation can remove less stable mineralogies, particularly evaporites, some carbonate phases and weathered silicates.
If a grain or cement retains its form during alteration it is sometimes very difficult to determine when that alteration took place, unless it can be linked to other dissolution/replacement phases.
Only if the alteration product is otherwise modified is it possible to fit the alteration precisely into the diagenetic history of the sediment.
Similar problems occur when a sediment has been completely replaced, particularly when replacement has destroyed the original texture.
Dravis & yurewicz (1985) found that blue light emission spectroscopy aided identification of predolomitization fabrics; Goodall & hughes (1985, personal communication) successfully used this technique in evaporite petrography.
Cathodoluminescence petrography (Chapter 6) may also help to ‘see through’ complete replacement fabrics.
Individual mineral replacement fabrics are, on the whole, easier to place in a diagenetic sequence (e.g. Fig. 5.41a, b, c) as relationships with preexisting diagenetic events are visible.
5.3.6 Diagenetic potential
Many sediments are more susceptible than others to change during diagenesis.
The diagenetic changes which take place within a supermature quartz sandstone are limited; quartz overgrowth cements may form, but, unless pore fluids are extremely aggressive, neither dissolution, alteration nor replacement of detrital quartz grains are likely to occur.
The presence of feldspar grains within a sandstone renders it more susceptible to change during diagenesis as alteration, replacement or dissolution of these grains may take place.
Feldspar grains therefore have a higher diagenetic potential than quartz grains, particularly to chemical change; mechanically, they are almost as rigid as quartz grains when fresh.
Other minerals (e.g. pyroxenes, amphiboles, micas and many rock fragments) have a considerably higher potential for alteration and dissolution and are also less rigid.
On a quartz-feldspar-rock fragments triangular diagram these more susceptible minerals plot together in one corner.
Sandstones with compositions which plot in this area are therefore much more susceptible to diagenetic change than those with compositions nearer a quartzose sandstone (Fig. 5.42); they thus have a much higher diagenetic potential.
Carbonate and evaporite sediments also have a high diagenetic potential.
Many modern carbonate sediments are a mixture of aragonite and high Mg calcite, minerals which are theoretically unstable at surface temperatures and pressures.
During early diagenesis these minerals rapidly change to low Mg calcite, either by dissolution/reprecipitation or by alteration.
However, many ancient carbonates, particularly those in the Palaeozoic, have a somewhat lower diagenetic potential, being initially dominantly high and/or low Mg calcite.
Evaporite sediments have a yet higher diagenetic potential than modern carbonate sediments, producing a near-metamorphic fabric.
The diagenetic fabric of a sedimentary rock is therefore largely dependent on the original sediment composition, although fluctuating pore fluid compositions may govern the rate, the extent and the relative timing of diagenetic reactions.
5.4 CONCLUSIONS
Petrographic examination of thin sections can therefore reveal much information about the depositional and diagenetic history of the sediment.
Recording of these data in a systematic manner is vital to its interpretation.
This is best done by systematically working through a given series of points on a data           sheet (Figs 5.43a, b and 44), particularly at the start of a project.
Data compiled in this way can then be used by co-workers to combine results into a more regional synthesis than otherwise possible.
Familiarity with a certain sediment type, however, can lead to abbreviated data sheets, containing only those aspects present in those sediments, which, in turn, may lead to unusual or less common fabrics being overlooked.
Unfortunately, experience is the best guide to fabric interpretation, and this can only be obtained by study of many different sediment types.
The combination of depositional and diagenetic   fabrics therefore creates a complex texture within a sediment, representing both sedimentation events and events which have taken place during diagenesis.
These events are closely linked to the setting and evolution of the containing sedimentary basin with burial diagenetic events representing different stages of basin history.
Petrofabric evaluation should therefore form an integral part of any study of basin evolution.
As modern weathering masks many of these textures, petrographic studies are best carried out on subsurface samples wherever possible, particularly if samples are to be chemically analysed later.
The study of petrographic fabrics forms the basis for later analytical research, both chemically and isotopically.
Diagenetic fabrics are also linked to subsurface porosity evolution and hydrocarbon migration and closer future links with organic geochemists will evaluate potential interrelationships between these events.
Perhaps the one point that should be emphasized is that extreme care should be taken in documentation and interpretation of petrofabrics, as one can be easily misled by what appears to be a straightforward thin section (Fig. 5.45)!
6 Cathodoluminescence microscopy
JOHN MILLER
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Luminescence is the emission of light from a solid which is ‘excited’ by some form of energy.
The term broadly includes the commonly-used categories of fluorescence and phosphorescence.
Fluorescence is said to occur where emission ceases almost immediately after withdrawal of the exciting source and where there is no thermal cause, whereas in phosphorescence the emission decays for some time after removal of excitation.
The distinction between these so-called types of luminescence is somewhat arbitrary and confusing; for example, many minerals have very long post-excitation decay times.
Confusion is avoided by using the term luminescence, and specifying the activating energy as a descriptive prefix.
Thus roentgenoluminescence is produced by X-rays, photoluminescence by light (e.g. ultra-violet) and cathodoluminescence (CL) results from excitation by electrons.
Thermoluminescence results from heating.
Luminescence has been known in geological materials since 1604, when the alchemist Cascierolo described light emission from barite.
Nowadays the phenomenon is very familiar: CL provides our television pictures from excitation of chemical phosphors by the cathode-ray tube's electron beam.
CL of minerals was first investigated systematically by Crooks (1880), who sealed diamonds, rubies and other gems into a discharge tube and observed their brilliant emission colours.
This work was not followed up thoroughly by geologists until the advent of the analytical electron microprobe (Smith & stenstrom , 1965).
The small beam size and poor optics of the microprobe were restrictive, however, and it was quickly realized that a simple device specifically designed for CL petrography was required.
Long & agrell (1965) and Sippel & glover (1965) both published descriptions of such a device, which could be attached to a petrographic microscope for examination of thin sections.
There are now several commercial luminescence machines available, mostly developments of these early designs.
Ultra-violet fluorescence microscopy is often used in examination of hydrocarbon residues in sediments (e.g. Burruss, Cercone & harris , 1985).
Polished thin section surfaces are required, and a special microscope with UV source and quartz lenses is needed, such as used for immunological work in many biological laboratories.
Various wavelengths of UV can be selected by means of filters, and filters can be interposed when viewing the emission.
Hydrocarbon inclusions show strong luminescence, the colour varying with the gravity of the oil.
Recrystallized organic-rich fossils, such as renalcid microorganisms in reefs, may show up very well under UV, whereas they may be invisible in transmitted light and CL.
Dravis & yurewicz (1985) have shown that in some limestones, cement generations and fine crystal growth zoning can be revealed by UV.
Certainly UV microscopy is attractive because it does not require elaborate vacuum arrangements, but inorganic materials such as calcite often show only very weak UV luminescence, so UV microscopy is not a general substitute for CL work.
Sedimentologists have now found a wide variety of applications for CL, and it has become a very important tool for petrographic analysis.
Nevertheless, despite the growing volume of publications reporting CL results, there is still much fundamental work to be done on understanding the precise causes and significance of luminescence phenomena in geological situations.
It is therefore essential to have at least a general knowledge of the physical background of CL to avoid serious misinterpretation.
6.2 PHYSICAL EXPLANATION OF LUMINESCENCE
6.2.1 Excitation factors
An explanation of luminescence was not forthcoming until the development of quantum theory.
Quantum approaches to luminescence are outlined by Nickel (1978), Marfunin (1979) and Walker  (1985).
The energy of a beta-ray (electron) is sufficient to excite an atom or molecule and cause a quantum jump, with the input energy being totally absorbed.
After a short delay time (10 -8 s) the excited atom or molecule returns to its former energy state and may emit radiation in the form of light, alpha-, beta- or gamma-rays.
The wavelength of the emitted radiation is always longer than that of the exciting radiation.
For geological purposes, we are usually only interested in emission in the visible spectrum, although it should be noted that a proportion of emission in some minerals may be in the infra-red or ultra-violet (e.g. in feldspars).
The intensity of CL is a function of current density at the specimen and the voltage (accelerating potential) of the applied electron beam.
The relationship of luminescence intensity to electron beam intensity is not a simple linear one, however, and moreover varies within the mineral families (Coy-yll, 1970).
Coy-yll (1970) also showed that, for a given crystalline solid, there is a point at which increasing the electron beam current ceased to produce greater luminescence intensity; he termed this the saturation level.
Increasing beam energy beyond this level actually produces a decrease in luminescence intensity; this is the inhibition phase.
For a given current, saturation occurs with beams of about 8 kV potential in feldspars but at more than 16 kV with quartz.
In practical terms this means that attempting to elicit more luminescence from a mineral by simply increasing beam power can have the reverse effect if the saturation level is exceeded.
Overly powerful beams are also likely to have a local heating effect, causing thermoluminescence.
Thermoluminescence and CL spectra may then combine, giving a false impression of the luminescence colour.
Intense, narrowly-focussed beams may also cause local heating to the point of incandescence, particularly with micas, which flare and collapse.
Further damage to preparations caused by local heating includes blistering of thin section bonding resins and even cracking of the glass slide.
Within that part of a sample bombarded by electrons (the ‘reaction volume’), there are many effects other than cathodoluminescence.
Secondary, backscattered and auger electrons are produced, as well as X-rays.
With suitable detectors, in scanning electron microscopes or microprobes, some of these effects can be used for analytical or imaging purposes.
However, in cold cathode luminescence machines (see below), many ions are produced in addition to the electrons.
These also enter the reaction volume and can induce damage in the uppermost layers of a thin section by remobilizing elements and homogenizing luminescence activators (see Section 6.2.2).
Therefore, a thin section remaining in the beam for a long time may show a decrease in luminescence intensity as ionic-bombardment and thermal diffusion take place.
According to Remond, Le Gressus & okuzumi (1979), this change in CL is irreversible and the affected section must be repolished, removing the damaged layer.
Certain minerals are very susceptible to irradiation damage, and may become permanently coloured after removal from the electron beam.
For example, halite is ‘electron-stained’ blue in a few minutes, and Dickson (1980) reported a stable purple colouration in  electron-bombarded fluorospar.
6.2.2 Luminescence centres
An excellent summary of the present knowledge of CL generation in minerals is given by Walker (1985), and only a simplified outline follows here.
At any temperature, a real crystalline solid is in a state of dynamic unrest, with the various electrons and atoms in its lattice vibrating about their mean positions.
This state of energy is called ‘ground state’.
Few crystals are perfect.
During normal growth, they may acquire defects from distorted internal structure between mosaic crystals, suffer omission defects where grounds of atoms or molecules are missing from lattice sites, have charge displacements (for example where there are abnormally ionized atoms), or undergo mechanical damage such as formation of distorted surfaces and cracks.
Upon excitation by an electron beam, such local sites of crystal imperfection are more liable to absorb energy from the beam than are neighbouring lattice sites.
The domains of imperfection become luminescence centres; they preferentially trap energy from the cathode beam which induces ‘jumps’ in their lattice electron orbitals.
On subsequent decay to the resting state, photons are emitted and luminescence occurs.
The excitation-emission process is often temperature dependent.
Cooling samples with liquid nitrogen, for example, increases CL efficiency in some minerals such as quartz, producing much greater luminescence intensity for a given beam energy.
Other minerals, such as calcite, tend to emit less on cooling.
Also, cooling can produce spectral  shifts in emission wavelength, so although it may have potential uses for geological applications where CL emission at room temperature is meagre, the full effects of cooling are at present poorly known and the technique cannot be recommended as a regular practice for petrographic purposes.
Luminescence centres may occur in two general forms: intrinsic and extrinsic.
Intrinsic centres are due to lattice imperfections such as growth distortions and other electronic lattice defects, acquired independently of the composition of the precipitating medium.
Extrinsic centres are those acquired from the parent medium during crystallization, such as impurities in surface, regular lattice and interstitial sites, or compositional inhomogeneities between different parts of a crystal.
In practice, it may be very difficult to determine the principal cause of CL in a mineral, as often there are complex interactions between extrinsic and intrinsic centres.
Extrinsic luminescence centres may behave differently depending on their response to electron beam excitation, and the following types can be distinguished:
(1)
Activator centres: those where  radioactive transitions (luminescence) are highly probable as the energized centre returns to its ground state.
(2)
Trap centres: those where additional energy is required to raise the energy state sufficiently to produce luminescence on transition to the ground state.
(3)
Quencher centres: where even the excited state of the centre is close to a radiationless transition level, so little or no luminescence is emitted.
Extrinsic luminescence centres are the best known, and perhaps the easiest to detect by geochemical analysis, whereas the causes of intrinsic CL require detailed crystallographic and solid state physical investigation.
Transition metal ions are the commonest activator impurities causing extrinsic CL, substituting in crystal lattices for normal ions with appropriate ionic radii.
Rare earth elements, such as Eu 3 +, Sm 3 + and Dy 3 +, are also implicated as inducing activator centres (Mariano & Ring, 1975).
In geological materials, luminescence is commonly controlled by the balance of activator and quencher centres.
For example, Mn 2 + is the main activator causing luminescence in calcite, whereas Fe2 + is a quencher in the same mineral.
However, there is no guarantee that activator or quencher elements will always have the same effect in different minerals; for example, Fe 2 + is an activator in some feldspars, despite the quenching activity of Fe in calcite.
The colour (wavelength) and intensity of CL may also vary according to the sites in the crystal lattice where activator ion substitutions occur.
Because of interactions between activators and quenchers, and between intrinsic and extrinsic luminescence centres, it is often difficult to be certain of the cause of luminescence in a given mineral.
Nickel (1978) and Amieux (1982) summarized known emission colours and activators for many minerals but, in our present state of knowledge, these data should only be used as a guide.
Depending on the activator, a single excited mineral may radiate at several different wavelengths; for example, apatite CL may be green, yellow, pink, violet or white, with a variety of rare earths acting as activators.
Activator and quencher ions may produce their effects at extremely low concentrations, below the detection limits of the electron microprobe.
Analytical techniques such as atomic absorption spectrophotometry and neutron activation analysis may be required for quantitative determination at such low levels.
The surest method of identification of CL-activating ions is by analysing luminescence excitation spectra (Walker, 1983, 1985) and combining this with studies of emission spectra (Mariano & ring , 1975).
6.3 EQUIPMENT
There several ways of generating electron beams under vacuum: by stripping electrons from a hot filament; utilizing field effect or corona discharge from metal points; or by generating a plasma across a low pressure gas using a cold metal cathode disc.
Zinkernagel (1978) and Ramseyer (1983) described a hot filament luminescence apparatus especially suitable for observation of very dull emission from quartz.
While this equipment gives good results with such difficult cases, it is bulky and expensive, difficult to construct and maintain, and requires a high vacuum from diffusion pumps.
Cold cathode machines are much less complex, easily mounted on a standard petrographic microscope and perfectly suited to most sedimentological requirements.
They offer the advantages of cheapness, ease of operation and simple maintenance, and are ideal for routine petrographic purposes.
Commercial CL machines (Figs 6.1 and 6.2) use the cold cathode method at present.
With the cold cathode system (Fig. 6.1), there are always sufficient positive£ ions in the vicinity of the specimen to prevent it acquiring a space charge, eliminating the need for pre-treatment of samples by evaporating a conductive coating on to them.
Since a steady leak of gas must be maintained for plasma generation, a small rotary vacuum pump is adequate.
In contrast to hot filament cathode systems, a sudden loss of vacuum causes no damage to the equipment.
Beams can also be established at low accelerating voltages, thus reducing the risk of specimen damage.
There are, however, a number of disadvantages to cold cathode systems.
Delicate arrangements are required to maintain the controlled gas leak and these are prone to wear and maintenance problems.
The discharge plasma produces a blue glow which may interfere with luminescence observation, particularly with meagre emitters such as quartz: this problem may be overcome by using helium rather than air as the leak gas.
Because of the presence of gas (usually air) in the system, a stream of positive and negative ions is also generated and this may induce sample damage.
All of these effects mean that cold cathode equipment, while eminently convenient for qualitative work, is unsuitable for making reliable and precise observations on CL intensity and emission wavelengths (see Section 6.5).
For this purpose a new generation of hot cathode machines must be developed.
6.3. 1 Operation
Figure 6.1 shows a schematic cross-section of a typical CL apparatus.
The electron beam is generated by applying a potential up to 30 kV between a small tungsten steel cathode disc and an annular anode which lie within an evacuated glass tube.
At low pressures, a plasma is established with a discharge of positive ions travelling towards the cathode.
An electron beam (together with some negative ions) is emitted in the opposite direction, attracted towards the collimating anode and passing through its central hole.
In the Nuclide Luminoscope® (Fig.   6.1), the beam then passes through a focussing coil, which carries a variable DC voltage to give control over the beam size impinging on the specimen.
Narrow beams with high current density can be used for observation with high magnification lenses or on samples with poor CL; the beam can be also expanded to cover an area of several square centimetres for macro-photography of small slabs or large thin sections.
The electrons are deflected down on to the specimen by a pair of adjustable magnets attached to a movable carriage on the top of the specimen chamber.
In the Technosyn equipment, the gun is arranged so that the beam fires obliquely down on to the specimen (Fig. 6.2) and these magnets are not needed.
A focussing coil is not required, and as the beam cross-section is relatively constant, the current density at the specimen surface is also relatively constant.
There are some advantages to a lateral gun position and focussing device; larger viewing windows can be accommodated so that greater sample areas may be excited by de-focussing the beam, and the occurrence of sample damage by direct bombardment is lessened.
Samples are placed on a glass tray supported on an X-Y bearing carriage.
They can thus be moved in any direction across the microscope stage.
Viewing may be by transmitted light, CL, or a combination of the two, observed through a lead glass window which absorbs X-radiation.
The equipment should be used in a well-darkened room, and a red photographic safelight usefully provides illumination for operating and note-taking without disturbing the worker's ‘night-vision’, which is essential for observation of low intensity CL.
During excitation, samples are heated and begin to outgas, producing more ions and concomitantly increasingly the electron beam current, which if unchecked will reach a preset level within the power unit and cause the high tension to be switched off to protect the gun.
The art of achieving a steady-state beam depends on balancing the controlled gas leak and the sample outgassing with the continuous pump evacuation at a given beam voltage.
Sample changing is rapid.
The beam is turned off, the vacuum valve closed and the chamber vented to air.
Several samples can often be placed in the chamber at once, depending on their size.
For viewing with higher magnification lenses, which are necessarily of shorter working distance, a recessed window is usually required to accommodate the smaller working distance of the lens.
6.3.2 Microscopes for cathodoluminescence
It is of capital importance that the microscope upon which CL equipment is mounted should be of the highest possible transmissivity.
Because most petrological microscopes are designed for use with transmitted light which can be provided at any required intensity, manufacturers mostly pay little attention to this parameter.
Luminescence is rarely more than 1% efficient and thus of comparatively low intensity.
Marshall (1980) investigated the behaviour of several microscopes with CL samples.
He found that the controlling factors were the magnifications and numerical apertures of eyepieces and objectives, transmission of individual optical elements, and other details of the optical path, including prisms, splitters and polarizers.
The optimum system for CL should have as few optical elements and lens/air surfaces as possible, with good coatings on lens surfaces.
Therefore, monocular microscopes with ‘straight through’ ray paths have the greatest transmissivity.
It is recommended that several microscopes  meeting the criteria outlined above should be tried, using a fairly dull CL subject such as a sandstone sample, before deciding on one which will be dedicated to the CL equipment.
For those setting up a CL unit for the first time, and considering purchasing a new microscope, the inexpensive Olympus POS Student Microscope has one of the best transmissivities.
However, it is a simple monocular design and suffers slightly from pin-cushion distortion, but makes a good general-purpose CL microscope where low cost is important.
If long-term viewing comfort and high quality flat-field optics are required, a stripped-down version of the Nikon binocular petrological microscope is recommended (Fig. 6.2), where there is a ‘straight-through’ path for photomicrography.
The objective lenses required for cathodoluminescence must have long working distances, so choice is often limited and prices high.
Measuring or Universal Stage objectives are usually suitable.
However, these are complex multi-element systems, and their transmissivity decreases rapidly with increased magnification.
Some of these lenses appear to have selective absorption at certain wavelengths, and there can be distinct changes in perceived CL colour when such lenses are interchanged during viewing of a single sample.
It is important to carry out some experimentation with various objectives and objective-eyepiece combinations so as to be familiar with the optical properties of the microscope system in use.
To maintain optimum transmissivity, it is also vital to keep viewing windows clean.
Lower window surfaces rapidly become coated with a brown layer of pyrolized hydrocarbons, derived partly from heated resin on thin sections and from vacuum pump oil mist.
The window coating problem is considerably reduced by using a foreline trap on the vacuum system, but the trap filter material must be regularly replaced, otherwise pump-down times are increased.
Window coatings not only impair transmissivity but, as they build up, selectively absorb certain wave-lengths.
Acting as a coloured filter, such coats give a misleading impression of CL colours.
Viewing windows are best cleaned with a pinch of non-abrasive laboratory glass detergent and a damp wad of soft tissue or cloth, taking care to avoid the sealing gasket around the window.
Stubborn deposits may require application of organic solvents such as acetone or petroleum ether, but as these have harmful effects on skin and may also dissolve or harden the window sealing gaskets, they should only be used as a last resort.
6.3.3 Radiation precautions
At the voltages used for CL, electron beams are capable of generating appreciable amounts of X-rays.
Luminescence chambers are designed to cope with this and are tested up to specified voltages with metal targets as samples.
However, it is important to check radiation levels regularly with a geiger counter at worst-case operating levels, paying particular attention to joints and gaskets, particularly around the viewing window and anode.
In European countries the mains supply voltage may fluctuate considerably, often being above any rated working voltage of the CL power pack, so that actual beam voltages may be appreciably higher than those set on the instrument panel.
A potential X-ray hazard could then exist.
If there is any suspicion of fluctuating voltages, instruments should be fitted with stabilized power supplies.
With the Nuclide Luminoscope®, a standard glass coverslip may be used in the recessed viewing window when the thicker lead glass window does not allow the shorter working distance objectives to focus.
This unprotected window provides an X-ray hazard.
It may be covered with a lead foil annulus around the lens barrel, but a much better arrangement is to manufacture brass collars for the high magnification lenses.
These should fit into the well of the recessed window and have a flange which overlaps the edge of the well.
Focussing movements of the objective can then be accommodated without risking radiation scatter.
6.4 SAMPLE PREPARATION
CL observations are usually made on uncovered thin sections.
They must be bonded with thermo-stable epoxy resin (see Chapter 4).
Bonding agents such as Lakeside 70 and Canada Balsam are unsuitable mountants for CL work as they are volatile, causing blistering and rapid charring under the electron beam.
Some epoxy resins also show luminescence (usually yellow) which can interfere with observations.
Polished surfaces give the best optical resolution, and the double polished thin sections described in Chapter 4 are ideal.
If great detail is not required, surfaces can be quite crudely prepared.
Etching of  limestones with dilute acid gives an apparent increase in luminescence intensity, but this is due to points of high relief catching the oblique beam, with shadowing giving an increase in contrast but at the expense of resolution.
Nevertheless, both etched and stained surfaces (see Chapter 4) can be used.
Stained surfaces, however, rapidly fade and acquire a brown discolouration in the beam, so transmitted-light examination and photography of stained samples should be carried out before irradiation.
Mechanically strained or damaged crystals tend to become strong CL emitters, and their luminescent patterns can be mistaken for geologically significant features.
Such artefacts can easily be generated by rapid or crude preparation of thin sections, using coarse abrasives and forcing rocks through diamond-impregnated saw blades.
The gentle and conservative method of high quality thin section preparation described in Chapter 4 is particularly recommended for samples to be investigated with CL.
Scratches, cleavage shattering and other features of mechanical damage in crystals luminesce brightly and can be recognized by experienced observers.
All sample surfaces to be placed in the CL chamber should be dry, clean and free of contamination, including fingerprints as well as dust and lint.
Fibres tend to cast shadows in the beam, wave about or become incandescent, blemishing time exposure photographs.
A blast from a compressed air canister or a jet of petroleum ether across the surface helps to give a contamination-free surface before samples are irradiated.
It is also important to remove all traces of abrasive powders used in sample preparation, because they usually have a bright luminescence themselves and can be mistaken for heavy mineral grains in the sample.
Even the smallest particles of diamond are revealed by their brilliant green emission.
CL is essentially a surface phenomenon.
Beam penetration is proportional to accelerating voltage, and is only a few tens of microns at 18 kV, so 30 µm thin sections are adequate.
Thicker sections may give better heat dissipation for prolonged CL examination.
Ultra-thin sections are not recommended, as the beam may be able to penetrate to the resin or glass and produce anomalous luminescence.
Evaporated conductive coatings are needed only for use with high voltage hot cathode cathodoluminescence instruments.
Slides which have been carbon-coated for probe work, however, can be examined directly in cold cathode equipment; the thin coating offers no impediment to the electron beam.
Depending on the size of the specimen chamber, rock slices can also be examined under CL.
The standard Nuclide Luminoscope® chamber in particular is large enough to take slices over 5 mm in thickness, and there is a special deep version which can take sawn core samples for rapid examination, possibly on site.
Best results are obtained from smoothed surfaces, but even broken faces can give useful information.
Pump-down times are correspondingly increased for these larger and more porous samples, which should be well dried before evacuation.
Single crystals and loose sediment can also be viewed with little preparation.
A rapid and simple technique for checking the mineralogy of placer sands is simply to sprinkle some sand on to the specimen tray glass or on a standard slide and evacuate it in the chamber (Ryan & szabo , 1981).
If there is a tendency for grains to become charged and leap about disconcertingly in the beam, a dried aqueous grain suspension usually has sufficient adhesion.
6.5 INTERPRETATION AND DESCRIPTION OF CL RESULTS
CL colour and brightness are dependent on several factors, including beam voltage, current, surface current density (a function of beam focus), nature of sample surface, time for which sample has previously been irradiated, degree of heating (thermal quenching or emission of thermoluminescence) and the geochemical composition of the sample itself.
Marshall (1978) has suggested a standard for reporting CL results so that comparisons between the results of different workers may be more valid.
With the cold cathode equipment, so many variable factors are involved that there is some doubt whether a true standard can be established (Fairchild, 1983).
However, it certainly facilitates communication and comparison if the observation conditions are reported as Marshall suggested.
Experience has also shown that the same samples can have different appearances under CL in machines from different manufacturers.
Details such as fine zonation in calcite cements may be visible in one case but not in another.
The reasons for this are not fully understood; the metal used for the cathode disc may be a factor, and the angle at which the beam impinges on the specimen surface may be another.
Cold cathode systems may  generate some CL as a result of ion bombardment, and the nature of the ion content of the plasma is likely to be machine-dependent.
Therefore, the type of equipment should be specified as well as the observation conditions.
Problems in communication of results arise from the difficulty of describing CL colours and intensities.
Authors refer to ‘bright’ or ‘dull’luminescence, but such terms are relative to their sample suites and are also highly subjective.
The descriptions depend on the sensitivity of the observer's eye to specific wavelengths, instrumental variation (such as chamber pressure, voltage, beam focus and beam current) and the wavelength-dependent transmission properties of the optical system, including the gradual buildup of brown pyrlysis deposits on the viewing window.
Furthermore, human eyes are uneven in their perception of the visible spectrum, with peaks and troughs in sensitivity across the frequency range.
A significant proportion of the population (mainly males) is also affected with ‘colour-blindness’ of one kind or another, often to a subtle degree which may not be apparent in normal life.
Reporting of colour perception is also subject to variations in linguistic understanding of words for describing colours.
These are learned at an early age and reflect the bias and background of our parents.
Upon asking a number of people to describe the CL colour of a given sample, I have received responses including ‘bright red’, ‘dull orange’, ‘purple-brown’ and ‘crimson’; a red-green colour-blind person perceived ‘grey’.
To help overcome this potentially serious problem, observations should be made under internally consistent operating conditions and descriptions of CL characteristics chosen to be as unambiguous as possible.
Careful photographic recording is most important to support subjective descriptions, but this has problems in itself (see below).
What steps can be taken to minimize subjectivity in recording and reporting CL results?
Several petrographic uses of CL involve comparisons of CL intensities and colours between samples or within different areas of a single sample.
Pierson (1981) suggested that a sample with the brightest observed luminescence be kept in the chamber and used as a reference against which the intensity of other sample areas could be less arbitrarily judged.
He also advocated the use of a colour chart (fig. 21–1 in Pauling, 1970) for determining CL colour.
This colour chart is quite inadequate for registering the subtle range of CL colours, and standard rock colour charts do not contain an appropriate range or scale for comparison either.
Until special colour charts or reference sample scales become available, CL operators can do little more than ensure internal consistency, or attempt to construct a system for quantification of CL intensity and wavelength.
6.5.1 Quantification of CL results
There are many difficulties in designing ways of obtaining meaningful and consistent measurements of CL intensity from extant cold cathode CL equipment.
The current density at the specimen must remain fixed during the observation period, and there is no direct way of measuring this in present CL devices.
Variables such as window and microscope transmissivity must be calibrated.
Since one usually needs to measure emission from only a small area of the viewing field rather than the whole field, a fibre-optic probe inserted in the light path would probably be the best method, with the light-pipe output directed on to a highly sensitive photoelectric cell or photomultiplier, whose output would also have to be calibrated against some standard phosphor.
No commercial equipment for this application exists at present.
Production of a CL emission spectrum is the only way to record and compare CL ‘colours’ objectively.
Mariano & ring (1975) took spectra from feldspars on a Nuclide Luminoscope®.
They used a fibre optic probe of 1250, 700 or 450 µm diameter measurement area, transmitting the CL through an external light pipe to the entrance of a grating monochromator.
The output of the monochromator was detected by a photomultiplier, amplified and then plotted on a wavelength-synchronized x-y recorder.
Spectra were produced by a scanning spectroradiometer which was calibrated against a US Bureau of Standards incandescent standard.
Plots of luminescence intensity against wavelength thus obtained must be corrected for any variations in spectral response of optical fibre, monochromator and photomultiplier.
Although beam conditions should be kept steady while spectral measurements are made, this is less critical than with CL intensity measurements, as CL frequency is not dependent on beam current or voltage.
So far, quantitative measurements have mainly been done in order to discover the nature of the emitting centres, but there is considerable scope for using emission spectra from different growth zones  in crystals as ‘fingerprints’ in establishing carbonate cement stratigraphies (see below) on a more certain and detailed basis.
Clearly, at the present state of the art, both communication and interpretation of CL results in petrography are dominantly subjective.
There is an urgent need to develop quantitative and thus more objective methods for assessing CL intensity and wavelength.
This poses a formidable problem for instrumentation, because of the very low light levels for most CL emission, and the difficulty of keeping beam parameters constant while making the optical measurements.
Hot cathode devices appear to provide much better capabilities for quantification of CL results, and the next generation of instruments may well be built on this principle.
Electron microprobes and scanning electron microscopes are now appearing with custom-designed CL attachments, allowing spectra to be taken and computer-assisted image enhancement processes to be used.
Element analysis and CL can thus be more closely and conveniently linked.
Because of the subjectivity referred to above, interpretations of CL results should therefore be framed critically and cautiously.
Many assumptions are involved: apart from variables inherent in instrumentation, our understanding of activating factors in many minerals is incomplete.
It would be most unwise at present to rely solely on luminescence interpretations of geological phenomena.
The technique should only be used in conjunction with other standard petrographic approaches.
Its greatest strength lies in revealing fabrics and ‘mapping’ compositional variation, rather than in providing direct geochemical information, wherein the greatest uncertainties exist.
6.6 APPLICATIONS
Cathodoluminescence has several general applications in sedimentology:
(1)
Rapid visualization of mineral distribution, where minerals have closely similar optical properties or are very fine-grained.
For example, yellow-orange CL of calcite generally distinguishes it from the darker red-crimson of dolomite, and feldspars are very bright blues, reds or greens compared with subdued violets and browns for quartz grains.
Complex intergrowths of minerals such as halite and sylvite (blue-grey and silver-grey CL respectively) can be easily visualized.
It is essential to be very cautious and check mineral identifications with other techniques, as CL has complex origins and emission colours are rarely diagnostic.
(2)
Fabric and textural characteristics are often more easily visible, especially in recrystallized carbonate rocks (Fig. 6.3).
Fossils in neomorphosed limestones or carbonate-cemented sandstones reappear and can give otherwise unavailable stratigraphic and environmental information (Figs 6.4c, d, 6.5a, b).
Point counts carried out on such rocks under CL may differ significantly from those performed under transmitted light, particularly in the greater proportion of bioclasts detected.
CL makes it much easier to determine if sparry fabrics are of neomorphic or cement origin by displaying growth zones in crystal aggregates (Dickson, 1983).
Sparry crystal aggregates might display the outline of primary void systems under CL (Fig. 6.3a, b), providing more information on porosity evolution than available with transmitted light alone.
(3) Small-scale features, which are difficult or impossible to see in transmitted light microscopy, may be well-displayed with CL.
Fine veins, grain fractures (caused by extension or compaction), and authigenic mineral overgrowths readily become apparent (Fig. 6.5c, d).
(4)
Provenance studies are more exact, since many grain suites carry characteristic luminescence ‘fingerprints’ which can be related to their source rocks (Fig. 6.5f).
The origin of quartz grains can be determined to some degree, and mixing of quartz grains, feldspars and heavy minerals from different sources more easily detected, e.g. Stow & miller (1984), Richter & zinkernagel (1975).
This aspect of CL petrography has received little attention, but it could be extremely valuable in petroleum exploration, giving an extra feature for use in correlation of borehole core sequences and interpretation of their depositional environments.
(5)
Diagenetic and geochemical studies are enhanced by the very fine CL resolution of growth histories in crystals (Fig. 6.4).
Taken together with other evidence, these geochemical variations may indicate variations in groundwater chemistry and burial depths, greatly increasing the resolution of diagenetic histories (e.g. Grover & read , 1983).
(6)
Mechanically induced post-depositional changes in sediments such as compaction, stylolitization and structural deformation can more easily be detected and evaluated with the aid of CL.
6.7 EXAMPLES OF CL USE IN SEDIMENTOLOGY
Exhaustive discussions of the CL properties of minerals are beyond the scope of this chapter, and the reader is referred to the reviews of Nickel (1978), Amieux (1982) and Walker (1985).
Some of the most important petrographic uses of CL are outlined below for the more common sedimentary rock types.
6.7.1 Carbonate rocks
PRINCIPLES
Carbonate minerals give bright and stable luminescence at low accelerating voltages, so limestones and dolomites have attracted much attention from sedimentologists working with CL (Amieux, 1982).
Chemically pure calcite may show a blue CL which is probably due to an intrinsic lattice defect.
Mn +2 is the primary activator and produces yellow to red emission, dominating any low intensity blue peak.
Fe 2 + is the commonest quencher ion, but Ni 2 + has a similar effect.
Complete quenching by Fe produces a black luminescence distinct from non-luminescence (Amieux, 1982); Pierson (1981) found this to occur in dolomites at 1·5 wt. % Fe.
Mostly, however, Mn and Fe tend to co-precipitate in the lattice of carbonate minerals and varying degrees of quenching occur, reducing the intensity of Mn 2 + emission and inducing a brownish colouration according to the quenching.
Amieux (1982, fig. 5) has      related Mn/Fe ratios and their emission colours to geochemical environments, particularly to redox potential changes during crystallization.
Trace elements such as Sm, Dy, Eu, Er, Ce and Pb act as sensitizers or ‘co-activators’, facilitating Mn 2 + activation (Mukherjee, 1948; Schulman et al., 1947; Machel, 1985).
Empirical studies, comparing Mn and Fe contents of calcite and dolomite with their luminescence, have indicated that the Mn/Fe ratio is the main controlling factor influencing CL intensity in these minerals, at Fe 2 + concentrations below 1% (Fairchild, 1983).
Cross-plots of Fe/Mn are given by Fairchild (1983) and Grover & read (1983).
These observations are supported by the correspondence of dull CL with blue ferricyanide stained areas in calcites, where the Prussian Blue precipitate is specific for the Fe 2 + ion.
The CL colours produced in calcite and dolomite by Mn 2 + range from yellow to dark reds and pinks.
Sommer (1972a) determined that with increasing substitution of Mn 2 + into Mg 2 + rather than Ca 2 + sites, the colour tends towards red (see also Amieux, 1982).
Broadly, therefore, low Mg calcites give yellow CL and high Mg calcites are orange to red.
Dolomite is characteristically a ‘brick-red’ colour.
Heavy quenching by Fe was considered by Amieux to produce a dull brown-maroon CL quite distinct from black non-luminescence.
Ten Have & heynen (1985) investigated the incorporation of Mn 2 + into calcite crystals in over 50 crystal synthesis experiments from gels and solutions.
Normal temperatures and pressures were used.
They reported that 15–30 ppm Mn were sufficient to induce luminescence in the synthetic calcites (Fe less than 200 ppm).
Dolomites from the Jurassic of the Middle East and Miocene of the Bahamas were also analysed.
These were found to luminesce when Mn was higher than 30–35 ppm and Fe less than 300 ppm.
A higher level of activator was thus required in dolomite compared to calcite, due to the more efficient luminescence of Mn 2 + when present in the Ca 2 + lattice sites than when substituting Mg 2 + sites.
In dolomite, Mn 2 + largely occupies the Mg 2 + sites (Sommer, 1972b).
The minimum amount of Mn 2 + activator for CL is thus lower in calcite than in dolomite.
Many of the synthetic calcites produced in the experimental work displayed zonation in CL comparable to that found in many natural carbonate crystals.
Variations in CL intensity in the zones were related to variations in their Mn content.
Ten Have & heynen suggested that differential Mn uptake during crystal growth may be caused by two processes:
(1)
Changes in the bulk chemical composition of the precipitating solution, such as an increase in its Mn content during crystal growth.
(2)
Changes in the rate of crystal growth related to variations in the supersaturation level of the solution.
While the crystals were growing slowly, the lattice was able to ‘sweep out’ impurities such as the Mn activator ions and thus exhibit less luminescence.
More Mn was incorporated during rapid crystal growth.
Both processes resulted in similar CL zonation patterns.
This implies that variations in CL intensity need not necessarily reflect changes in bulk pore fluid composition.
However, the experimental growth rates are probably much higher than those encountered under geological conditions, but this effect should be born in mind.
CEMENT STRATIGRAPHY
One of the commonest applications of CL in carbonate rocks is in revealing successive stages or zones of void-filling cements with far greater precision than that possible with optical microscopy.
Cement stratigraphy (Fig. 6.4) involves the application of stratigraphic principles at an inter-granular and void level, correlating stages of cementation within a given basin of sedimentation.
Meyers (1974, 1978) pioneered cement stratigraphy, demonstrating that ‘zones’ of carbonate cements, as revealed by their CL and other petrographic characteristics, could be correlated both vertically and regionally in the Mississippian of the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico.
Grover & read (1983) performed a similar study in the Ordovician of Virginia, and related the sequence to diagenetic changes resulting from changes in formation water composition during shallow and deep burial.
Walkden & berry (1984) correlated CL zones in overgrowth cements from the Upper Dinantian of northern Britain, and ascribed them to cyclic replenishment of vadose and shallow meteoric water tables in calcretized marine limestones.
Miller & gillies (in press) discussed the principles and practise of cement stratigraphy, especially the confused and varied terminology existing in the literature.
In order to improve communication and comparison of CL results, they suggested standard terms for cement sequences, using numbered stages, sub-stages and zones, divided on the basis of unconformities, crystal habit and composition.
Further, they noted a tendency to concentrate on cement stratigraphies to the exclusion of many other diagenetic events, such as dissolution, compaction, stylolitization, neomorphism and mineralization.
Instead, they emphasized that the detailed cement sequences revealed by CL could be used as a time framework upon which to locate other diagenetic events, providing a complete ‘diagenetic stratigraphy’.
This provides a powerful tool for analysis of post-depositional changes in sedimentary rocks.
Uncertainties exist in our present interpretation of CL and its relation to the geochemistry of carbonate precipitation from pore fluids.
Carbonate minerals are also inherently unstable and liable to both obvious and subtle alteration during diagenesis.
Therefore, additional criteria, such as evidence of dissolution or fracturing, changes in crystal habit, inclusions, carbon/oxygen isotope  ratios and accurate geochemical analyses of individual luminescent zones using microprobe, AAS and neutron activation techniques must be integrated with CL results.
This involves very precise, tedious work, often using very small samples of cements for analysis.
At the very least, the precaution of staining thin sections with Alizarin Red S and potassium ferricyanide (Chapter 4) is required as a rapid and sensitive method of determining whether variation in CL intensity is likely to be due to fluctuations in Mn activator or to the presence of Fe as a quencher.
Generally, CL work is done in conjunction with microprobe analysis performed on the same thin sections.
CL cannot be used alone for other than general interpretations of cement histories.
Studies of cement sequences must pay particular attention to veining phases.
Many post-burial cement generations can be linked to specific sets of veins, some of which are extremely fine and are only visible with CL.
Commonly, later stages of cements precipitated during veining episodes may induce neomorphism of earlier cements, replacing them partially or completely, or may merely precipitate films of new material along crystal interfaces between existing cements.
In all cases this leads to a pronounced change in the CL of the affected cements which is an important element in the diagenetic event stratigraphy.
Large thin sections (see Chapter 4) are important for this work, as veins and their conjunction with voids are often missed in small samples.
It is also necessary specifically to select veined material for study, hitherto not a regular practise in traditional carbonate petrography.
Studies of stable isotopes in carbonate minerals and skeletal materials can provide valuable environmental and diagenetic information.
Prior examination of material to be sampled for stable isotope analysis with CL enables selection of areas uncontaminated by neomorphism or inter-crystal infiltration as described above.
6.7.2 Sandstones
QUARTZ
The causes of CL in quartz are not yet fully determined (Walker, 1985).
Alpha quartz shows visible CL with two broad emission bands in the blue and red (Zinkernagel, 1978).
Various authors have attributed these emissions to Ti and Mn respectively but, as Walker (1985) pointed out, the spectral bands are present in highly pure synthetic silica, and it seems certain that emission is intrinsic rather than due to impurities.
CL from natural quartz is characteristically thermally unstable.
Heating collapses the blue spectral peak, causing the violet luminescence to shift towards red.
This presents a major problem for observation of quartz grains under an electron beam: its heating effect can quickly cause the red colouration to be assumed.
High accelerating voltages and current densities speed the change, which is permanent.
It may be very difficult to obtain accurate colour photographs of quartz luminescence because the shift to red may occur during the time of exposure.
Zinkernagel showed that natural quartz grains have a luminescence which apparently reflects their source (or, more correctly, their thermal history).
Broadly, violet CL is typical of igneous sources, but brown grains originate in certain types of metamorphic rocks (Fig. 6.5f).
This scheme of provenance using CL was further elaborated by Matter & ramseyer (1985).
Quartz overgrowths and other forms of authigenic quartz are commonly non-luminescent under normal CL conditions (Fig. 6.5d), while zoned CL is typical of grains derived from hydrothermal veinquartz.
CL is thus a very sensitive method of determining presence and timing of pore occlusion by quartz authigenesis, particularly where there are no obvious dust-rims on grain cores.
Owing to the thermal instability described above, with violet grains easily becoming brown while in  the electron beam, much care and some skill is needed to distinguish quartz CL colours successfully.
Given this, CL affords a rapid means of detecting different quartz grain populations in sandstones and in ascertaining their provenance.
The different shades of violet and brown in a grain population probably represent various grain sources, since there is no evidence that crystal orientation exerts significant control over CL wavelength and intensity in quartz.
Of course, it is wise to check the other properties of the grains, such as inclusions and type of extinction, to gain confirmation of CL determinations.
Sippel (1968) and Sibley & blatt (1976) have applied CL in investigations of silica authigenesis in sandstones.
Burley, Kantorowicz & waugh (1985) suggested how CL may profitably be combined with other techniques in elucidating diagenesis of clastic rocks.
FELDSPARS
The causes of CL in this mineral group are relatively well-known from investigations on lunar rocks (Geake et al., 1977) and carbonatites (Mariano, Ito & ring , 1973).
Feldspars have low CL thresholds and are thus obvious even at low accelerating voltages.
Typical CL colours are brilliant blue (possibly Ti 2 + activation), red to infra-red (Fe 3 + substitution for A 13 +) and green (Mn 2 + substitution probably for Ca 2 +).
Feldspar CL is polarized and some intensity variation is seen upon rotation of a polaroid sheet interposed between the viewing window and the microscope eyepiece.
This property often helps to distinguish feldspars from other minerals of similar CL colour.
In general, authigenic feldspars are non-luminescent or very dully luminescent (Kastner, 1971), serving to differentiate detrital cores from their overgrowths.
In terms of provenance, there is no evidence to suggest that feldspar CL is related to specific igneous or metamorphic origins.
However, the presence of feldspar ‘suites’ containing consistent proportions of the rarer red and/or green emitter grains amongst the common blue emitters can be used to trace particular sources of clastic feldspar supply (e.g. Stow & miller , 1984).
Because even the smallest feldspar grains luminesce brightly, a far more accurate estimate of the percentage of feldspar in a clastic sediment is obtained by point-counting under CL.
This is particularly true for fine sandstones and siltstones.
Even grains which are badly weathered or altered still register the typical emission.
HEAVY MINERALS
Many accessory minerals of clastic rocks contain at least traces of rare earth or transition metal impurities and are therefore liable to luminesce.
Nickel (1978) listed the known CL characteristics of such minerals.
Apatites give particularly bright CL, with europium a common activator (Mariano & ring , 1975).
Apatite emissions range from bluish-violet, lilac, pink and orange to yellow.
Portnov & Gorobets (1969) have proposed that certain of these colours are related to particular igneous or metamorphic origins.
If this can be confirmed, it would be an invaluable adjunct to provenance studies.
Again, the small size of many heavy mineral grains means that they are often overlooked and easily underestimated in transmitted light petrography of clastic rocks.
Invariably, use of CL produces an often surprising re-evaluation of the importance of accessory grains.
CEMENTS AND DIAGENESIS
Carbonate cements are commonly involved in occlusion of sandstone porosity (Fig. 6.5b, f).
Their mineralogy and sequence of development are more accurately followed by using CL than by transmitted light alone (see above).
Other diagenetic features such as corrosion of quartz grains by carbonate, relative timing of quartz overgrowth formation and cementation and the onset of dolomitization can also be rapidly documented with CL.
Authigenic kaolinite or dickite commonly form late stage cements in sandstones (Fig. 6.5f, Burley et al., 1985, fig. 7f), and they usually have a brilliant royal blue CL, whose origin is unknown.
The extent and timing of these cements and their relationship to compaction and tectonic events, such as extension veining, is much more easily appreciated under CL than with transmitted light microscopy.
A good example of the combined use of CL, SEM and transmitted light petrography in documenting the provenance and diagenetic history of a Jurassic reservoir sandstone is given by Olaussen et al.(1984).
6.8 PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORDING OF CL
Prior to the realization that high transmissivity microscopes were mandatory for successful CL work, photography of CL was extremely difficult and the results highly variable.
Minerals giving very low intensity emission, such as quartz grains, required many minutes or even hours of exposure with fast films.
Generally, these films were working at luminance ranges beyond their zones of reciprocity failure, resulting in poor resolution, low contrast and indifferent colour rendition.
Good microscope transmissivity, aided by straight-through light paths between objective and film, means that slower (and thus finer-grained) films can now be used, working well within their optimum exposure ranges.
Most petrological microscopes can be fitted with photomicrography accessories which allow automatic exposure determination (Fig. 6.3).
The large viewing window of the Nuclide Luminoscope® also allows the use of a 55 mm f/3·5 macro lens directly mounted on a camera body to take pictures of whole thin sections or slabs under CL.
Such pictures are invaluable for mapping CL zones in carbonate cements  which are to be sampled for AAS and stable isotope analysis by drilling or scraping from individual cement stages.
They also show up fabrics and small-scale sedimentary structures in sandstones and siltstones.
Recent advances in film technology have increased the range of films suitable for CL recording.
For routine work, particularly with limestones, where the colour range is restricted and can be adequately represented in grey tones, black and white films are satisfactory.
Invariably, good quality prints will show up more detail than was apparent to the observer viewing the CL, because of fatigue and insensitivity of the eye at low light levels.
Suitable films are medium-speed types (ISO 125–400) which possess fine grain, good contrast range and some exposure latitude, such as Ilford FP4 or XP1.
Normally, paired exposures are made, one showing the transmitted light view and one the CL view.
CL negatives often have a somewhat restricted contrast range, and these ‘flat’ negatives may be enhanced by printing on harder paper than the transmitted light frames.
Sandstones are difficult subjects; quartz CL is very subdued but feldspars are very bright, often with a high UV component.
It is almost impossible to get brilliant and dark grains properly exposed on the same frame.
Correct exposure for dull quartz usually results in serious over-exposure of feldspars, with development of halation areas around the grains, while correct exposure of feldspars produces marked under-exposure of quartz grains.
A series of half-stop under- and over-exposure gradations will usually produce one frame which is satisfactory for each.
Correction can also be done by changing the film speed between exposures on an automatic centre-weighted averaging meter-setting a slower film speed will trick the meter into underexposing a bright grain.
A light meter with a movable spot, as in the Nikon system (Fig. 6.3) can provide direct exposure readings for particular grains.
It is also important, with porous rocks, to remove carefully all traces of the diamond polishing abrasives from the slide: industrial diamond grains have a brilliant green CL which produces halation spots, giving the impression of a larger grain, which is apt to be mistaken for an apatite or other heavy mineral gram.
Colour pictures are somewhat more problematic, in that the precise colours of CL are very difficult to reproduce exactly.
Daylight films give the best colour balance, with a blue compensating filter for the transmitted light (tungsten lamp) frames.
The choice lies between print films with a narrower contrast range and variable colour balance depending on printing filtration, and reversal films with a higher contrast and resolution range but where subsequent correction is not possible.
Agfa, Kodak and Fuji produce ranges of colour slide and print films ranging from ISO 25 to 1000, with an HR suffix indicating the films' high resolution capability by virtue of the very thin emulsions used in the colour separation layers.
The slower the speed, the finer the grain and the greater the resolving power of these films.
ISO 1000 films may be needed to collect CL images of thermally unstable quartz grains which rapidly redden under excitation.
Each worker is advised to experiment with a range of films, both colour and monochrome, and then to become thoroughly familiar with those which are best suited.
CL depends so often on rendition of a range of colours, some soft and subtle, some brilliant, that optimum reporting of CL studies in publications may demand expensive colour plates.
While monochrome CL images are adequate for limestones, as noted above, sandstone CL recorded in monochrome  is unsatisfactory (Fig. 6.5).
Several publications have colour plates, e.g. Zinkernagel (1978), Richter & zinkernagel (1981), Amieux (1982), Olaussen et al.(1984), Dickson (1985), Burley et al.(1985) and Matter & ramseyer (1985).
They are very few compared with the many thousands of monochrome illustrations which appear each year.
The cost of providing adequate colour reproduction in publication could dissuade some petrographers from using CL, particularly with sandstones.
6.8 CONCLUSIONS
There is little doubt that the availability of relatively cheap and convenient machines for viewing CL is one of the most important developments in sedimentary petrography in the last twenty years.
The technique significantly enhances both the quality and quantity of information to be derived from thin sections and rock surfaces, and provides a powerful tool for the construction of extremely detailed diagenetic event stratigraphies.
However, a great deal of development work remains to be done in determining the causes of CL in minerals and in understanding the geochemical significance of changes in activator concentration in minerals precipitated during diagenesis.
It is clear even at this early stage that CL is not a substitute for existing petrological techniques but, when combined with these approaches, it provides a rapid and powerful way of eliciting more data from geological samples.
There are now overwhelming arguments for considering CL to be a standard technique and not an esoteric diversion.