

Almost tomorrow
The generation above us had a hard time.
(Miles, co-founder of International Times)
I feel the hints, the clues, the whisper of a new time coming.
There is a universal rebellion in the air, and the power of the two colossal superstates may be, yes, may just be ebbing, may be failing in energy even more rapidly than we are failing in energy, and if that is so, then the destructive, the liberating, the creative nihilism of the Hip, the frantic search for potent change may break into the open with all its violence, its confusion, its ugliness and horror.
(Norman Mailer, Village Voice, 1956)
In October 1955 Jimmy Young's ‘The man from Laramie’ was at number one in the British hit parade.
It was a domestic cover version of an American record from an American film.
The Communist Party of Great Britain was still mourning the death of Joseph Stalin.
The Conservative Party was celebrating the election of another administration.
By the end of 1956 the Communist Party was mourning its lost membership.
The Conservative Party was reeling, with its leader stricken in the aftermath of the Suez debacle.
Nine days into 1957 Anthony Eden quit, having consigned Britain's role as the world's third power to the bottom of the Canal together with President Nasser's block ships.
With the dreams of 1945's Labour victory long gone, and the pretensions of the Conservatives painfully exposed it was the hour for the group of young meritocrats who had done well out of the peace, the Angry Young Men.
Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim was popular.
A woolly-jumpered Colin Wilson was photographed for the press in his Notting Hill bedsit and under the tree in Hampstead Heath where he had worked on his best-seller The Outsider, a paean to the existential rebel Wilson wished to be.
John Osborne's Look Back In Anger added to the chorus from the lost boys of the lower middles.
With the titans of 1945 gone, the stumbling old guard of the Conservative Party finally tripped up: it was the chance for the lower orders of the middle classes to bite back.
And they would not be choosing the Communist Party.
Earlier that year it had been uneasily digesting the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's secret speech denouncing the excesses of the Stalin era.
Meanwhile in Hungary the reform-minded Communist leader Imre Nagy responded to popular pressure and began liberalization.
The process had accelerated by the autumn into revolution.
Within the small but industrially and intellectually significant British party dissatisfaction with the leadership had already been growing before the Soviet Union provided its response to the Hungarian events.
From Budapest that November the Daily Worker's correspondent Peter Fryer provided pro-revolution and anti-Stalinist reports until they were suppressed.
Later he was ousted from the CPGB, but with Hungary, the party split wide open.
In the dissident Communist New Reasoner magazine historian Edward Thompson asked: ‘Where is my party in Hungary?
Was it in the broadcasting stations or on the barricades?’
Between 1956 and 1958 the Communist Party lost 10,000 people, some 30 per cent of its membership.
The Party's role on the left of British politics had far outweighed its size, and the fall-out from that explosion threw new clusters of groups, causes, and concerns into British politics.
They met head on with elements of that teenage army that had also emerged from 1956.
In 1955, while Jimmy Young and Dickie Valentine's ersatz American crooning dominated the milk bars of Britain, Bill Haley, the John the Baptist of rock ‘n’ roll, took four records into the Top Twenty.
Blackboard Jungle, that portrait of minor-league delinquency in a New York school, with Haley's ‘Rock around the clock’ on the soundtrack, opened, and briskly closed cinemas.
And after Haley came Presley, Little Richard, and Fats Domino, laying a freeway through popular culture that outraged left and right alike, and down which successive generations of youth were to drive for the next three decades.
The impact of rock ‘n’ roll went everywhere, including the debating society of my Southampton grammar school, debating, as 1956 closed, that the new music should be deplored.
While Eden manqués wrestled with the finer points of parliamentary style a wild man struggled to his feet from the bottom stream of the fifth form.
His blazer studded with drawing pins in homage to Presley's cloth of gold, he cut through the verbiage with a revolutionary cry for the times.
‘All I gotta say’, he proclaimed to wild applause, ‘is don't knock the rock!’
In Liverpool John Lennon, aged 16, bought Lonnie Donegan's ‘Rock island line’ and a guitar.
Beat was hot and cool, rock was hot.
Drink, junk, poetry, Stalin's legacy, Eden's folly, Presley's charisma, Brando's (unseen in Britain) Wild One filtered into the consciousness of the young.
The hip could experiment and buy  Coltrane, the mass market could buy Johnny Dankworth's modern jazz pastiche, ‘Experiments with mice’, in enough numbers to make it seven in the April 1956 hit parade.
With class war anaesthetized by the Cold War and affluence, the generation gap and teenagers became a subject for serious observation.
Amongst the books, tracts, poetry, and pamphlets that the young would-be intellectuals began to absorb was the new writing from the United States, that accompaniment to the modern jazz that survived alongside rock into the 1960s.
But one Englishman at least was experiencing it all first hand.
In 1946 a 19-year-old Yorkshireman, John Wilcock, got a lucky break, his first job in journalism on the Sheffield Morning Telegraph.
Three years later he switched to the Daily Mirror; he was still based in Yorkshire, covering the local beat.
By 1952 the attraction of America was tugging on the young journalist.
But America wasn't easy to get into.
He picked up a copy of Time magazine, the cover story was about Canada; maybe the British Dominion would be the compromise.
He made inquiries and discovered that for just 19 he could get to Ontario.
Wilcock set off for the New World.
Jobs weren't easy but eventually he fixed a slot as a night wire man at a Toronto press agency.
He made contacts which brought him in touch with Jack Kent Cook who ran Saturday Night Magazine.
Cook had done well, Wilcock heard, making a fast million working with the Canadian newspaper magnate Roy Thomson.
And Cook was impressed by the young man from Sheffield.
He took him on.
It was a literary weekly with an upfront section modelled on the New Yorker.
Wilcock stayed for a year before briefly taking off for a job in Nassau.
It was a wonderful place, he thought, but the money, the job, the office were awful.
Within six months he was back in Toronto.
Thanks to Cook's intervention he got a job on Liberty magazine, and Wilcock began working on its ‘Screwball’ column.
It was a downmarket job; he'd report on reactions to his attempts to change a $1000 bill, sit in a lion's cage at the local zoo, or clean windows on the twenty-eighth floor of a skyscraper.
It paid the rent.
He was crazy about New York and went there for long weekends.
It was where he wanted to be.
After a year he made the move.
Money was bad, but he was still working for Liberty and picked up work on Pageant magazine.
Things got better, he even got commissioned to visit Hollywood and interview Rock Hudson, Milton Berle, Marlene Dietrich, and Marilyn Monroe.
It beat the Sheffield Morning Telegraph but Hollywood was far from New York and Greenwich Village.
The Village, thought the Yorkshireman, was the centre of the universe.
By 1955 the star of Senator Joe McCarthy, the red baiter, was waning.
And even at the zenith of his power Greenwich Village had  remained a place shielded from some of his excesses, open to the pull of Europe, a haven for the dissident, the Bohemian, the dropout.
Allen Ginsberg was writing his first major work Howl that summer in the Village.
His contemporary Gregory Corso's first book The Vestal Lady On Brattle had just been published.
The coffee shops and bars, little theatres and jazz made the Village quite different from small-town America, quite different from Eisenhower's other America.
But it had one thing missing — a proper paper.
There was a paper, the Villager, but a parish pump periodical wasn't really what the place needed.
Wilcock put a notice up in a bookshop.
Would anyone like to get together about starting a paper, it said, if so, meet with Wilcock.
People did, and people met, and nothing came of it.
But the meetings had shown there was interest.
One day in a bar he ran into two of the people who'd attended the meetings, Dan Wolf and Ed Fancher.
Fancher had some money, at last.
Did Wilcock want to come in?
He did.
Fancher put in $5,000, and persuaded Norman Mailer, a friend of Wolf's girlfriend, to do the same.
Long sessions followed.
What was it to be called?
Eventually a title was suggested by Mailer, and it was agreed — the Village Voice.
Wilcock was doing all right at Pageant, taking home $100 a week, but he quit the job to become the Village Voice's news editor, at $25.
He did lay-out, editing and writing.
On 26 October 1955 the first issue hit the news-stands.
Their friends told them they were crazy, it sold for a nickel and nobody, they discovered, had the curiosity to buy it although it did make all the local Greenwich Village news-stands.
Maybe the paper was too literary but, whatever the reasons, the ‘Weekly newspaper designed to be read’, targeted to sell 10,000 a week, sold, maybe, 2,000 that first week, and began losing $1,000 a week.
Yet it survived.
It wasn't very radical, it wasn't very intellectual, but it caught a mood of dissent in mid-1950s America, just edging away from the excesses of McCarthyism, still immersed in the Eisenhower years.
Never was it to be regarded as ‘underground’, but it was the straw in the wind.
On Wilcock's suggestion the Voice had approached a distinguished critic with the New York Times Book Review, Gilbert Seldes.
The young man from the Voice had met Seldes in Canada where, curiously ahead of his time, he was lecturing on television.
Since the publication of his The Seven Lively Arts in the 1920s Seldes had been a linchpin of New York's arts scene.
To recruit the veteran on the Voice's rates would be unlikely, they realized.
Intriguingly, Seldes agreed, on one condition — that he had a column, and it appeared every week.
The Voice accepted and Wilcock learned a lesson he was to remember: the value of a  column, the value of control over one's work.
A column was the rubric under which the writer could put anything at all.
Wilcock was to spend the next thirty years attempting to put it into practice.
Hearing Ginsberg's tumultuous reading of Howl spurred Lawrence Ferlinghetti to ask for permission to publish it under his City Lights imprint in San Francisco.
In 1956 it came out, and Ferlinghetti had opened the City Lights Bookshop in that city.
The publishing house and the shop became a focus for the new writing born in the aftermath of the Second World War, the Beats and their associates, Jack Kerouac, William Burroughs, Kenneth Rexroth, Gregory Corso, and the poets, surrealists, and film-makers of San Francisco.
It was a movement whose history went back into the Second World War, into the New York clubs that had bred Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, and the new jazz of be-bop.
But 1957 was its year, with the publication of Jack Kerouac's On the Road.
Suddenly its author became the ‘King of the Beats’, and his milieu the stuff of headlines, cover features, and money.
In 1958 came another sign of the US emergence from the McCarthyite age with the debut of Paul Krassner's The Realist.
An early contributor was Wilcock.
In 1956 he had quit the Voice full-time, settled into writing his weekly column, ‘The Village Square’ for the paper, and taken a job with the New York Times travel section.
It was to ensure that throughout the years that lay ahead he would remain on the road.
The Realist, meanwhile, provided Wilcock with a vehicle for his own essays into experimental writing.
That year Allen Ginsberg paid his first — and largely unnoticed visit to England and read his poetry in Oxford.
Back in London, in February, at Central Hall Westminster, a movement that was to provide fertile soil for his work was launched.
The great and good from the liberal/left establishment — A.J.P. Taylor, the historian, James Cameron, the journalist, and key organizers Peggy Duff and Canon John Collins — sat on the platform as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched.
The attendance was so large that five overflow halls had to be used.
A movement was born that provided for the next four years the reference point for the left, and for artists and what passed for Britain's Beats.
It was a key part of what Jeff Nuttall was to label ‘bomb culture’.
Soon after, at the offices of Peace News, the pacifist paper that had provided, and was to provide into the 1960s, the key radical voice of the new movement, the first Aldermaston March was organized by the Direct Action Committee against Nuclear War.
That year was special, the marchers marched to the British atomic research centre in Berkshire.
From 1959 it changed: their target, each Easter, was to be London.
The biggest place in town
The underground happened everywhere simultaneously: it was simply what you did in the H-bomb world if you were, by nature, creative and concerned for humanity as a whole…
The nineteenth-century artists were faced with the collapse of Christianity and the end of Hellenism.
We are faced with the end of man.
(Jeff Nuttall, Bomb Culture)
The 1956 vintage of the independent left was one of extraordinary potential, numbering many thousands of experienced cadres from the Communist Party crisis, hundreds of Labour lefts bursting from their party prison, contingents of determined and defiant pacifists and, within a short while the Children's Crusade of teenagers from all classes.
(Peter Sedgwick, The Left In Britain)
Amongst those who watched and then joined that route from Berkshire to central London was the future co-founder of International Times, Barry Miles from Cheltenham.
He was 16 in 1959, and just entering a local arts college still run on quasi-Victorian lines.
The son of parents ‘in service’ in Gloucestershire, Miles — as he was to be known universally within the underground and after — had interests which moved rapidly across from art into poetry.
CND provided the trigger, setting up a network of connections across the country.
Through an Oxford commune he met Michael Horovitz.
His vital and pioneering poetry magazine, New Departures, had first been published in late 1959.
And Miles met a musician, trumpeter Pete Brown.
Also in his first year at Cheltenham, a copy of a poem by Gregory Corso came into his hands.
The most contemporary poet he had until then encountered was Siegfried Sassoon.
At the bottom of the poem was an address, City Lights Bookshop, San Francisco.
He wrote for a catalogue, and they sent him back a list of ten titles.
He had heard of none of them, but his eye was caught by Ginsberg's Howl.
‘Through the bank I ordered one dollar, two dollars maybe, and sent off for it.
The book came back and I was amazed.
It absolutely knocked me out.’
Literature had that effect on other people too.
In 1960 Penguin Books published D.H.
Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover.
The company expected legal action, and it got it.
The case was to set a stamp on the decade, and one question from prosecuting counsel Mervyn Griffiths-Jones was to mark the period as precisely as Neville Chamberlain's ‘Peace in our time’ had done in 1938.
The difference was that it took a year before Chamberlain's words came back to haunt him.
For Griffiths-Jones the lag was the time it took his words to leave his mouth and hit the pages of the newspapers.
‘Is it a book that you would even wish your wife or your servants to read?
Is it what? asked everybody under 40.
Why, there were graduate wives now, soon Margaret Drabble was to make a comfortable living writing about such people in her novels.
And where were these servants?
Where had Griffiths-Jones been?
Had he taken no note of changing employment patterns, from 1945 to 1960?
Did he not know that 33 per cent of married women were going out to work, and that didn't mean they were competing to do Mrs Griffiths-Jones’ dishes?
But the barrister wasn't the only person in Britain affronted by its publication.
In Edinburgh, autumn 1959, another co-founder of International Times, Louisiana-born Jim Haynes, soon after winning an early discharge from the US Airforce at the nearby Kirknewton base, opened his Paperback Shop in Charles Street, off George Square.
It became a centre for the young, the radical, and the literati of that city.
It also, in 1960, shifted a lot of copies of Lady Chatterley.
It shifted even more when a former missionary from Africa came in, bought a copy, took it out on the end of a pair of coal tongs, and set fire to it.
A conveniently placed photographer ensured that the story made national, and international, news.
Amongst the younger generation the arrival of the book in the wake of Penguin's successful defence met with an enthusiasm which rarely survived a thumbing of its pages.
For male adolescents Lady Chatterley was hardly even a competitor with the modest pornographic magazines of the period.
But, for the young, she was loose, roaming the public domain, flaunting sex and intellectual respectability, a companion for Simone Signoret in Room at the Top, Shirley-Anne Field in Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, and Alberto Moravia.
It was one in the eye for the old order.
The show that underlined changing days was the Oxford review, Beyond The Fringe, with its mild demolition job on national pretensions which had been the Conservatives' stock-in-trade since 1951.
Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller, Alan Bennett, and Dudley Moore came from public and grammar schools, juvenile mandarins of the meritocracy, they provided a show lodged in the half-way  house between the angries of 1956 and the arts labs and tepees of the later 1960s, and, unlike much of what was to follow, it was very English.
In May 1961 the show opened in London to a rapturous welcome.
By Autumn 1961 Miles had begun to visit London.
At the Whitechapel Art Gallery he could see the American abstract Impressionists whose work provided in paint what be-bop and Beat aimed for in music and words.
And he began to connect to the nascent counter-culture, visiting Pete Brown's home in Oppidans Road, Primrose Hill.
The house was shared by designer Mal Dean, the future underground press writer Felix de Mendelsohn and an avant-garde sax player, George Kahn.
But the place to crash was further west, with John ‘Hoppy’ Hopkins, in Westbourne Terrace — Hopkins, future instigator of the London Free School, photo-journalist, and another founder of It.
It was easy to see the place was cool, thought Miles, there was always a copy of The Naked Lunch on the table.
The book, by Ginsberg and Kerouac's associate William Burroughs, was still illegal at the time.
Another of Burroughs's acquaintances was the Glasgow poet, writer and junkie author of Cain's Book, Alex Trocchi.
In nearby Powis Square he was running a book-cum-record shop with John Michel, whose semi-mystic writing was to become a feature of It five years later.
And the bookshop also brought another figure of the future on to the perimeter of the circle, Michael de Freitas, later Michael X, and Michael Abdul Malik, then a frontman for the racketeering landlord Peter Rachman.
Separate worlds brushed against each other in those early 1960s days.
Another visitor too was Aloysius ‘Lucky’ Gordon.
That autumn, while a youthful Mick Jagger was enrolling at the London School of Economics, Gordon met Christine Keeler at Notting Hill's Rio Cafe, and Keeler was in mid-affair with John Profumo, the Conservative Government's Secretary of State for War.
Gordon was to be a key element in Profumo's downfall, the event that dragged the Conservatives into an unwelcome part of the modern world.
Unlike that unfortunate, notorious heroine of the mid-1950s Ruth Ellis, Keeler didn't ape Tory style.
She looked natural, in time.
Two years later, when the scandal peaked and middle-aged mobs shouted abuse at her as she sped away in large cars, it seemed less outraged morality they were proclaiming than outrage at being left behind in the 1950s.
She too became a victim, but to many of the young, observing from out in the sticks, far even from the world of CND, she was a victor.
In a collision between the furtive sex of the old order and the impression of freer sex of the young, the Tories like the doomed professor in The Blue Angel three decades earlier had come off worse.
The Tories did it, but didn't want to talk about it.
Why not just do it?
The Profumo affair had been perfectly timed for the beneficiaries of the Beyond the Fringe satire boom.
On 25 October 1961, the first issue of Private Eye, all 5,000 copies of it, was published.
Produced by public schoolboys, with public schoolboy tastes, and public schoolboy humour, the magazine had, within eighteen months, circulated to the schools of the land, crossed oceans, irritated politicians, and helped bring down Profumo.
Never of the underground, and despising, and despised by it, it was the link between mainstream and fringe publishing, between the small magazines of the poets, the politicos, and the despised conglomerates of Fleet Street.
At the core of the paper in its early days were Peter Usborne, Christopher Booker, and Richard Ingrams.
With Paul Foot, Booker and Ingrams had been at Shrewsbury in the early 1950s.
Oxford in the late 1950s brought together a coterie, which, after graduation, and without much else on, led to Private Eye.
Booker had been working at Liberal News and, after receiving a letter from Usborne, whose proto-satirical magazine Mesopotamia at Oxford had centred around Foot, Ingrams, and John Wells, the product hit the streets or rather those streets in South Kensington to which Andrew Osmond, another Oxford contemporary, chose to distribute it.
After ten issues the magazine was selling around 18,000; within a year, as the satire boom celebrated the collapse of Macmillan's reign, it had climbed to 35,000.
Another key to Private Eye's success, and one that was not to be lost on the underground, was its use of offset litho printing.
The paper could be pasted up by amateurs, and set on a typewriter.
Hot metal would last another two decades in Fleet Street.
For the underground it was to be almost unknown.
Out of Private Eye, too, came, briefly, the Establishment Club, set up in the week of the magazine's launch, capitalizing on the upsurge and faintly echoing Greenwich Village's more vibrant nightlife.
The club was to nearly kill the magazine as its losses accumulated, but it also provided a link with the United States which was to snap as the magazine moved towards Little Englandism, or Little Londonism.
It provided a venue for Lennie Bruce.
Back in New York, John Wilcock was still writing his column, still hanging out with the Realist's Paul Krassner, and had moved from New York Times travel writing to travel books, indeed an opus on Mexico had begun to open — or dilate — his eyes to drugs.
One evening at the Village Vanguard Krassner introduced Wilcock to the comedian whose black humour pushed comedy beyond any of the mild Eisenhower era limits of Shelley Berman and Bob Newhart.
The Yorkshireman explained that he lived around the corner, if Bruce needed to rest between gigs.
The comedian took up the offer.
Wilcock, with a lifelong affinity for cultural outlaws was  intrigued by Bruce, even if alarmed that the jacket pocket spilling out with hypodermics would get them both busted.
He had, he told him, to write a Voice column about him, and his act.
‘You wanna do it now?’ asked Bruce.
‘Bring the typewriter into the kitchen.’
Bruce went into the bathroom, put on his tie, and stuck the needle that was to plague his remaining years into his arm.
He shouted out questions — and answers — to Wilcock.
Within ten minutes the journalist had his story.
But when the Establishment booked a return visit for the comedian for 8 April 1963 it had problems.
The then Home Secretary, a man notorious even in an unloved job, Henry Brook, banned his entry.
The week before in New York Bruce had been arrested backstage by the New York police for giving an ‘indecent performance’.
The snatch had taken place at Greenwich Village's Café à Go Go and it was Wilcock and fellow Voice journalist Nat Hentoff who provided the backbone of the ‘Emergency Committee Against the Harassment of Lennie Bruce’.
The comedian never made it to England again, and was soon to die.
But tangentially he was part of that transatlantic wave shaping the British 1960s, with Ginsberg, Laurence Ferlinghetti, Corso, and Burroughs-cult figures amongst the milieu spilling out of CND.
Private Eye's inception had drawn on other foreign influences.
One had been Paris's satirical daily, Le Canard Enchainé.
The France of the period, in its memories, movies, and residual expatriate culture, still pulled strongly on radical America and Britain.
In 1958 William Burroughs had moved to Paris, where Allen Ginsberg had helped set up the ‘Beat Hotel’ that persisted into the early 1960s.
Alex Trocchi had escaped Glasgow for the city, and release from Calvinism.
It was still the city of the existentialists, of Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, Jacques Brel and Juliette Greco.
The New Wave was sweeping through the cinema.
And the bars didn't close at half past ten.
One tripper on 1960 had been the future Black Dwarf journalist, feminist and socialist, Sheila Rowbotham, fresh out of Yorkshire Methodist boarding school and en route to Oxford.
The influences that had pressed on her adolescent consciousness began to come together that summer in the French capital with her arts school boyfriend, Bernie from Bermondsey.
Earlier, holidaying in the less exotic Yorkshire resort of Filey she had picked up the American Beat anthology Protest, one of the volumes triggered by the ‘on the road’ boom after 1957.
Back in her home town of Leeds she patronized the local cinema which alternated art and porno movies.
A lot of the clientele, she noted, didn't seem to discriminate between the two.
There she had seen Jean Cocteau's Orphee.
Under Bernie's influence she shifted to Beat, black sweaters, black stockings, shades from Woolworth's for two and sixpence, layers of ripped T shirts  shirts and old jeans — fifteen years pre-punk.
In Paris fifty years of radical arts movement, Dada, surrealism, danced with American hip and jazz.
Unnoticed too in those years, and out of Marx and surrealism, another movement for the 1960s began to take shape.
In 1962 the International Situationists began to impinge on the wilder fringes of Gallic politics, with the publication of Raoul Vaneigem's Totality For Kids.
Five years would pass before the Sits' days would come.
Across the globe in that year, 1962, 21-year old Richard Neville was taking his first step into journalism, editing the University of New South Wales student paper, Tharunka.
By the following year he was working on his second and more notorious venture into magazine publishing, Oz, with Richard Walsh from Sydney University, and a gifted young student graphic designer, Martin Sharp.
The Australia of the early 1960s still seemed secure and stultified with the apparently eternal regime of Robert Menzies.
Under his rule the old English-fashioned elite rubbed uneasy shoulders with a new ‘classless’ middle-class youth sold on American music.
On April Fool's Day 1963 came the first issue of Oz.
All its 6,000 print run sold out.
It fired at God, Royalty, the upper crust, politicians and the new pop culture, using cartoons, lampoons, and interviews.
Some labelled it an Australian Private Eye, but there was more to it than that.
The young Australian had sensed other places, and other moods.
In the university library he had happened on a copy of the Village Voice.
He was intrigued, and particularly by John Wilcock's ‘Village Square’ column.
Neville wrote to ask Wilcock, could he reproduce the column?
‘He wrote back an absolutely charming letter’, he remembers, ‘saying don't worry about the money, of course you can reproduce it, and don't worry about the copyright.’
Which is why, suggests Neville, to this day Wilcock has remained a poor, and honest, man.
Through Wilcock, too, he came into contact with another American, Tuli Kupferberg, whose poetry and cartoons astonished him, and with Paul Krassner and his Realist.
In the second issue, echoing the 1950s' Realist, Oz gave a sympathetic interview to a practitioner of that then outrageous operation, abortion.
In the sixth issue- and what was to be the most famous Australian Oz — the magazine reprinted a Lennie Bruce feature from the Realist, providing a print debut for the comedian in Sydney.
The first issue also netted its editors $40 fines for obscenity.
Having started on a shoestring, the paper built itself a circulation of 40,000 and also got itself, with the sixth issue in February 1964, its big Australian obscenity charge.
Sydney's latest new building, and its pride was the P&O block.
Part of its appeal stemmed from the Tom Bass fountain inset into its wall, a long thin crack in the stone.
To some — notably the three Oz editors — it bore an irresistible  resemblance to a urinal.
Thus were they photographed, their backs to the camera, their fronts, in the traditional male pose, to the fountain.
The picture adorned Oz's cover, and outraged polite society.
Charged with obscenity the magistrates gave them six months hard labour each.
They appealed, and eventually the sentences were revoked.
Early in 1964 the magazine gained another recruit.
Marsha Rowe was part-timing at university and working in a dead-end secretarial job.
Seeing an ad for a secretary on Oz she went along.
‘The editors noticed a kindred spirit and were dazzled’, wrote Richard Neville two decades later of the tousle-haired 20-year old.
Rowe made a joke about Oz's pension scheme and they both laughed.
It was the beginning of an on-off professional relationship that was to persist into the 1970s, by which time, in London, Neville would even write for Rowe's new magazine, Spare Rib.
Feminism was some way away.
Her erstwhile Bohemian boyfriend advised firmly against such a risqué job.
So did her parents, her father announcing that should she work for Oz he wouldn't speak to her any more.
She was on the point of abandoning the plan when a neighbour, a solicitor who had been advising the magazine, explained that Neville and company were respectable young men really, from decent backgrounds — after all, his father had been a colonel in the Australian Army.
She took up with Oz at 14 a week.
But her generation and its immediate elders were beginning to move north.
Rowe, the loyal Australian, stayed put, but a group of Australians whose influence on London and the underground was to be crucial had started the shift, including Neville, Sharp, and Germaine Greer.
The country they arrived in, after the Profumo affair, was hearing a mild hurrah for the dissidents of 1956, as Harold Wilson's brand of socialism without class or pain, and with industrial modernization and assorted ‘plans’, edged towards power.
In October 1964 the Labour Party buried the Conservatives of Sir Alec Douglas-Home in a shallow grave, and the talk, briefly, was of a ‘Kennedy-style’ new broom in Downing Street.
The orthodox left, the Daily Mirror, New Statesman, and Tribune, celebrated.
And, briefly, in university bedsits more backward undergraduates added the new Prime Minister to collections of newly-fashionable photo-posters, alongside such Beat heroes as Brando and Dean.
Others were more sceptical — the far left, and the dissidents and pacifists of Anarchy and Peace News.
The latter, during those days, was edited by Theodore Roszak, the American whose The Making of the Counter Culture (1970) was to be a key work of the early 1970s.
With the clean, sanserif layout pioneered as a classic 1960s design by the Observer, Peace News stood at the crossroads of mid  1960s dissident culture.
From the United States came reports of the battles on campus and in the south, and writers like jazz critic and Village Voice columnist Nat Hentoff; from London came a critique of Wilson's first stumbling days of power, a concern with the new politics of ecology, the black movement, Vietnam, Algeria, Cuba by then in the sixth year of revolutionary rule — the seizure of Burroughs's The Naked Lunch by the Director of Public Prosecutions, R. D. Laing on ‘Violence Masquerading as Love’, the campaign to legalize marijuana.
Under the editorship of Roszak, and subsequently Rod Prince, Peace News trailed the bulk of the preoccupations for the next half-decade.
And it was selling to an audience that, with the change in mass pop culture after the rise of the Beatles in 1963 was expanding, in London and elsewhere.
A flood of new bands, from the north and around London, had emerged, fed by the influences of the blues, the bomb, CND.
In March 1962 Alexis Korner had opened his blues club in Ealing Broadway, by July that year the Rolling Stones were debuting at the Marquee.
By the following winter Michael Horovitz's New Departures magazine had advanced so far as to put on a live performance at the same venue.
Horovitz was to be vital to the underground's birth.
In Soho the Partisan coffee bar, founded by the New Left Review — which had grown out of the New Reasoner in 1960- was attracting a far more Bohemian and disreputable crowd than the straighter new leftists for which it had been intended.
Down on Old Compton Street, the Two ‘I's, hailed as the home of British rock, because Tommy Steele and Cliff Richard had once drifted through its doors, was old hat.
Across in South Kensington the Troubadour had been an early target of Private Eye's Andrew Osmond, due to its reputation as a ‘CND stronghold’.
The offspring of Beat poetry and folk music, Paul Simon and Bob Dylan, passed through London, picking up tunes and women from the CND folk scene.
Spearheaded by Horovitz's New Departures were a cluster of small magazines, harking back to surrealism and Dada, but crucially covering what was new in the return of modern times.
In 1963 Miles and Haynes met for the first time, in Edinburgh.
He dropped in at the still extant Paperback Shop.
Within twenty minutes he found himself minding the store, while Haynes slipped out ‘for a few minutes’.
It was, he says, ‘the casualest place you can imagine’, an impression confirmed by his wife-to-be Sue's stocktaking of the stack of horrifying bills and invoices buried in the basement.
Haynes had moved on since Lady Chatterley.
The Traverse Theatre had been born in the Grass Market in 1962 and that, together with his involvement in the Edinburgh Festival, had sucked him into a travelling show of poets, writers, actors, directors, and  hype-merchants from across the western — and sometimes eastern world.
Through Haynes, Miles was introduced to Jack Henry Moore, labelled by Haynes later as ‘one of the incredible characters of our time’.
Moore, rare for those days, a declared homosexual, had, after a period running a Dublin detective agency, begun directing for the Traverse.
The theatre and the bookshop had sustained their influence on Edinburgh students.
Open all hours, blending left literature, the Beats, the new absurdists, it attracted a clientele whose Scottish consciousness might repel them from London, the ‘imperial capital’, but attract them towards Paris, and New York, free of the effeteness of English culture.
Amongst the Traverse and Paperback Shop's habitués was the sometime editor of the university paper, Student, and future editor of the underground's Ink, and later Time Out and the New Statesman, John Lloyd.
For Lloyd, from an east coast Scottish village background, the American appeared a charismatic character, exuding self-confidence, surrounded by women students, like some alternative Hugh Hefner.
‘He was a really powerful figure for people like me’, says Lloyd, ‘who were looking for something new, and we weren't sure what.’
In 1964 Miles, via Cheltenham, Oxford, and Stroud finally made it to London, and by January 1965 to a job behind the counter at Better Books.
The shop had been going since before the Second World War.
In 1946 the premises at 94 Charing Cross road had been taken over by Tony Godwin, and under his ownership the place had become to radical culture what Collets, further down the same road, was to radical politics.
Apart from selling books, the locale also provided a meeting place for such gatherings as ‘Better Books writers nights’, and in February/March 1965 housed ‘the  sTigma environmental exhibition’, which included amongst its contributors Jeff Nuttall, and amongst its inspirations Alex Trocchi's Sigma, a Tactical Blueprint-drawing for its inspiration on the International Situationists.
The impact of the exhibition — and increasingly the smell — was such that its March closure was widely welcome.
Miles began ordering books, stacks of City Lights' publications, and as many from Grove Press as he could get.
Since the mid 1950s Grove had published much of the west coast American — and some of the international — avant-garde, including some of Kerouac, Burroughs, Trocchi's Cain's Book, Theodor Reich, and excursions into Zen Buddhism.
It also published the Evergreen Review.
The new material sold well, and Henry Miller's Sexus, Plexus and Nexus leapt off the shelves — under the counter — at ten shillings a copy.
To help cover the import bills Miles would take half the orders around the corner into Soho where at a higher price the proprietor  of a dirty book shop would retail them to less artistically minded purchasers.
Soon Godwin was to sell the shop to Collins — and trigger its slow decline — but before he quit for a job as chief editor with Penguin Books he decided to open a paperback section in Old Compton Street.
Part of its inspiration was indeed Haynes's outlet in Edinburgh, and Miles was the man left minding the store.
While Britain got used to Wilson, the Americans didn't come to terms with the post-Kennedy era.
Peace News reported on the revolt against the ‘multiversity’ at the symbol of liberal corporate America, the Berkeley campus within the University of California; it reported on the growing movement that had sprung out of the deep south civil rights campaign.
Even in the early 1960s there had only been a few brave individuals.
By August 1963 — three months before the President's assassination — 200,000 had marched on Washington.
A year later in September 1964 the ‘Free Speech’ movement had erupted at Berkeley, and by Christmas 800 students had been arrested there.
In March 1965 a civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, had been broken up by police.
And alongside the internal battles partially catalysed by the hopes Kennedy's Presidency had aroused came the beginnings of opposition to the war his ‘pay any price’ foreign policy had finally ignited, Vietnam.
Twenty days before Kennedy's assassination his South Vietnamese satrap, President Diem had suffered a similar fate, with the collusion of the US authorities.
In August 1964 President Johnson claimed, falsely, that the USS Maddox had been attacked by North Vietnamese gunboats.
The US had been sending combat troops into South Vietnam since 1961.
This was the pretext for escalation: Hanoi, the North Vietnamese capital, was bombed.
In November 1964 Johnson won the Presidential election by a landslide, and promised that the ‘Great Society’ would wage war on domestic poverty, on the racism that had triggered both the civil rights movement and the riots in Harlem that summer, and, if necessary, on the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam and the North Vietnamese government as well.
There were other straws in the wind.
The hit of the summer of 1964 in the London theatre had been the Royal Shakespeare Company's Marat-Sade, theatre as revolution, and the dialogue between mind and politics.
‘Marat we're poor and the poor stay poor’, the chorus had chanted.
‘Marat don't make us wait anymore, we want our rights and we don't care how, we want our revolution now.’
The following month an 18-year-old Scottish anarchist, Stuart Christie, was held in Spain on bombing charges.
By September the Franco courts had given him a twenty-year prison sentence.
In January 1965, three days before the death of Churchill, that symbol  of the past, Malcolm X, that symbol of the 1960s present, was shot by black separatists.
But for Miles, Haynes, and others a perhaps more significant event had taken place in April 1964 at the Renaissance Pleasure Faire on the outskirts of Los Angeles.
John Bryan had already produced a paper called Open City in San Francisco, but Art Kunkin, a former Trotskyist, decided to put together a semi-spoof, semi-newspaper, the Faire Free Press, which he hawked at the Faire.
Partly inspired by the Village Voice, across the continent, he developed the one-off.
By the summer it had become the Los Angeles Free Press.
It was in the right place at the right time, and the underground press, in the United States, was born.
One day in spring 1965, while Miles was behind the counter at Better Books, Allen Ginsberg walked in.
He had been invited by Miles's predecessor at the shop.
He had nowhere to stay, and ended up at Miles's place.
He also gave a packed-out reading at Better Books in May.
‘This could well turn out to have been a very significant moment in the history of England’, wrote Tom McGrath in Peace News.
Covering his tracks a little he added, ‘or at least in the history of English poetry’.
McGrath, the first editor of International Times, was then features editor on the pacifist paper.
Born near Glasgow in 1940 McGrath was already established as a poet in his own right, with work in Ambit, Jeff Nuttall's My Own Mag, Tribune, and many of the small magazines, north and south of the border.
Whichever way, Ginsberg's appearance proved to be significant in the history of the English underground.
Through the American Miles made a lot of connections.
There was his friend Barbara Rubin, Andy Warhol, but, most of all, once in touch with the poet himself, observes Miles, ‘it was like plugging into the main switchboard — he knows everyone’.
After Better Books Ginsberg read at the Architectural Association, and the Institute of Contemporary Arts in Dover Street.
He also pointed out that Ferlinghetti was in Paris and Gregory Corso was in Italy.
They could easily come over, why couldn't there be a big reading?
Amongst the people around Better Books then were New Yorker Don Richter and his English wife Jill.
They had been living in Athens, and bringing out a magazine, Residue.
An English poet, Harry Fainlight, who had been living in New York dropped in.
‘All these Americans were sitting round saying what's the biggest place in town?’
Miles recalls.
‘So I said the Albert Hall.’
It cost 400 to book for a night.
And, to the management, poets sounded like a good thing, a respectable thing.
And Jill Richter's mother had money, quite enough to front the 400.
The hall was booked, 7 p.m., Friday, 11 June 1965, for Poets of the World/Poets of Our Time.
The cast list expanded rapidly.
As well as the Americans, Adrian Mitchell, Alex Trocchi, Harry Fainlight, and Michael Horovitz were to be there from Britain.
Anselm Hollo from Finland, Andrei Voznesensky from the Soviet Union, Ernst Jandl, the sound poet, from Austria.
Contacts with the Cuban embassy were good at that time, with the revolution just six years old.
‘It was a really hip place to go’, says Miles.
‘They'd tell us stories about the Cuban Revolution and we'd sit round getting drunk and nostalgic about something we had never been in.’
Consequently Pablo Fernandez, the Cuban cultural attache, and a poet as well, was booked in.
On Wednesday 9 June an invitation went out to Fleet Street.
It didn't emphasize the internationalism, it homed in on what it — correctly-saw as a Fleet Street preoccupation.
‘The Beat poets invite you to a press conference at noon, at the Albert Memorial; if raining, inside the Memorial.’
The Observer had already been excited about it in its preview the weekend before.
‘It can hardly fail to be the biggest and liveliest feast of modern poetry we'll get in years.’
Yet it devoted more space to a rival attraction at the London School of Economics that same evening, Britain's first teach-in; the subject, the Vietnam War.
The two key preoccupations of the coming years came together.
In those days Covent Garden still had a flower market.
The night before the reading John Hopkins organized friends to collect the lost flowers of Floral Street.
But would anyone come?
They did, and were greeted, as they forked out their ten shillings and five shillings, with the residue of Covent Garden, presented to them by women, their faces painted.
Another aspect of the times had made its debut.
Once the more than 7,000-strong audience had packed the Albert Hall, and the smell of pot had begun to drift across its Victorian arches, it became clear that not all had gone according to plan.
Pablo Neruda, the unofficial Poet Laureate of Chile, and holder of the Stalin Prize, had pulled out, and departed for Cambridge a day earlier.
Pablo Fernandez was suddenly stricken by a bout of flu.
Still, Voznesensky was there, but would he read?
With Trocchi in the chair, the evening began with Simon Vinkenoog from Holland.
He didn't like the microphone and had to be cajoled into using it, he stalked up and down the front of the hall quoting from cuttings on the Vietnam War, and was heard by few.
He was followed by Horovitz and Pete Brown, who were better received, but it wasn't easy for poets used to small back rooms to fill a hall of 7,000.
Then came Ferlinghetti, whose call for ‘an international fucking exchange’ was well received.
During the interval the absent Burroughs was pumped over the PA system, via a tape supplied by Somerville.
Nuttall and John Latham prepared their happening.
‘One had a sense of constituency that was never there before’, remembers Miles.
‘All these people  recognized each other and they all realized they were part of the same scene.’
‘I have never seen so active an audience’, wrote Tom McGrath in the following week's Peace News.
It brought out Marxists, the lost armies of CND, Michael X, continuing his transition from Rachmanism, dress designers, artists, priests.
‘Even if the poetry reading had turned out to be a giant bore, the audience itself would have been an event’, McGrath added.
Not all went well as the second half began.
Nuttall's happening didn't go as expected, when he became jammed in the bath in which he had placed himself, and Latham fainted while trying to drag him out.
More seriously, Voznesensky had ruled that he would not read.
The biggest ovation was reserved for Mitchell, reading his ‘Tell us Lies about Vietnam’.
In that vast space Jandl's sound poetry proved effective, but a nervous Fainlight read ‘The Spider’ about a bad mescaline trip, and flipped under unwelcome support from Vinkenoog.
‘But’, reported McGrath, ‘the ‘great’ lost temper of the night was Ginsberg's.’
Horovitz disagrees, ‘he communicated brilliantly’.
Ginsberg was infuriated by  Voznesensky's refusal to appear on stage.
As Ginsberg read out one of the Russian's works, the writer himself stalked out of the hall.
It wasn't the ‘gentle, angelic Allen of earlier readings in London’, wrote McGrath, and ‘some of the audience responded as if they were at a bear baiting’.
But Ginsberg survived, and won the audience over.
The evening ended with Davy Graham, a fixture in the folk scene and the basements of London, playing his guitar.
The 6,000–7,000 people melted away into London, into Notting Hill, Chalk Farm, Covent Garden, Ladbroke Grove.
Many of them were to meet again.
Their very own and golden city
Once assembled, the contingent dispersed.
In the wake of the Albert Hall Michael Horovitz had renewed enthusiasm to take New Departures on the road.
Ginsberg remained for his fortieth birthday party.
John Lennon dropped in on it, and got embarrassed when the poet, naked except for a pair of underpants draped round his head, kissed him on the cheek.
In July 1965 Adlai Stevenson, who had carried American liberalism's torch through the 1950s and into defeat by Eisenhower in the 1952 and 1956  Presidential elections dropped dead on a London street.
As Kennedy's United Nations ambassador, he had defended the involvement in Vietnam which, by the end of the month, had put 125,000 US troops in that country.
In Oxford Tariq Ali and Stephen Lukes had organized a second teach-in on the war.
British Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart had given uneasy backing to the American representative, Henry Cabot Lodge, and his defence of US action.
Teach-ins had sprung from the American example.
Week by week Peace News reported from Berkeley where the battle for the Free Speech Movement had, by May, led to the formation of the Vietnam Day Committee, pledged to stop conscription, and the war itself.
By August that political movement found itself a paper in the Berkeley Barb.
Up the Californian coast in San Francisco the LSD freak end of the underground was growing and pushing more people, and more pressure, on to Haight-Ashbury.
The first wave of British bands was being supplanted by the new Californian sound.
In San Francisco the Oracle, with its blend of acid graphics and peace and love exhortation, was to prove an irresistible lure to many in the 1967 Summer of Love.
Back in London the poets had dispersed, except for Gregory Corso.
And Miles didn't want to stay with Better Books if Collins was to take over.
He had discussed the prospect of setting up City Lights London with Ferlinghetti, but the San Francisco bookshop was tightly stretched as it was, and had no dollars to spare.
The contact with Corso proved more fruitful.
Through him he secured an introduction to John Dunbar, then the fiance of 16-year old Marianne Faithful, whose virginal looks and upper middle-class style had put her into the charts as a complement to the art student  R&B bands.
Dunbar in turn was a friend of Peter Asher, also in the charts as one half of Peter and Gordon, Westminster School's contribution to the mid 1960s.
And Asher, the brother of actress Jane Asher, was in touch with Paul McCartney.
Indeed the new millionaire of the Beatles was living in a small room in the Asher family's Wimpole Street home, next to Peter's Norwegian-wooded apartment.
The contacts paid off.
Miles.
Asher, and Dunbar became MAD Ltd, with the task of setting up a new bookshop.
Peter Asher put in 700, and lent Dunbar and Miles 700 each.
Dunbar was to run the art gallery attached to the shop, Miles would take care of the books.
The next problem was premises.
The Scotch of St James, off Piccadilly, was the club that pulled in the new pop generation.
Next door to it, in Mason's Yard, was an empty shop, which MAD leased.
‘Indica seemed a good name for an art gallery’, says Miles, ‘and it was the first name in Latin for marijuana.
It was a supposed joke.’
Even in its construction the shop intertwined the strands of the counter-culture and the music scene.
McCartney helped paint, and put up shelves alongside Pete Brown, poet, CND member and future lyricist for Cream.
Ian Somerville did the electrical system.
He was qualified.
‘He wrote the technical parts of Burroughs's books like The Ticket That Exploded’, explains Miles.
In January 1966 Indica opened its doors.
Ever since 1959, and Bomb, Miles had been experimenting with small magazines and one-offs.
In 1960 there had been Tree.
In 1964–5, with John Hopkins, he set up Love Books, specifically to publish experimental writing and poetry.
For company secretary they settled on a 34-year-old chartered accountant called Michael Henshaw.
After twelve years with the Inland Revenue he had quit to work for Arnold Wesker's ill-fated Centre 42 project at Chalk Farm's Roundhouse.
Wesker's dream had been a cultural palace for the workers; in the years ahead, through the Henshaw connection it was to become something else.
And Henshaw was to become the first money man of the underground.
In 1965 Miles and Hopkins produced Long Hair magazine, a collection of writings and poems that sold modestly.
But it was a first run, and there were plenty of other inspirations.
In New York John Wilcock's relationship with the Village Voice was moving towards its conclusion.
In between travel trips Wilcock ran into a woman at a party who lived with an artist manqué, Walter Bowart.
Returning from Japan Wilcock got in touch, and Bowart told Wilcock of his plans, together with Allen Katzman, to produce a new paper for the ‘east village’.
Ten years on the Village Voice was selling 80,000, getting respectable, and, thought Wilcock, staid.
Everything that the east  village — the downmarket part of the Voice's patch — wasn't.
Since it was to be the Village's other paper the name was simple, the East Village Other.
‘Great’, said Wilcock, ‘send me a copy and I'll plug it in my Voice column.’
On 1 October 1965 Bowart and Katzman duly obliged, as the first 2,500 copies of EVO rolled off the presses — the same number as the Voice's first issue ten years before.
So impressed was Wilcock that he offered to provide a column free for the new paper.
Less enthusiastic were Fancher and Dan Wolf, the Voice's owners.
‘The Voice was getting square’, says Wilcock.
‘The woman in the classified department would complain about how her advertisers didn't like my column.
They didn't like the stuff I was writing about Vietnam and Fancher and Wolf had always sort of suffered me.
They suffered me to the extent that I did my column for 530 weeks in a row but over the years there was more and more of a crackdown on giving me facilities in the office.
Eventually I had to get my mail elsewhere.
I think Fancher thought I'd have dope sent to the Voice.
They didn't like the EVO column one bit and finally they made me choose between them and it.’
EVO won.
The first column he wrote was about art and forgery, and he titled it ‘Art and other scenes’.
Bowart liked it, but thought it a trifle long.
They agreed to shorten it to ‘Other Scenes’.
It was to be a title with a long and cosmopolitan history.
Another early contributor was Ed Sanders, whose Fuck You — A Magazine of the Arts had begun from a ‘secret location’ in New York's lower east side in 1962.
Through Better Books Miles had been in contact with Sanders.
Indeed he was appointed London correspondent for EVO when it was launched, a fact that initially escaped Miles, since he was unaware it existed until the third issue.
But EVO went into Indica with the Voice and the Los Angeles Free Press.
So did a lot of people — many the worse for drink and other things — from the Scotch of St James.
The bookshop was on the ground floor, and the gallery in the basement.
The first account customer was McCartney, who, having heard a play on the BBC Third  Programme , had picked up on Alfred Jarry and Ubu Roi.
He was not alone, Ronnie Davis's San Francisco Mime Troupe had produced the play in December 1963, and Jim Haynes, in Edinburgh earlier that same year.
Dunbar progressed meanwhile with his art exhibitions.
In November 1966 he featured a Japanese artist, Yoko Ono.
An invitation went out to — and was accepted by — John Lennon.
In Edinburgh Haynes's time was running out, and his attention shifting elsewhere.
His relationship with the Traverse, rarely tranquil, was breaking down, with Haynes's suggestion that the theatre open a London base meeting with strong opposition.
The  bookshop was still open, and now, in addition to the paperbacks, the little magazines, and the Village Voice, the new wave of American papers was beginning to appear on the shelves.
The American papers were an inspiration to people like John Lloyd, as they were to the group gathering 400 miles down the A1.
With two of his friends, Alan Hamilton and Alan Jackson, Lloyd would visit Jim Haynes in his flat above the Traverse.
There they discussed Haynes's idea of a new paper.
‘It was based on the Voice’, says Lloyd.
‘Here was this tremendously exciting anti-establishment paper.
Hamilton and I did dummies of what an alternative paper might look like — we were then working on Student, and had access to design material.
We conceived it much more narrowly than Jim did.
We thought of it, I guess, as a left-wing paper.
He was much more into the arts in general.’
But nothing came of it, then.
In 1965 Lloyd went back to being Student's editor, and Jim Haynes headed south to set up the London Traverse Company at the Jeanetta Cochrane Theatre in Holborn.
In 1966 Vietnam was becoming an irritant to the Labour government, but not a major one.
At the end of March Harold Wilson had increased his majority from 4 to 94 in the General Election, but significantly in July there were arrests outside the US embassy of protesters against the bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong.
CND was still marching, and although the numbers were dwindling it remained a focus of opposition.
Indica had been open since February, and that month, too, the Marquee in Wardour Street had featured the ‘Spontaneous Underground’.
Across in west London John Hopkins had been running, with others including Michael X, his London Free School.
Love Books was continuing, Indica was open — although the premises rapidly became cramped — and there was Long Hair to look back on.
But what there wasn't was a magazine, a newspaper of the emerging movement.
But there were Miles and Hopkins.
And the CND march of Easter 1966 was where a new paper was given a test outing.
It was called the ‘Exploding Galactic Moon Edition’ of the Longhair Times.
It had a competition sponsored by McCartney to find a script for a movie, a declaration by Harry Fainlight about the (still legal) pleasures of LSD, it had letters, and, specifically, it had a long epistle from John Wilcock in New York, defining what was supposed to be going on.
It was produced offset.
‘Instead of setting it in type we got the original manuscript and made zinc plates’, recalls Miles.
‘It was great, the letters were just as they were when we received them.’
It was also rather different from Sanity, the Newsletter, the Daily Worker, Labour Worker, and the other papers bombarding the marchers.
Five hundred copies were produced, and  Miles believes they sold out within an hour.
The paper had taken a day to produce.
Meanwhile Indica needed more space.
At 102 Southampton Row was Jackson's booksellers.
Just south of it was the Jeanetta Cochrane theatre, where Haynes was working with, amongst others, Charles Marovitz, another exiled American, but, in his case, from New York's lower east side rather than Louisiana.
Marovitz, theatre director and critic, had quit New York in 1958, but had retained a writing relationship with the Voice, which led him, early in 1966, to cover the new-born Indica for the paper.
Across Southampton Row, a dull boulevard then, as now, of cheap Italian restaurants and tourist hotels were the little streets around the British Museum, and London University.
Nearby on the Row was the Central School of Art and Design.
The street might be boring, the neighbourhood wasn't.
Jackson's was.
Its speciality, according to Miles, was the supply of improving texts to convents, which was supervised by a man called Chris Hill.
Having met him, Miles made him an offer, a directorship of the company, and Indica to move in.
Hill accepted the deal, and in September 1966 the new Indica was open.
Compared with Mason's Yard it was huge, with a main shop 90 feet long, plus a basement as large, and other rooms in a sub-basement.
Marovitz and the Jeanetta Cochrane were early tenants down in the lower depths.
So was Alex Trocchi's Project Sigma, the Situationist-inspired intergalactic switchboard of information, a project for ‘invisible insurrection’.
Fourteen years later McGrath told the Guardian that ‘Trocchi used to say ‘Where Trotsky said seize the viaducts and bridges, we must seize the means of communication’‘.
As far as Miles could see the project did little.
The storage and dispensing of such material was to prove one of the more baffling, wearisome, and occasionally lucrative obsessions of the underground in the years ahead, but by the end of 1966 Sigma was petering out.
It could, on dark days in Bloomsbury, be a dreary place, but Indica was a place to go to, to exchange ideas, make initial contacts with another London.
Above its dull Edwardian frontage was the name, in stark white letters.
There was a growing movement: there were the Los Angeles Free Presses and the Barbs and the Oracles and the Village Voices and there was the example of that Easter's CND success.
There were the people coming in to shuffle through the little magazines, Zen Buddhism, Burroughs, Ginsberg, Nuttall, New Departures, Circuit, four letter words, and Indian music.
Above ground the modest experiment of the Labour government was degenerating into shadow boxing with Rhodesia's Ian Smith, compromises with the Americans’ Vietnam policy, and economic crises.
Yet what  could never be achieved via Parliament could be experimented with in more exciting forms in Southampton Row and the network around it.
By that summer Miles had started taking his unasked-for post with EVO seriously.
Having made contact with a group of students at the nearby Architectural Association he went to see them play at the Goings On Club in Archer Street, a tiny place largely frequented by poets.
They were called the Abdabs, specialized in serious experimentation in sound and light, wore white coats, and would discuss their work, post-performance, with the equally serious audience.
The week Miles reviewed them for EVO they changed their name to the Pink Floyd.
The name went well with the acid, which from early 1966 had begun to arrive in London from the United States.
In 1964 the Conservative Government had legislated against purple hearts, but in 1966 good and bad trips from lysergic acid diethylamide were still legal.
EVO, partly in reaction to the Voice, partly the result of its staff's predilections, had rapidly settled into the acid freak end of the underground, and away from the politicos of the American new left.
‘The style that EVO had was the one I particularly picked up on’, says Miles.
‘It was the unedited, extended transcribed interview, no one had ever done it in Britain or America.
It was an invention of the underground press.’
Later too, via Wilcock, it was to provide Andy Warhol with his path into magazines.
Another crucial feature of EVO was its printing: offset litho, cheap, and produced in Chinatown, below the Village.
Offset was exciting.
Offset was freedom.
At Better Books Miles had taken in the mimeographed magazines.
At Indica they appeared from offset litho presses.
New on the market were IBM electric golfball typewriters.
Once typed on to special paper, the copy could be pasted on to the boards and, with no need for hot metal, or skilled printers, was camera-ready.
‘Or’, says Miles, ‘what we regarded as camera-ready.’
And the bookshop had made the connections: Marovitz and the Cochrane theatre people; Haynes and Jack Henry Moore, with plenty of contacts in Scotland, in Europe; Burroughs and Ginsberg and Corso and Ferlinghetti; Simon Vinkenoog in Amsterdam; and through the art gallery Indica had access to the British avant-garde.
A paper seemed the logical progression, a paper for the 6,000 at the Albert Hall, a paper for the people living in cheap rooms in Notting Hill Gate, Covent Garden, Ladbroke Grove, Chalk Farm, the Gate, the Garden, the Grove, and the Farm.
But there were problems.
‘We didn't want to be press barons’, observes Miles.
And neither Hopkins, who had plenty of journalistic work, or Miles, who was running a bookshop, or Haynes, who was trying to run a theatre company, wanted to edit it, and probably  couldn't anyway.
Nor did they want a vast editorial board.
It settled down to Moore, Haynes, Miles, and Hopkins, and Michael Henshaw, changing hats from Love Books, was made a director.
They also needed a name.
This came from Bobo Legrendre, like Haynes a native of Louisiana.
‘She was’, suggests Miles, ‘the last of the va-va-voom types.’
She was big, well-off, theatrical, and lived above a butcher's shop in Shepherds Market, Mayfair.
They met to discuss the project.
‘Bobo marched across the room, floorboards squeaking’, says Miles, ‘and said ‘why don't we call it It?’’
It could be anything.
Intergalactic Times — like Longhair's child-Interracial Times, Intravenous Times, Interminable Times…
‘Other people called it International Times or even ‘eye tee’‘, says Miles.
‘We always called it It.
To the people on the staff it was always It.’
It didn't have an editor.
But Miles and Hopkins had the contacts with Peace News, and with Tom McGrath.
And it had been while McGrath had been features editor that Peace News had carried the spread extolling Ginsberg's London readings, and the big page feature on the Albert Hall gathering.
McGrath accepted the offer, and his assistant was David Mairowitz from New York.
Hopkins took charge of production — it was seen as a part-time post, leaving him free for other work — but where was the cash to come from'?
The literati and the US army hadn't been the only imports into Europe from across the Atlantic.
With the American-funded boom sweeping Europe a new generation of American tycoons was arriving too.
One was a former radical socialist, Bernie Cornfeld, whose IOS venture was to make him very rich, and many of those rash enough to invest in it extremely poor.
At the beginning of IOS one of Cornfeld's associates had been Victor Herbert, who had quit early.
From his Paris home Herbert was a funder of various cultural causes — including the Living Theatre — and he had met Haynes.
The man from Louisiana felt it was time to renew the acquaintance.
Would Herbert invest in the paper?
No he wouldn't.
It would probably never work out anyway.
What he would do was lend Haynes 500, on a very short-term basis.
He wrote out the cheque.
‘I rushed off and called Hoppy, Miles, and Jack and said ‘roll the presses’‘, wrote Haynes.
It wasn't quite that simple.
There were seven offset litho printers in the country.
All were approached, and all turned down the privilege of printing Britain's first underground magazine.
So the paper's first seven issues were produced on old, hot metal.
When should the paper come out?
Since it was to be a fortnightly, the best thing was to alternate with the other half of what passed for London's alternative press, Private Eye.
As for the starting date, that was simple: ‘when we were ready’, says Miles.
By luck rather than judgement they chose what, in publishing  terms, was a good, if late, launch date, 14 October 1966.
The colleges were back at the end of September, holidays had ended, the metropolis was beginning to settle down for the winter.
Challenging the dullness of London was a key aim of It.
A city where the buses stopped at eleven thirty, the pubs ushered their surprised foreign tourists on to the streets at five to eleven, and a meal after that meant Indian or Chinese.
A city where the fringe theatre meant Jim Haynes, Charles Marovitz, and a few other expatriates from across the Atlantic, and avant-garde cinema a night out at the 35-year-old Academy in Oxford Street.
There were clubs, true, upmarket places for the rock aristocracy, and places like the Marquee, the Flamingo, the 100 Club and Tiles — home of late-period mod pill-popper on Oxford Street.
But these remained isolated in a sea where information was the preserve of the music press, the two London evening papers, and the 30-year-old What's On magazine, with its catalogue of hostess bars staffed by girls who had left home with men from the motor trade.
It was a long way from New York, let alone the West Coast, Beatles, Stones, and all.
The staff of the new paper decided to launch It with a party.
The venue was the Roundhouse, still unused at the top end of Chalk Farm road.
‘Centre 42 had the place for years and had done fuck-all with it’, observes Miles.
‘Through Michael Henshaw we got permission to have a party there.
Later on Arnold Wesker severely regretted this.’
The Roundhouse was to flourish, in its darkness, with its cold and terrible facilities, as a key underground venue well into the 1970s.
That night in October was to be its first successful trial.
Once it had been a railway shed, indeed the tracks were still in it, later, in a period when Gilbey's Gin had used the building as a warehouse, a balcony had been added, which was only wide enough to take one person.
There was a narrow staircase leading in, two lavatories, and laughable electrics.
It should have been a deathtrap, but it wasn't.
‘We always figured we couldn't afford ads, but we could make a lot of noise’, says Miles.
The result, hopefully, would be publicity, free, and the admission fees — five shillings in advance, ten shillings at the door — would do something to pay off Mr Herbert, waiting in Paris.
The posters went up, in a scattered fashion, around the autumnal city: ‘All Night Rave’ they proclaimed.
Back in 1961 at the Beaulieu Jazz Festival, a modest event sponsored by the motoring Earl of Montague, some mild disorder had occurred amongst teenagers inflamed by the wild sounds of terrible trad bands.
The Daily Mail had proclaimed that a new and ugly word had entered the English language, ‘raver’.
That Saturday, 15 October, five years later, the ravers had come home to roost, this time accompanied by Strip Trip, Soft Machine, a steel band, and Pink Floyd.
The evening, largely organized by Hopkins and David Mairowitz did something to further that perpetually lost It cause — London as a twenty-four hour city.
It didn't even start until 11 p.m.
How the ravers were to find their way out of Chalk Farm and into their bedsits would also be a challenge worthy of the do-it-yourself times into which the metropolitans were moving.
It didn't deter the 3,000-odd who fought their way in.
Down from Chalk Farm tube, shivering, stumbling up from Camden Town, past a then-deserted lock, to be confronted by the soon-to-be-familiar queue.
An hour could be passed, meeting people last seen at the Albert Hall, on the marches of the last ten years, at rock concerts, in pubs, the London School of Economics bar, the London Free School, the Marquee, the Young Socialists.
The proto-underground drew out the proto-glitterati.
Monica Vitti, whose film with Antonioni, The Red Desert, an enigmatic portrayal of capitalist alienation, had left most of its audience little wiser but feeling they were into something good, fought her way up the stairs with Antonioni, then working on Blow Up.
She was in town to film Modesty Blaise for Joseph Losey.
McCartney, true to Indica, appeared dressed as an Arab.
Peter Brook, Marat-Sade's director came.
So, from America, did Kenneth Rexroth, friend of Ferlinghetti.
He wrote the event up for the straights of the San Francisco Chronicle.
Alex Trocchi tried to get in free, through the padlocked back door.
When the queuers finally made their way to the head of the stairs they were greeted by a strange figure holding a tray of sugar cubes, sure sign that acid was on offer.
Some said all the cubes were laced, others one in ten.
In reality none apparently were, but inside the revellers could try drink — if they had brought any — and dope and speed, were they in possession of such substances, or if anyone else was prepared to offer them around.
In addition to the sugar cubes a large jelly had been made for the occasion, indicative of 1950s kids on a spree.
Someone rode a bicycle through it, and the jelly and the bicycle disappeared.
According to Miles some had succeeded in having trips on the expectations induced by Tate and Lyle.
Soft Machine produced a motorcycle — a considerable feat in view of the human congestion — which was driven amidst the quaking pillars and balconies before being wired for sound, and revved up as additional accompaniment.
Indica's contacts with modern art had yielded, through the Robert Fraser Gallery a large American car which had been painted in fashionable stripes by New York's Binder, Edwards and Vaughan, interior decorators.
Before that evening the Pink Floyd's gigs had been small affairs such as the ICA, and for the London Free School at St Luke's Hall in Notting Hill — but their rudimentary light show meant they were paid rather better than Soft Machine.
‘They were a bit nervous, but it was a big break for them,’ remembers Miles.
‘Rexroth's review said that as the band hadn't shown up a pick-up band was assembled from members of the audience, who just banged pots and pans and made odd noises.
That was his interpretation of what the Floyd did.’
The band also succeeded in blowing the fragile electrical circuit during their performance.
The London Film Co-Op had just started too, and for those too tired, smashed out, or bored for the music or perhaps with an interest in America in grainy black and white there were movies like Kenneth Anger's Scorpio Rising, and Towers Open Fire.
The conditions were difficult, conceded It in its report of the night, ‘yet the films went on.
It may though, have been just the right setting for those particular films.
Burroughs’ inner space disappearance in Towers Open Fire somehow had more impact because of the vibrations from the ‘party’.’
The vibrations may, on occasions, have been shivers.
It was bitterly cold.
It also rapidly became very wet, as the two lavatories gave way under the torrent from the streets.
‘We had to put duckboards down to get to them,’ says Miles.
‘The girls would take their dresses off to tiptoe through that awful mire and then, coming back put them on again.
There was nothing remotely erotic about these naked people wandering around the lake surrounding the bog.’
The police arrived outside.
There was little anyone could do.
The promoters could hardly get out and the police, in at the dawn of the new experience, couldn't really get in.
It was just as well.
Inside the building Tom McGrath contemplated the oil heaters with their exposed flames, the quaking balcony stuffed with people, and, in between exhilaration, feared disaster.
Five years later, in Watch Out Kids the future It staffer Mick Farren noted that what he had seen there, that night, was more than a new rock ‘n’ roll show, it was ‘the germ of a new way of life’.
It observed the following week that the police had been very co-operative.
Others, semi-sightseers, put in an appearance.
Amongst them was Michelene Wandor, later a Time Out poetry editor, feminist, poet and playwright.
Then she was a Cambridge graduate mother of two, married to a successful young American publisher she had met at Cambridge, the future co-founder of Ink, Ed Victor.
Marriage had effectively put paid to her career as an actress, and between household tasks she busied herself penning articles protesting at the pressures on people like her to cook beautiful meals and write novels like Margaret Drabble.
She was relieved, later, that they weren't published.
Through Ed, who, she thought had the right contacts because he was a man, they went to the Roundhouse that night.
She contemplated the nubile, still just teenage teenagers, with their post jail-bait image.
She had long hair, and a short-skirt, but she didn't fit in, she was a mum.
Across the globe, in San Francisco that weekend the Artists' Liberation Front, in rather better weather organized a weekend of free fairs in the ghetto parks.
Tension was rising in that city; so was the militancy.
The Front's formation the previous spring had been backed by Ferlinghetti, Rexroth, Bill Graham — whose role as a rock promoter around the Filmore ballroom was just emerging and Ralph J. Gleason, then a little known San Francisco Chronicle columnist, later one of the main inspirations, and writers on Jann Wenner's Rolling Stone, just a year away from its first edition.
Back in Chalk Farm the crowds stumbled out into the dawn, past the shuttered Greek restaurants, the nearest thing to a chic London ice cream parlour, Marine Ices, the junk shops and cafes.
‘The Pop Art Costume Masque Drag Ball Et Al’ was over.
But the community — that much abused word for the next two decades existed and It was launched.
There was, thought Miles then, and now, an incredible exhilaration.
The disturbing world of the flower children
‘It’ hit the eye first, on the cover of that launch issue.
Reversed out alongside the gaze of a 1920s movie heroine staring impassively out into the 1960s.
She should have been the original ‘It’ girl, Clara Bow, but the staff, not for the last time, got it wrong, and put the more vampish Theda Bara on the cover instead.
Bara, with her hint of eastern promise by way of Hollywood, was more appropriate for a time fixated on oriental and Asian culture, mysticism, dope and war.
Above it: ‘The International Times, October 14–27/1s.’
A definite article ensured that it was the definitive paper, on this side of the Atlantic at least— except for The Times, which promptly began legal moves to get ‘Times’ dropped from the title.
Since that was the year that the Thunderer had finally decided to put news, rather than ads on the front page, it would be embarrassing-if bizarre — should unwary purchasers confuse the two products.
The layout was rudimentary.
It didn't have the inspired anarchic design of some later papers, nor the clean, sanserif appearance of editor Tom McGrath's previous paper, Peace News.
Photo reproduction was bad, headlines eccentric, and little of the paper was taken up with London.
But, significantly, half a page at the back featured the ‘What's Happening’ listings of events, printed in tiny type — one of the paper's key selling points for the future and, eventually, one of the sources of its downfall.
Soon after the departure of Roszak from Peace News McGrath had quit that paper, nursing an unhealthy obsession with drugs.
Anxious to quit London, he had accepted an offer from the poet Adrian Mitchell of the loan of a cottage in north Wales.
While there he received one of the fateful telegrams that were to dot the history of the underground: ‘Phone Hoppy’ it said.
Hopkins had told McGrath of the plans for It and for the Scot to edit it.
Taken up with the rather generous terms that he imagined — as it turned out accompanied the post, he accepted.
Talking to Gavin Selerie in 1983 McGrath detailed some of the influences that came to work on him at that time.
Through Roszak's influence he had read Thomas Merton and Kenneth Rexroth, the anarchists Paul Goodman and Alex Comfort, and had absorbed the new literature of the civil rights movement, Liberation magazine.
‘That was coming in from one side into It, but it was too moral for me — and it still is.
Although peace and love is one aspect of me, I thought I'd like to go with the sinners: people like Laing and Trocchi.’
The catholicism of McGrath's tastes, coupled with the contacts of Miles and his wife Sue Miles, and the input of Trocchi, Moore — whom McGrath had introduced to Haynes — and Hopkins were the core of It's initial success.
‘The first ten issues’, recalls Miles, ‘were deeply serious.
You can't be frivolous in hot metal.’
No, but even if the paper had been offset, its personnel would probably have prevented much frivolity.
‘The argument dwindles into a kind of romantic liberalism’, wrote Charles Marovitz on the front page.
He was castigating the new Royal Shakespeare production, Peter Brooke's US, on the war in Vietnam, but he could almost have been talking about the magazine.
‘The role of the theatre in times like today is to elucidate and give a positive lead.’
And the role of It?
‘London is a comparatively free and happy city’, mused the inaugural editorial.
‘But it isn't quite as switched on as our ad men make out.’
It continued by denouncing artists' tangos with the Arts Council, and pointing out that ‘Change begins with you’.
Quite, but who was ‘you’?
They didn't want to be press barons, says Miles, they wanted a community paper, and it hadn't even been easy to find an editor amongst the founding group, preoccupied as they were with art galleries and bookshops, theatre companies and poetry, and preoccupied also with that sense of freedom, and the breaking down of national barriers which had accompanied the explosion of travel in the 1960s.
From the beginning the group had said it wanted the paper to be international, and It was.
It was the internationalism of the 1965 poetry reading, cultural, post-Beat, off-beat, and art-oriented.
Simon Vinkenoog, the founder of Sigma Nederland provided a piece from Amsterdam for the first issue on the then prominent Provos, the proto-Green anarchists who had just won seats on that city's council.
From Paris, Jean-Jacques Lebel wrote an obituary for the surrealist André Breton, beginning a relationship between the French semi-Situationist and the British underground press that was to persist into the following decade.
A giant inflatable woman-as-art-object was the contribution from Stockholm.
Dope featured prominently.
Yoko Ono's one-woman show at the Indica Gallery received a plug.
And there was what Miles describes as ‘our attempt at politics’: an analysis of China's cultural revolution-then moving towards its climax — by Alex Gross.
The writer assessed press reports, criticized the lack of western coverage, and likened the Red Guards to the children's crusades of medieval Europe.
It wasn't the unthinking Maoism of which the underground was later — and  usually inaccurately accused — quite the reverse.
Culture was under attack, Gross suggested; it had to be defended.
So did the London Free School, the creation of John Hopkins, with Michael Abdul Malik, and the victim, it was claimed, of neglect by Kensington and Chelsea council and harassment by the Special Branch.
Similar preoccupations dominated the issues that took It into the spring of 1967.
Ono was still around in issue two; growing fast was an interest in censorship and pornography, to join dope, flying saucers, ley-lines, and rock as obsessions of the nascent underground.
It was in attitudes to sex — and specifically male attitudes to women — that It began to argue with the outside world, and itself, almost from the beginning.
The 1940s and 1950s Beats had created a vision of lone men, and buddies out on the highway, fucking where and when they wanted to, an image that Kerouac et al.had carried to farcical, and imaginative, extremes.
The Situationists, too, in their demolition job on the ‘spectacle’ of capitalism had used pornography for what they regarded as subversive purposes.
Those attitudes fed into It and continued to inform — or divert — the underground press up to, and beyond, the inception of the women's movement.
That autumn, in the New Left Review, Juliet Mitchell was writing her ‘Women, the longest revolution’ article, whose impact, eventually, on the new British feminism was to be enormous, but while the Marxist journal was on sale in Indica its message didn't penetrate It— or many other places — in those days.
Thus was sexual liberation defined by an almost exclusively male heterosexual group, drawing on old subversions — Dada, Surrealism, Beat, Situationism — diffused through the mass-market expansion into commercial sex that Playboy had pioneered back in the 1950s.
It's staff would probably have decried any such connection with the upmarket skin magazine's Hugh Hefner, but it was there none the less.
David Mairowitz's Censorship column covered the controversies around obscenity cases like Last exit to Brooklyn but also struck attitudes which others saw, even in those days, more suspiciously.
Mairowitz was, McGrath pointed out in an ‘open letter’ published in It, responsible for ‘the pretty chicks’who appeared in the paper.
The editor added that a girl had remarked to him that ‘she thought that many of the supposed erotic pictures in It degraded the female’.
He had, he added diplomatically, a sense of this himself.
‘I would much rather define my intentions as pornographic than erotic’, responded Mairowitz.
‘I have no love for the very common attitude which places certain literature and pictorial matter in the realm of art to justify it to the establishment…
My intention is not to shock anybody.
Nor is it to degrade the female (far be it from  me to do so).
I merely want to open all the doors as far as they will go at the moment.’
For the next six years doors opened and slammed.
Meanwhile It girls continued to ‘show their pretty faces’ in the paper, and brandish candles, bananas, and transparent dresses ‘designed by two local tripped-out chicks’and suggested as purchases for ‘your psychedelic mistress’.
Old-style male sexuality had, in the pages of It at least, reached, eight years on, Macmillan's dictum for the consumer society-complete with features on rubber fetishism and consumer guides to Soho strip clubs.
Issue two covered the birth of the London Film Makers' Co-op and its chairman, Harvey Matusow.
The third issue provided four pages on London's underground film festival.
A three-page interview with Paul McCartney in the sixth issue, says Miles, probably boosted sales from the 5,000 to 10,000 mark towards, optimistically, 15,000.
Soon after Pete Townshend was questioned by Miles.
Allen Ginsberg's pronouncements on war and peace rated double-page spreads, and radical black comedian Dick Gregory got a page.
In between was the common currency of the underground, pieces on dope, and, at the back of the paper, the ‘What's happening’ section, which by issue nine was covering almost two pages.
And the ubiquitous Wilcock and his ‘Other Seens’— as it was spelt-column had shown up too.
Wilcock had written about Haynes and his Edinburgh bookshop in the Village Voice soon after it had opened, and had popped up in the one-off Longhair Times too.
The Englishman's news from New York emphasized again the paper's tilt towards the United States; it might cover Italy, India, Denmark, but it was the America of LBJ, poetry, the Vietnam movement, and Golden Gate love-ins that exerted the magnetic attraction.
Wilcock, the expatriate in Manhattan, also echoed in his concern with cultural anarchy rather than political action the preoccupations of the American expatriates in London.
Within it were the strong echoes of the disgust with politics that McCarthyism had induced, and the early excitement of the Beats and their progeny in Greenwich Village.
It was a leitmotif of the early It.
The background of the American pioneers was varied.
David Mairowitz had been active in Berkeley's Free Speech Movement; the one-time editor of the Insect Trust Gazette Bill Levy's interest was Ezra Pound.
He had produced the Gazette, it was suggested by one reader, as a ‘post-Beat, post-Howl product of nihilist despair’.
In the second issue of It the front page, and most of the second, had been dominated by excerpts from Pound's war-time broadcasts from fascist Italy to the allies.
Edited by Levy, the speeches reeked of Pound's obsessions and anti-semitism.
It was publishing the material because it existed, McGrath explained, and, while neither the paper nor staff were anti-semitic, ‘Considering Ezra Pound's  achievements as a writer, making work of his generally available would seem to need no excuse…
We can never know what folly and what wisdom is in the speeches until we have had a chance to read them.’
The chance was short-lived.
McGrath promised a further extract for the following issue, but by then Pound's publishers had stepped in, claiming breach of copyright.
Jim Haynes, meanwhile, tended to gravitate through London oblivious of politics, taking as much pleasure it seemed from a London night out with President Johnson's daughter, or a meeting with the US ambassador's wife -'I; don't see how anyone can meet her and not fall in love with her' — as from radical arts.
And for Jack Henry Moore, who had made his own commitment to sexual politics by coming out years before, the subject was now part of his past.
At the end of the decade, when the Gay Liberation Front emerged in London, he was unimpressed.
‘It was done man’, he told a young associate on It, ‘We've done all that.’
Orthodox politics, too, including those of the left were also uninteresting to him.
Harvey Matusow, too, who featured in It and other, later underground papers, also disclaimed interest in straight politics.
Apart from chairing the new London film co-op he had a small article in the first It detailing his efforts to phone the CIA at the American embassy.
He didn't get anywhere, which in view of his past was ironic.
Matusow was one of those lucky, and curious, souls who surfaced out of a curious past — like Michael X/Malik/de Freitas — in those fragmented times.
Mainly regarded as a victim of McCarthyism amongst his London associates, he had, in reality, spent much of the early 1950s as a nark for the House UnAmerican Activities Committee.
While on the Justice Department's payroll he had named 216 ‘Communists’; in 1950–1 he had been employed by the FBI — at $70 a month — to inform on the US Communist Party; and one of his early (1952) journalistic outings had been to write ‘Reds in khaki’ for the American Legion Magazine.
By the time he had got to suggesting that 126 card-carrying Communists were on the staff of the New York Times Sunday supplement, Matusow's credibility was fraying, and, in 1956, after a series of volte-faces he found himself on the wrong end of a five-year sentence for perjury.
By the late 1960s he also found time to set up ‘Harvey Matusow's Jew's Harp Band’.
The Englishman, Hopkins, like Mairowitz, had embraced different politics.
After Cambridge he had worked at Harwell Atomic Research Station, begun working as a photographer for the Observer, and been active in CND and Centre 42.
But his work with the London Free School and around the early days of the UFO club, indicated the change in his priorities since Centre 42 and CND.
For Miles those priorities had never really existed.
orthodox politics in  those days meant copies of the New Left Review and the other papers stacked on Indica's shelves.
He met the new left, was sometimes intrigued by it, but it was a different, and largely incomprehensible, world.
‘There was no contact with the straight left’, he says, ‘they hated us.’
And to some the left didn't seem relevant to the underground eruption taking place around It.
Admittedly It's hopes of a twenty-four-hour city remained dashed; in the paper's listings a motley collection of late movies, plumbing services, and such late-night eateries as the London airport restaurant were featured, but the Roundhouse launch gathering was rapidly imitated, and replicated.
Just before Christmas 1966 was ‘Night Tripper’; just before the New Year UFO, the club of the early underground, opened its doors.
UFO breathed life into the Tottenham Court Road of furniture showrooms and Quality Inns.
Near Goodge Street tube station was the Shamrock Club, a venue for the Irish in the centre of London.
The club had fallen on hard times, and the arrival of a travelling circus of the long hairs, trainee freaks and happening performers seemed like a good idea.
Through the winter and into the spring the dedicated, the day trippers, and the voyeurs plodded their paths down the stairs of the club — complete with its incongruous Hibernian motifs — into an atmosphere of joss sticks, dope, new music, and occasional bad trips.
When, in June 1967, the Beatles' ‘Sergeant Pepper’ was released, UFO, with its light shows, and globules of colour spewing down the old Irish walls, seemed the natural place to go and listen to it.
At the end of January 1967 Miles took stock in his It column of the ‘London Underground Generation’.
There were two main groups, he suggested: under-20s brought up on TV and 1950s rock ‘n’ roll; and post-20s conditioned by ‘illustrated volumes of The Great War in Pictures, Dad's war stories, rationing, and Frankie Laine’.
The latter split between what were to become known as ‘weekend hippies’ taking time off from the straight world, and those in Miles words, ‘still trying’.
In between were the Americans ‘who are responsible to a degree for the professionalism and hustling that goes on around town’.
The link, he suggested, was the ‘intuitive poster art, words to songs that are not quite understandable, superimpositions in films that don't quite focus into a subject’, all of which, he contended optimistically, ‘move us towards the new era’.
But there were others too, some drawn from that old left milieu regarded with suspicion by Miles.
One was David Robins, then a student at nearby University College, from a leftist Jewish London background.
Later in the 1960s it would be great to be a student, but not then, not for Robins.
Near his Chalk Farm flat was an entrée to another social scene, the world of the small magazines, of Pete Brown, Mal Dean — who had done design for the first It  and Robins was drawn towards it.
He worked for Circuit, another magazine following the path of Horovitz's New Departures, and at Indica he met Miles.
To Robins Miles was a sophisticate, in touch, linked to Ginsberg and to It, and to Tom McGrath and the Americans abroad, Haynes, Moore, Mairowitz, and Levy.
The Americans had, he thought, the edge on everybody else, they had been doing it, they had confidence, credentials, and they could write.
The lure of It proved irresistible.
But at another college nearby — Central School of Art further down Southampton Row — another student, Pearce Marchbank, was less impressed.
Marchbank, the designer later of Friends and Time Out, and one-time Oz editor, was also later to become a great friend of Miles, but the early It left him unimpressed.
He was planning his own paper, the Wall Street Journal, which was to include posters by various artists, including Pink Floyd's Nick Mason and a story by Terry Jones, later of Monty Python's Flying Circus.
But the format, almost more than the content, interested him: each front cover on each copy was to be different, and the magazine was contained, loose-leafed, in a bag, inspired, he thought, by Andy Warhol, and it was what he felt an underground magazine should be.
It meanwhile was still being printed letterpress and seemed more an arts magazine than a product of any new movement, and put together by amateurs with leather arm-patches on their tweed jackets.
Offers from the new paper that Central students help with It left Marchbank unmoved.
But outside London the paper began to sell, as in cities like Birmingham, Manchester, and Edinburgh attempts were made to match the expanding underground scene.
By the summer of 1967 Birmingham had the beginnings of an arts laboratory, partly masterminded by the future It music editor, Mark Williams, who was street-selling the paper to supplement a meagre income as a trainee advertising account executive in Solihull.
And in Edinburgh the appearance of It at the still-functioning Paperback Shop renewed the link with Haynes for people like Lloyd, who could regard themselves as the Americans' ambassadors in the north.
And Lloyd found, in a milieu still heavily influenced by the Communist Party, that he had little difficulty in outselling the Morning Star when he took it on the streets.
And if the vagaries of distribution made it difficult to get It there were others on hand more than willing to give the new paper, Indica, and the new culture a boost.
‘Pop stars and drugs’, blazed the News of the World on 29 January 1967, the week following Miles's analysis of the new underground, ‘Facts that will shock you.’
The headline accompanied the story of the unfortunate Suzanne Lloyd who recounted her ‘acid times’ with the new pop/folk singer Donovan, which had included a visit to Jean Luc Godard's Pierrot le  Fou which she labelled as one of ‘the ‘acid’films that are in vogue now’.
The paper's initial foray suffered from a certain paucity of research and culminated in an attack on the impeccably orthodox BBC disc-jockey David Jacobs whose prime status was wilting under the impact of the new pirate radio stations.
 Jacobs' folly had been to play ‘Can't Happen Here’‘by a group of American male singers calling themselves the Mothers of Invention’ on BBC TV's Juke Box Jury, adding that the record had been made on a ‘trip’.
Even worse, the paper suggested, two of the four-strong jury had voted the record — wrongly as it transpired — a hit.
By 12 February the paper had done some digging, which had taken it, bashfully, to Southampton Row and Indica, and had summoned up many of the spectres upsetting the generation still in thrall to Dad's war stories.
‘Like so many sophisticated evils, the LSD craze began in America’, it noted.
‘Amongst the most active British groups advocating LSD are some members of the London Free School which comprises about 200 people and has many supporters.’
Having dealt with Hopkins's venture, the News of the World's reporter thumbed through It, where he found advertisements for Psychedelic Review and ‘editorial matter praising drugs and drugtakers’.
The hapless Jeff Nuttall — whose cartoon strip had been running since the first issue-also felt the lash.
‘The strip showed huge distorted bodies with monster heads and twisted limbs sprouting with such things as: ‘Vera, your beauty is unsurpassed in the undeniable excess of its obscenity and still you mouth me nothing but zero.’’
By the following week Nuttall, whose attitude to LSD was far from enthusiastic within the underground, had been forced to issue a denial of drug taking, as had the Pink Floyd, another target.
But it was Indica which seemed to most disturb the paper.
Its ‘investigator’ reported that: ‘Browsing through the shelves was like a glimpse of a madhouse.
Books with poetry scribbled across erotic pictures lined the shelves…
One book called The Four Letter Word contains page after page of white space with four letter words all over it.
There were rows and rows of cheaply printed books of weird poetry about erotic fantasies all of which had close links with LSD…
Posters on the walls invited customers to ‘All night trips’, and Indian music is played gently in the background.
The Indian music is significant, since it is a generally accepted part of many organized LSD experiences.’
The News of the World's vision should stand with the many other bizarre sightings of that year, blending as it did fear of modernity evil American sophistication — the threat of revamped Limehouse opium dens, courtesy of Indica's Indian music, and the throwback to holiday camp drilling thanks to ‘organized’ LSD experiences.
The paper was to return to the theme throughout the year, but its early  outrage began to be accompanied by a tone verging on envy.
By June it was quoting Paul McCartney from Life magazine admitting to LSD experiences.
By July it was observing the ‘Disturbing world of the flower children’ and a week later it featured ‘Weekends with the flower children’complete with notes on make-up followed by ‘Flower children at home’comprising pictures of radicals doing very little in a house off the Balls Pond Road.
While the campaign doubtless sent many young people off to London in search of trips, eroticism, and communal life it also energized the police.
One result was a raid on the Rolling Stones, which, by June, had left Mick Jagger facing three months in jail, Keith Richards a year, and their- and Miles's — acquaintance, art gallery proprietor Robert Frazer, six months in jail.
A July editorial by William Rees-Mogg ‘Breaking a butterfly on a wheel’ was to help free Jagger and Richards, not so Frazer, or John Hopkins, who was sentenced to nine months for marijuana offences on 1 June.
It, meanwhile, as a primary source of debate for many people having good, bad, and catastrophic times with drugs in that year, was doing its best to agonize over the issue.
In between interviews with ‘Men of grass’ and ‘Interpot reports’were editorials denouncing addiction, suggesting, as Tom McGrath had in November 1966, that ‘if we ever get round to doing full serious research into drugs as we must do soon — we might find that no one will want to use them again'; opposing moves to a US-style approach to addiction; and advising on ways to help junkies.
Such deliberation, while the youth of Britain were liable to go up in smoke, outraged many.
When Jim Haynes had been planning his shift from the Edinburgh Traverse to London in 1965, the suggestion for the Jeanetta Cochrane venue had come from Harold Wilson's all-purpose wheeler-dealer Lord, then Arnold Goodman, the Chairman of the Arts Council.
For Goodman, Haynes would have been just the kind of dynamic figure beloved of the Labour Government during its expansive tea-with-the-Beatles phase.
Goodman's honeymoon with Haynes terminated with the launch of It and the American's plan to pull out of the theatre and set up his Arts Lab in Covent Garden.
Haynes may have been apolitical, but his very naivete, and openness to the cultural currents of the time, underlined the difference between the Labour Government's radicalism and the new popular movements.
The Jeanetta Cochrane could be an alternative ‘centre of excellence’, a derelict warehouse in Drury Lane clearly couldn't.
And It, with its drug connections, was the last straw for Goodman.
The It connection also disturbed Haynes's fellow directors at the Jeanetta Cochrane, who considered it bad for the theatre's image.
Goodman didn't stop with Haynes.
Miles too had been invited to join the Arts Council's literature panel, an offer which was  promptly rescinded after Goodman got to hear of it, and which prompted a poem for page two of It on 27 February 1967, from Adrian Mitchell, suggesting that such an appointment would ‘disrupt the council's true intent which is to fill the entire interior of the Royal Opera House with tins of chunkydogmeat and the rest of England with custard of the kind which thickens and grows a skin on top’.
The same issue featured Bradley Martin — as Hopkins tended to byline himself when writing on drugs — noting the News of the World's ‘sensational splurge on drugs and the pop world’, the harmful effect the attack had had on Nuttall's work as a teacher, and Miles's self-proclaimed lack of enthusiasm for LSD.
The Sunday paper's attack fed into an older battle, that between radical theatre, cinema, publishing, and the state which had been smouldering ever since Lady Chatterley six years before.
The publication of It had opened a new front and brought in new troops, and different ones, to the Hoggarts who had testified for Lawrence's novel.
Around Oz, The Little Red Schoolbook, Last Exit To Brooklyn, the ‘experts’ would again be summoned to testify for liberalism and freedom of expression, but the cases would become inextricably blurred with others, about drugs, and, by 1972, about political challenges to the state.
Such concerns were unlikely to have interrupted the deliberations of the police when, spurred on by the  News of the World, they raided It's offices at Indica in Southampton Row.
Subscription lists were taken, the premises were turned over, and the paper found itself with its first crisis.
New printers had to be found, which ended It's uneasy relationship with hot metal.
But by the end of April there was a new crisis.
McGrath quit, taking the office's only typewriter with him.
The return to London had not, despite the paper's success, been a particularly happy time for the Scot.
Discussions about drugs' harmful effects were one thing, but McGrath was sick with heroin.
Back across the border he began the painful process that was to make him, by the 1970s, one of Scotland's leading playwrights at, amongst other places, Haynes's old stamping ground, the Traverse.
Dreams and dialectics
Hippy and student activist continue to recognize each other as allies.
Certainly there is a common enemy against whom they both combine forces; but there is also a positive similarity of sensibility.
(Theodore Roszak, The Making of a Counter Culture, 1970)
The fact that hippies were so violently apolitical inspired a lot of my polemics for a long time on Oz.
(David Widgery, student activist and Oz contributor, 1986)
In 1965 Louise Ferrier decided she was sick of Australia and Sydney, which was, she remembers, a very small town in those days.
Her mother waved the 20-year old off, and she set sail for England.
In London she settled in Highgate and ventured out from there on the variation of the Grand Tour that beckoned for the young in Europe in the mid 1960s: Paris, Rome, Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Tunisia, and across north Africa.
Amongst those saying goodbye to Ferrier in Sydney had been Richard Neville.
Involved in a relationship with her since his university days he missed her, and he too began to think of making the trip.
He had stayed up three nights researching south-east Asia for a speech planned for a big demonstration against the Vietnam War.
He had been through college, and yet, he reflected, he was still ignorant of the continent to the north.
Then Martin Sharp rang up: let's go to London, he suggested.
OK, said Neville, but if they were going to make the trip it should be through Asia.
They flew to Singapore, traded in their suitcases for back-packs, and hit the pot trail.
‘I loved every minute of it’, remembers Neville.
They went to Laos, Cambodia, but by the time they had arrived in Katmandu Sharp had decided to head on to London.
‘By that stage’, says Neville, ‘I think Martin was tired of sitting round and vomiting.’
But for both men it had been a spectacular and formative trip.
Out on a train in Cambodia they had even talked lightly of setting up Oz again in London, even as Neville filed stories back to Richard Walsh and Oz in Sydney.
But it was a vague idea, little more, Neville remembers, than an inchoate impulse.
Yet the magazine's fame — or notoriety — was spreading: in Katmandu he  was even shown a copy of the London Observer Magazine that featured Sharp, Walsh, and Neville and the story of the Sydney Oz trial.
He put it out of his mind, and headed towards London.
Having left Sydney in April, he finally hit London in September, and moved into a flat in his sister's house in Clarendon Road off Holland Park.
Jill Neville was, and is, a novelist, whose arrival in Britain had been part of an earlier 1960s Australian wave, more tied to bohemianism than to the music and the scene that sucked in Australians in the mid 1960s.
Clarendon Road was a good place to be.
His sister's connections in the publishing world meant that he quickly made contacts.
A renewed one was with Louise Ferrier.
To many within the underground, and in the media's eyes, in the years ahead Ferrier and Neville were to be the archetypal underground beautiful couple.
Her cool beauty was to be the stuff of Oz covers and underground posters.
The irony and cool eye she brought to the circus was sometimes lost in the Sturm und Drang generated by her partner's effortless flair for publicity.
Publicity quickly came.
Others had noticed the Observer piece and that Sharp and Neville had arrived in London, including the Evening Standard's ‘Londoners’ Diary'.
A young reporter, Mary Kenny, was despatched by the diary editor to go down to Clarendon Road, complete with a photographer, and get a story.
Neville, fresh in from points east, had just been down to Carnaby Street and looked the very model of the new generation.
‘They took a very nice photo which mostly showed my legs’, says Ferrier.
‘My legs looked very good.
I was posing as his secretary, of course.’
‘The photograph captured something alright’, remembers Neville, ‘it was almost better than the original, in terms of getting the mood, and Louise looked spectacular.’
What, asked the reporter, was Neville going to do?
Was he going to produce a London version of Oz?
Yes, he was, said the Australian, not for the first or last time thinking on his feet.
Duly, in December, the piece appeared.
Neville, wrote the reporter, was the editor of the controversial Sydney paper Oz.
Few had heard of it, but no matter.
He was going to set up in London.
‘The telephones began buzzing with eager contributors’, he wrote three years later in his book Playpower, ‘and what was once my merely exhibitionist impulse to impress a friendly gossip columnist soon gathered its own momentum.’
Indeed it did.
Neville, to a London media sated with the word, if not the reality, was classless.
Australians were still the butt of English condescension but he clearly came from a different mould from his fellow Australian Barry Humphries' Private Eye creation, Barry McKenzie.
Jaggeresque in appearance he began to sail through the submarine defences of the class system, rather  as the English in India had transcended the caste structure.
He wasn't a bore or a boor, he couldn't be typecast or even neatly slotted within the underground, from which he always maintained an apparently effortless sense of distance.
Contributors were clearly not going to be a problem, nor were staff-Australia could take care of that.
Paul Lawson from Melbourne had worked with Oz in Sydney and he automatically came round, and was appointed deputy editor.
Andréew Fisher had been another contemporary from Sydney and an ability to write, a law degree, and a background in student papers and films made him a choice to handle much of the business side.
Martin Sharp's ability as an illustrator and former Oz co-editor, made him the art director.
He was joined by a young Londoner, Jonathan Goodchild, who rapidly moved from being Sharp's assistant to art director in his own right, leaving Sharp a clear run as perhaps the underground's most innovative illustrator.
And Ferrier was always around, answering letters and the phone, shipping out the new magazine, rolling joints, making the coffee, doing, she says, the dogsbody things.
But just what was to be in Oz?
And what was Oz to be?
The ground rules had been set in Australia, but the ground had changed, and It had come into existence.
Neville was interested, and sympathetic, towards the paper, but not deeply impressed.
At Indica he had met Miles and had struck up a friendship with the ever-cordial Jim Haynes, and the early contributors pushed the new magazine beyond an Australian mafia, he emphasizes.
Amongst the people who came visiting was a young Maidenhead medical student.
David Widgery was deeply immersed in student politics, and deeply suspicious of It.
On one hand he disliked its American disdain for Marxism, on the other what he identified as an English druggy self-indulgence.
Oz, he thought, might be Private Eye all over again only this time without the smart-alec Shrewsbury and Oxford public school boys putting down grammar school boys with ideas above their station.
It would be no-nonsense Australians without class hang-ups.
Neville had been to see Private Eye, and its staff had been courteous, but faintly aloof.
There was to be no real rapport — with Peter Cook allegedly burning the first Oz in a Soho pub — until the Oz trial five years later.
‘Richard Ingrams seemed to think we must be ‘pooves’ because our hair touched our collars.
He was quite extraordinarily obsessive about homosexuals and how marijuana would be the ruination of western civilization', says Neville.
Thus the meeting between the Berkshire grammar school boy and the Australian was a meeting of minds, and style.
‘I still remember David coming round’, he adds, ‘and thinking this man is a great writer, I was absolutely captivated by his prose style.’
Neville suggested he might write something on the Eye, to take  on the ageing young men of Greek Street.
Widgery acquiesced, aiming to do it from a position in keeping with the times, and from his revolutionary socialist stance.
Widgery's radical politics made limited headway within his medical school, where even the sprinkling of Labour Party careerists within David Robins's University College might have appeared perilously left-wing.
But down in the Aldwych was the London School of Economics, where there were the first stirrings of student revolt, English-style, and to which the medical student often made his way.
There, the Student Union, under the presidency of a left-wing socialist David Adelstein, and the Graduate Students' Association, under the presidency of the future founder of the underground's Liberation News Service Marshall Bloom, were in the early stages of a battle about the appointment of a new director.
The LSE authorities' choice was the head of the University College of Rhodesia, Walter Adams, and the students weren't happy with it.
Like Miles, Widgery had taken the CND road from Aldermaston.
Thereafter their paths diverged towards the two camps within the underground.
While still at school Widgery had written for a short-lived national schools magazine, which rapidly collapsed.
Through it Widgery became involved with another student venture, U Magazine, and managed to become its editor without even being a student, having been expelled from school for producing an irreverent magazine.
Again like Miles, his path had crossed with Ginsberg's during the poet's 1965 visit.
He interviewed him for U and they passed the day together.
Speeding home to Maidenhead on his Lambretta he brooded on the exciting and slightly scary world of West Coast direct action, radicalism, Beat and homosexuality.
That summer of 1965, prior to medical school, he took the almost obligatory trip to the United States.
He arrived as the black district of Watts, Los Angeles was exploding.
The battles went on for four days that August and at least thirty-four people were killed.
The riots were the culmination of rising unemployment, rocketing population, bad housing, and police racism.
The Los Angeles Times had asked the local police chief why the riots had occurred: ‘One person threw a rock, and then, like monkeys in a zoo, others started throwing rocks.’
His belief in non-violence, and in tales that the United States was a classless society, wilted.
There was, he decided, an extremely oppressed working class, black and white, and an extremely greedy philistine group of people running the system.
‘You gotta understand about America’, an old black man had told him in Washington DC, ‘it's a fucking capitalist nightmare.’
Yes, thought Widgery, it is.
Heading south he got beaten up by the Miami cops for having  long hair.
In Bogaloosa he drove cars for the Student Non-Violent Co-ordinating Committee which was then organizing black voter registration.
Queuing for a bus he met another English student and they decided to head for Mexico City.
On the road to Laredo they talked student politics, how the US Central Intelligence Agency had financed sections of the National Union of Students.
Once in Mexico, Cuba seemed a good idea.
They presented themselves to the Cuban ambassador.
Widgery's colleague, an NUS vice-president, conveniently ignored the other fifteen people sharing the post and announced that he was the vice-president.
Widgery meanwhile brandished his privately-sponsored U card and announced that he represented British student journalists.
Six days later they flew into Havana.
Back from Cuba, his belief in non-violence now a fading memory, he fell in with the dope-smoking radicals of the key young radical movement, Students for a Democratic Society.
With those SDS contacts he journeyed on to the West Coast, where the Vietnam Day Committee had started that May.
Back in the east he sat in a bar one night and watched one of his idols, and inheritors of Charlie Parker's mantle, Roland Kirk, playing jazz.
As he did so a white man put a dollar on the table and said to the barman, ‘shut that nigger up’.
In New York it was acid art in knocked-together Lower-East-Side lofts, and a meeting with John Wilcock on the verge of quitting the Voice and moving to Walter Bowart's new East Village Other.
‘That’, says Widgery, ‘was my education.’
From the early 1960s onwards it was to be a trip that many young English radicals were to make.
Some went wide-eyed, some went in search of music, the world of On the Road, some went looking for Ken Kesey's Merry Pranksters, others for the new politics.
Many, loathing corporate American power, fell in love with the movements that had emerged to counter it.
Others eventually, as in the case of Widgery, developed an affection and a distance from that seductive New World.
Thus was an It still smelling of an earlier American decade's cultural anarchy unattractive to him, and the new Oz appealing.
Thus did his byline appear in the first issue.
From Australia, via Cambridge, there were Germaine Greer and Clive James as occasional contributors.
In the first issue that seminal writer of London and Notting Hill in the late 1950s, Colin Macinnes, wrote on that seminal figure of London and Notting Hill in the 1960s, Michael Abdul Malik.
Alex Cockburn, later to work for Black Dwarf and 7 Days before decamping to the States and a 1970s career on Village Voice, provided a somewhat withdrawn interview with the New Statesman's then right-wing socialist editor Paul Johnson.
Greer wrote ‘In bed with the English’ which began to hint  at Oz's future development in its uncomplimentary analysis of the experience.
Widgery, meanwhile, attempted to get to grips with the Greek Street gang.
The fortnightly was ‘Andrew pretending to be Kleenex.
Tampax pretending to be Durex.’
What this meant wasn't certain, but it sounded good at the time.
The Evening Standard, commenting on Oz's inaugural issue, found it a great disappointment.
They weren't the only ones.
It was a magazine about the media, about London, but it wasn't an underground paper that hit the streets in late January 1967 with, as Neville wrote, ‘a resounding thud’.
‘The early Ozs were an uncomfortable hybrid of satire, Sunday journalism, and pirated underground tit-bits’, wrote Neville four years on in Playpower.
‘The art work of Martin Sharp and the excellence of some of the early contributors saved the magazine from total calamity…
In London not only did satirical intention seem redundant — other people were doing it better — but as a critical reaction to society it seemed inadequate and ultimately reactionary.’
It also seemed peculiarly irrelevant.
At the London School of Economics the students had occupied the premises in February 1967 as their struggle intensified.
The storming of the college gates locked by the authorities — had been accompanied by the death of a porter from a heart attack.
Radicals from across London, Britain, and Europe began to pour into the college to observe, participate, or make unsuccessful attempts to take the struggle into the correct channels.
The LSE's walls were plastered with slogans — a favourite being ‘Beware the Pedagogic Gerontocracy’— and suddenly the Situationists moved from the world of small magazines, happenings, and Alex Trocchi to hand out their leaflets, and flypost their documents on ‘Ten Days that Shook the University’.
This detailed the student takeover at Strasbourg University, and its apparent success in challenging the ‘spectacle’ of capitalism.
It had little impact on the LSE students who, if they were in anything at all were likely to be inclined towards the Trotskyism of the International Socialists and the varieties of new leftism rather than this unknown creed.
At Alexandra Palace in north London the other side of the burgeoning movement was celebrating the ‘Technicolour Dream’.
With UFO established, the Dream extended the mood and spread the wave that the Albert Hall had initiated eighteen months before.
Only now the coherence and the poetry were being deluged by the reality, or hope, of psychedelic drugs.
The West Coast had love-ins; now London in considerably less welcoming climes tried the same, complete with an obligatory visit by Andy Warhol, Pink Floyd, and celebrants shinning up organ pipes as the night wore on and boredom or chemically induced demons had to be exorcized.
As the  freak end of the underground had dropped in on the LSE, so the politicos, or would-be politicos, packed their bags for Alexandra Palace.
Britain, it seemed, had been black and white.
Suddenly they were wearing the colours of the rainbow.
And these weren't even, it seemed, the bombed-out hippies of later days, they were dandies, male and female, they glittered, they had what the left had always lacked — style.
Tom McGrath, in his last days at It responded with a ‘14-Hour Technicolour Dream Read-in Issue’, printed in day-glo colours.
For Oz the tide floated the magazine off the mudbank of media obsessions and into new directions.
Sharp's graphics became more lurid.
Widgery's attacks on swinging London more fanciful and, in keeping with the phallic times, more vitriolic.
‘You can't see the prick for the codpiece’.
Not everybody could keep up.
A correspondent, Victor Coughtrecy, wrote in to demand that ‘you really must climb down from your ivory tower and admit that you (and I) represent a tiny minority of intellectual misfits…
I wish you would have more consideration for your undersexed readers.
Your female contributors make us half-men feel pretty useless.’
By the summer the paper that had been interviewing Paul Johnson continued its move into youth, with a dose of Australian cultural snobbery directed against the ‘Alfs’: ‘This bizarre cult of grey, short-haired nine-to-fivers’, who worked as ‘account executives, journalists, bank managers, doctors, lawyers, salesmen, dentists, insurance clerks, civil servants…
Most people are Alfs nowadays.
They are a threat to world peace…a social embarrassment.’
Amongst Alf achievements were listed the Crucifixion and ‘not buying any of Vincent Van Gogh's paintings during his lifetime’.
Across the Atlantic John Wilcock worked on with East Village Other.
After about eight issues he picked up a copy and noticed that Bowart-using the same technique he had used to appoint Miles London correspondent — had appointed him, and William Randolph Hearst as editors.
The paper, in 1966–7, was doing well, the music industry had noticed it, and sex ads helped pay the bills.
Wilcock had developed another interest too, one that had burgeoned on the Voice, a fascination with Andy Warhol's factory, then turning out movies at the Factory by the dozen, and sucking in voyeurs, drifters, hopers, and no-hopers.
Contact with Warhol introduced him to the Velvet Underground.
After six weeks or so, three days a week, with the Factory Wilcock received hints that an article might be a good idea.
He obliged with ‘How Andy Warhol makes movies’.
‘That’, says Wilcock, ‘is how I learned a lot about life and a Sophoclean scene where people were learning.’
It was also a time when the American underground press was  expanding, rapidly.
By late 1966 the Los Angeles Free Press, the Berkeley Barb, East Lansing, Michigan's Paper, Rag in Austin, Texas, and the East Village Other were all publishing.
In London It had started.
Why couldn't there be a system? thought Wilcock, Bowart, and others.
Wilcock, with assistance, wrote the preamble.
All the information they got should be pooled, the only condition was that each paper was sent to every other paper, and that all could pick up anything they wanted.
It was the Underground Press Syndicate.
‘When Richard and Martin Sharp were in London it was my natural tendency to get involved with them,’ says Wilcock.
So he did.
And by the sixth London issue Sharp's graphics had exploded, the paper wasn't a poor Private Eye or New Statesman anymore.
A lot of it was to do with Neville's desire to develop — alongside the graphics — the magazine's prose style.
It was no model, the New Statesman, which he thought then ‘superbly written’, was.
And by the fourth issue of Oz the plaudits were beginning to outnumber the brickbats.
From New York, meanwhile, Wilcock had begun to send over copies of EVO, which meant that the Australian had become more aware than most in London of the underground explosion across the Atlantic.
Wilcock arrived in London, and for the first time the two men met.
The sixth issue of Oz, they agreed, would be a joint issue with Other Scenes, with contributions from Widgery et al., and editorship from Wilcock.
The Yorkshire expatriate, thinks Neville, was not tough-minded with copy, but crucially, he was open.
‘He'd say things like ‘who is this Michael X guy?’ and I'd say I didn't know', says Neville.
You had to meet these people, Wilcock would explain, and thus they went off on the 31 bus to meet the Trinidadian.
‘He got me out’, explains the Australian, ‘and off the telephone.’
In Playpower Neville wrote that the sixth issue was when Oz finally went underground.
Wilcock looks back on it as a ‘very heavy issue’.
‘It even included a piece by Anthony Burgess — not a figure usually associated with the alternative culture — on ‘flower language’.
‘During those years’, says Wilcock, ‘I felt closer to Richard, in his feelings about life, news, his sense of playfulness, his serious concern about issues which had to be dealt with but had to be entertaining.’
‘We skip the light fandango, threw cartwheels across the floor.
I was feeling kind of seasick, the crowd cried out for more’, sung Gary Brooker of Procul Harum in ‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’, on Deram, that June.
It was a song with everything: baroque references, long sombre organ solos, and words so opaque that they could mean all things to all people, unless they actually asked what they meant-which was, unless one was very stoned, nothing  which was why, for eleven weeks, during that summer it was high in the charts.
It provided a vocabulary for the mass marketing of hippies.
It also brought cheer to the giant Decca record company, which had set up Deram precisely to capture back from the new independent companies some of the money pumping into what there was of Britain's counter culture.
Having established the tone, Procul Harum duly yielded their place at the top of the charts to the Beatles, who settled on the essence of that summer with ‘All You Need Is Love’, to be followed by Scott McKenzie's ‘San Francisco’, which was, millions of radios announced, the place to be to skip the light fandango, and where all one needed was love.
‘The adventure of poverty by young white people in love ghettos across the country, like Haight-Ashbury and the Lower East Side’, wrote Emmett Grogan in Ringolevio, ‘was pleasant fakery for most of them.
But in the same way that real poverty has always given birth to real revolution, this feigned poverty of the adventurous would breed a false-bottomed, jerry-built revolution in which the adventurers would continue their make-believe and be followed by the rock-concert lumpen, tired of their own voyeurism.’
Haight-Ashbury got violent that summer.
But not as violent as Newark, New Jersey.
Between 14 and 16 July twenty-two people were killed in the battles between blacks, the police, and the National Guard.
By 24 July 4,700 soldiers had been sent into Detroit.
Fourteen people were killed.
The battles continued into August.
It wasn't like that in London, Edinburgh, Birmingham, Leeds, Leicester.
A new race relations act had been introduced, supposedly to counter white racism.
In August the first prosecution was initiated.
Michael Abdul Malik stood accused, and was convicted, of using the phrase ‘white monkeys’.
Michael X's friend, Jim Haynes, was doing better.
For him that summer — Newark, Haight-Ashbury, Detroit, or Vietnam aside London was the capital of the world, and in July the Arts Lab opened.
Haynes and Jack Henry Moore, who worked with him on the project, planned to be, as It predicted in late April, ‘as experimental and as international as the Lord Chamberlain will allow’.
Things were being allowed.
That month homosexuality was legalized.
Dope wasn't, but the drug legal advice service ‘Release’ which concerned itself with the increasing number of busts — and junkies — began operating in West London.
And the population of London swelled, both with naive readers of Time, and with young people from across the country.
In the absence of a ticket to San Francisco they felt that London would have to be the next best thing.
And other Londoners-traditional dwellers — were moving out.
Rachmanism had gone — or at least Rachman was dead — and, before the property boom of the 1970s, there was empty property in places like Chalk Farm, Ladbroke Grove, Covent Garden.
They were areas with a shifting working-class population, and ideal for putting down bohemian roots.
With the roots came dreams of the creation of liberated zones, embracing the generation briefly flirting with peace, the new libertarian-oriented politicos, and, crucially, people doing what the period was supposed to be about, having a good time.
It made the gathering at the Roundhouse that July, ‘The Dialectics of Liberation’, a symposium which in other years, might have attracted a handful of people, an often packed and vital event.
Compared with the activism of the United States, or the war in South Vietnam, Britain remained a backwater.
Compared with five years before it was a raging torrent.
The Vietnam Solidarity Campaign was beginning to take off — with the Communist/ Christian British Council for Peace in Vietnam eclipsed by its growth.
The London School of Economics had provided a trailer for what was to come, black activism within Britain was on the rise, and three years of Labour Government was decimating its support amongst students and the young intelligentsia.
They were turning towards Marxism, often of a neo-Trotskyist variety, and almost never via the Labour or Communist parties.
The other inspirations were the revolutions of the southern hemisphere — the Portuguese colonies in Africa, Vietnam, Latin America — the peripheral appeal to some of the more deluded souls of the Chinese Cultural Revolution, and for a few the writings of the émigré Frankfurt Marxist, Herbert Marcuse.
But crucially ‘Dialectics’ was not organized by any political group, as such, but by a group of psychiatrists including R.D. Laing and David Cooper.
It aimed to ‘demystify human violence in all its forms’, and, unsurprisingly, it failed.
But what it did do was provide a unique workshop of the ideas that had been bubbling up in the years since the cracking of the ice in 1956, and in a context which leapt over the boundaries of ‘official’ politics, whether mainstream, Marxist, anarchist, reformist, or Maoist.
The currents were all there, and they interconnected.
Paul Goodman, the American anarchist writer; Stokeley Carmichael, the 26-year-old Trinidadian-born New Yorker whose black nationalism had just triumphed within SNCC; Laing and Cooper; Ginsberg-whose contribution took the form of a mantra, American radical journalists John Gerassi on the Third World; Trotskyist theoretician Ernest Mandel; William Burroughs; Angela Davis, the Californian activist and academic; the Marxist historian and biographer of Trotsky, Isaac Deutscher; the San Francisco digger, Emmett Grogan, who popped up for a fringe meeting ‘still loaded with the sleepiness of heroin'; and Herbert Marcuse.
Perhaps it was the name of Carmichael — the closest that London was to get to contact with the black revolt that year- and the name of Marcuse that pulled in the crowds that went to the Roundhouse for the fortnight.
Third worldism, Laingian theories of schizophrenia blended with Marcuse, black power, and elements of Trotskyism that excluded only two groups, not insignificant ones — women and the working class.
Carmichael's sexism — not that the word existed: ‘the role of women in the struggle is prone’— and the obsession with struggle elsewhere and male intellectuals' struggles here with an uncomprehending world, threw down enough issues to sustain a variety of competing tendencies, articles, and books for the following five years.
‘It all looks ludicrous now’, observed David Widgery, ‘but if you realize there had been twenty years of Cold War normalism this was a very exuberant reaction to the world of Pepsodent ads, and the father-mother-children-aren't-we-normal? kind of thing which was still the prevailing mentality.
I was very impressed by Marcuse who started his talk by saying: ‘What we are doing is hearing a lot of talk about the flower power, but the flower only has the power because the human being is watering it.’
I thought, fucking right!’
New explanations
The British Empire spent two hundred years unloading beads on the natives.
In nine months we get them all back again.
(Oz, 1967
It's finances were rocky, and stayed that way.
But after eight issues, early in 1967, the paper had a stroke of good fortune.
A young man came in and asked if he could help with distribution.
He had a Rolls Royce and a fortune.
His name was Nigel Samuel.
The son of millionaire property developer, Howard Samuel, the new recruit was quickly billed as an editorial assistant, and, shortly after that, joined the editorial board.
Inheriting a fortune on the sudden death of his father, and to the acute distress of the family trustees, Samuel Junior devoted much of his money to sustaining It and funding the activities of Michael X. It moved, first to Fitzroy Square, then to Betterton Street in Covent Garden, and later, in 1968, to Endell Street in the same neighbourhood.
In transit from Southampton Row to Covent Garden the staff, and the paper's orientation, shifted.
After McGrath's sudden departure Jack Henry Moore filled in, but with Moore's commitment to the new Arts Lab a new editor had to be found.
The police had dropped any action, following their March 1967 raid, by June.
New staff arrived.
Bill Levy took over as editor, and Mick Farren, whose relationship with It was to survive the history of the underground made his first appearance.
While Miles was influenced by the American Beats, and by a literary culture, Farren's somewhat more street-based style was born of the rock culture, which took in everything from Brando and The Wild One from the mid 1950s through early Elvis to Dylan and the Rolling Stones.
Out of rock came a stance of the rock concert rebel, where the crises and contradictions of the times could be played out as theatre.
The problem was that adherents to the vision had nowhere to go, as time passed, but onwards to the next gig.
But in 1967, as the high tide of commercial hippiedom flowed onwards, who cared?
The New Musical Express, stumbling after the new wave, advertised bells and full hippy regalia, from the people who had brought Beatle jackets to the young.
The conviction of Rolling  Stones Mick Jagger and Keith Richard, together with art gallery proprietor Robert Fraser, on drugs charges, together with the Stones' brief imprisonment — Fraser was not so lucky — triggered demonstrations running into hundreds outside the offices of the News of the World.
The paper indignantly rejected charges that it had set up the case which had, it seemed then, consigned Jagger and Richard to jail, but outrage at the sentences had touched liberal consciences, and galvanized youth inhabiting that grey area between music and social protest.
The old, it appeared, were on the attack everywhere; why, even pirate radio was being driven out of the North Sea.
A new New Left, drawing from Dialectics of Liberation, brushed aside the tentative offerings of the old New Left, gathered in its May Day Manifesto group and comprising such stalwarts of post-1956 as Raymond Williams, E.P.
Thompson, and Stuart Hall.
By the standards of 1961-or, perhaps, today — it was radical stuff, by the style of 1967 it seemed passé.
In London Oz and It had the field almost to themselves.
Private Eye was flourishing, and even advertising in It its discreet ‘God Is Love’, ‘Karl Marx’, and ‘Marquis de Sade’ T-shirts under the slogan ‘Plug in turn on freak out with Private Eye’, but this was little more than a wobble in that paper's progress — and a chance for a satirical quick buck.
With Paul Foot on board the magazine was heading towards its investigative period, an area into which the underground press was consistently to fail to make inroads.
But in those times Oz and It had a wave to ride, and they did their best to do so.
They were aided by the stabilization of their market.
The Arts Lab was in its honeymoon with London.
The Great and the Good, excluding Lord Goodman, rushed in their donations — Tom Stoppard, Doris Lessing, Peter Brook, Ken Tynan, David Frost, John Schlesinger — while It told readers that the project wanted them to join, and ‘for those few affluent It readers, founder membership is 50’.
‘We had German TV, Polish TV, Japanese TV, Spanish, Dutch, Swedish, French, Italian TV’, wrote Jim Haynes in Thanks for Coming, ‘and, of course, Granada and the BBC; it was amazing.’
The Garden, the Gate, the Grove, and the Farm…
Chalk Farm had UFO; Oz, the London Free School and countless others had Notting Hill and Ladbroke Grove.
Dick Pountaine, then in his final year of a chemistry degree at Imperial College, after two years of South Kensington had realized that Notting Hill was the place to live, with 3-a-week bedsits, and plenty of places to score.
‘By my third year people in the lab used to joke ‘Pountaine's in, it must be Tuesday’‘, he remembers.
‘I was quite lucky to get my degree, had I gone up a year later I probably wouldn't have done.
Being around Notting Hill meant we got involved in the Free School gigs, big social events that went round by word of mouth.’
Pountaine had gone up to Imperial a Communist Party member, but Notting Hill and the underground proved a stronger pull.
‘In a strict Party sense this was all bourgeois individualism and bohemianism, to me it was infinitely more attractive than anything going on in the Communist Party, particularly the student Communist Party, which was largely in-fighting and sectarian politics.
By the end of that summer I moved into this house in Lonsdale Road, Notting Hill, which was quite a little centre.
It was visited regularly by Hoppy and all those kind of people.
That was when I got in contact with the ‘official’ underground.’
Later it was to lead him on to Oz, Ink, and Friends.
Hopkins, during the later months of 1967 was being visited, rather than visiting, after his marijuana conviction.
But as It celebrated a year of publication it had grown from twelve to twenty pages, with the ‘What's Happening’ section now, significantly, filling two tightly set pages at the back, and the Arts Lab offering a ‘Black Power Week’complete with Stokeley Carmichael — bundled out of the country post Dialectics of Liberation — on film, and ‘Michael Abdul Malik and guests’.
That issue's front page proclaimed ‘The Second Coming’ and flashed Aleister Crowley, John Peel, and Alex Trocchi amongst its attractions.
Drugs might make people schizophrenic — or the system, as Laing was suggesting whichever way It certainly reflected it.
Bradley Martin devoted a page to extolling the virtues of cannabis and the need to fight back against legal restrictions and police interventions.
‘We fall into a trap if we admit to the government's right to pass legislation in areas concerning our own chemistry.
This right to use our bodies as laboratories is basic to changed expressions of thought and communications’, he wrote.
‘Without such transformation we will never change ‘this horrible society’, Tom Driberg admits his generation has created…
Listen man, don't talk to me like I was smoking a bomb.
It's only the resin from the flower and dried up leaves of a very beautiful plant.’
On the facing page, however, under the headline ‘Acid Burned a Hole in my Genes’, Joe Meltz reported on American research — later discredited — suggesting that LSD caused chromosomal damage, and It followed that up with a two-page ‘Acid Report’.
The drugs coverage underlined that the paper was shifting rapidly — if erratically — from its earlier goal of being a London community paper, or maybe that the community to which it was addressing itself had changed rapidly in the year since its birth.
On 22 October that year a small but significant march by the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign took place in Grosvenor Square.
The day before, 50,000 had marched on the Pentagon.
But as the year closed, the ‘New Age’ promised in It was still more to do with ley-lines and ‘the ecstatic return of everything blessed’, as John Michel, the paper's fixture on UFOs, Britain's ‘holy places’, and the ‘centres and lines of latent power in Britain', put it.
But more people were coming on to the paper.
Graham Plinston replaced Farren as news editor, John Hopkins — still inside — was billed as ‘research’, while, significantly, Dave Hall was in charge of‘Business’.
Hall was a significant recruit.
A fellow staffer of the time joked that his methods were ‘street corner based’.
A former convenor at Ford, Dagenham, his financial manoeuvres — plus input from Samuel — and his ability to get the magazine out, provided a core to its progress.
So did Peter Stansill.
Like Wilcock a Yorkshireman, he was the son of a Barnsley mining family, and, again like Wilcock, had provincial and national newspaper experience.
Stansill was not one of the extroverts of the underground, but what he did bring was method, in an environment with hardly any, and a philosophical view about the alternative which the underground could offer.
It wasn't just going to be papers, it could be health clinics, bookshops, making a network of people sharing lifestyles and indeed an economic base.
Women had been on the paper since the beginning — with Maureen McGrath as news editor- and it had been women who had been providing the typesetting, the listings, the ad selling.
But, says Dave Robins, who became assistant editor early in 1968, It remained very male, in its content, and in its style.
‘Women were just ‘chicks’‘, he says.
‘The attitude to women's rights, equality, to a bit of space was at best indifference.
There was a lot of downright exploitation.
Yet women like Jane Nicholson were doing the really important things.’
Amongst them was Sue Morris, ‘Hamburger Sue’.
She came to It via an employment agency, and, while others slept on the floor, worked, argued, or posed, she would work through the clerical, jobs, type, organize.
‘She treated it’, Robins reflects, ‘like a normal place.
Some people did.’
Sue Small didn't.
In 1966 she was a 17-year-old school-leaver living in a furnished room in Blackheath.
She had worked for a bent company running credit checks on people, had temped for an employment agency, a bank, and as a telephonist.
She had been a mod, but, after her brother told her to buy Bob Dylan records, she did so, being, then, an impressionable person.
It was a pleasant place, Blackheath, a shade too respectable for someone into the tablets of the time, and full of kids — unlike Small — waiting to go to university.
There was only one pub to go to and, since that closed at eleven o'clock, the alternative was her house.
Thus did dozens of local kids materialize in the early hours to listen all night to the Beatles, the Butterfield Blues Band, the Pink Floyd.
One night, in the pub, ranging out of north London an It seller  turned up.
She had never seen anything like it, and nor had anyone else in Blackheath.
She joined him on his forays into Covent Garden to collect the paper.
It was her first real experience of central London, she liked it, she even stuck around on those nights in Betterton Street helping pack the papers.
‘I was very young’, she says, and I was impressed by those people.
I was pretty odd for Blackheath but not in comparison with the people who were hanging out at the It office.
They were a lot weirder than I was.’
It needed people to work all night sending out subscription copies, getting them down to the all-night post office.
There was no money, just hot chocolate.
She didn't feel she could make a contribution, but she wanted to, so ‘I just went in and made myself useful.’
Through It she got to know Dave Hall and his wife.
But she still remained on the outside.
Until 1968.
She got, and hated, a job in a fruit pulpers in Covent Garden, and would drop in at lunchtimes, and one day, in the absence of anyone else competent to run the switchboard, she took it over for an hour.
Hall offered her a job, and there she stayed for two years working sixty to seventy hours a week and still commuting back to Blackheath, except on press night, which would go on all night, once a fortnight.
She was usually one of the first in.
Others would work more unpredictable hours, but, in those days the paper still hit the schedules.
And Small moved on, from the switchboard to the ‘What's Happening’ pages, which weren't regarded as too important.
‘Otherwise’, she says, ‘they wouldn't have let me do it.
I had no knowledge of the arts scene.’
And she also, later, moved into the ads section.
Meeting It, Sue Small, Blackheath retired mod, got hooked on it.
Others did too.
A succession of printers led the paper by 1968 to a Carlisle outpost of the Baring Family where, once a fortnight, Robins and Levy would arrive and wait overnight for the paper to roll off the presses.
From there it returned, via an accommodating lorry driver, to Tottenham, and out by mini-van across the city, and the country.
One week, when Robins and Levy arrived in Tottenham the paper wasn't there.
Frantic searches followed, and the run was eventually located — in Totteridge.
They called Farren.
‘He got all the heads, liggers, lunatics in Notting Hill out of their beds’, remembers Robins.
‘They appeared in a convoy and, led by Bill, went to where the van was.
At three in the morning they unloaded the paper.
Bill said: ‘These are the people who care about the paper.’
They were the people who did it for nothing.’
By the beginning of 1968 Oz had established itself.
And Neville, through Widgery and the Italian journalist Angelo Quattrochi had realized that the time was apparently right to think about fighting in the streets.
On 29 January 1968 the South Vietnamese National Liberation Front launched its attack on Saigon, and across the  country.
It was a sign of what the year was to offer, and a clear signal that the United States wasn't winning the war in Vietnam.
It was also a sign that the days of love-ins were about to change radically.
In 1967 the hippies and the radicals, in Britain at least, had coexisted.
Yet, as David Widgery points out: ‘It's important to remember that there was quite a lot of opposition within the underground against whatever flower power was.
There was a struggle about politics, and it was usually polarized about Vietnam.
The hippies used to say: ‘Wow man, you know we love Lyndon Johnson’, and people like Roland Muldoon — who was setting up the Cast street theatre group — were in a much more combative mood.
They were standing up at UFO and saying: ‘This is fucking rubbish, people are being killed in Vietnam’, and some people would say ‘It's all in your head man’.
Throughout 1967 there was this polarization going on, and when 1968 came along there was this very rapid divergence.
I remember during the Tet offensive going round with a transistor radio in my ear to hear the latest news.’
Before Tet, Vietnam could be a place where an unpleasant war was being fought, some might even know that 525,000 American troops were stationed in the country, that the United States was convulsed by the issue, but as the NLF penetrated the US embassy in Saigon, and as its troops had to be beaten out, one by one, millions of people, and hundreds of thousands of western radicals were taken by the idea that the emperor might be dangerous, was dangerous, but had no clothes.
And if that was true of the US government, it was true of the French, German, Russian, and British governments.
It was an idea whose time was coming.
Kennedy and Wilson had both aroused expectations, which had not been fulfilled.
The campaign against the war in Vietnam had taken the orthodox routes of left-wing protest, in the left press, in Peace News, around the Campaign for Peace in Vietnam.
But something new was developing, something that put as much-or more — of a gap between the 1968 generation and the liberals of 1956 as that generation had delineated between themselves and the spirits of 1945 and 1951.
In the United States Johnson's Presidency floundered as, in early March, Eugene McCarthy, the stop-the-war candidate took 42 per cent of the vote in the New Hampshire Democratic Party primary.
But for many American radicals McCarthy was not enough.
Liberalism was not enough.
In Britain Wilson's Labour Government sustained a half-hearted support for the war, and economic policies that were enough to drive Labour's constituency amongst the young working-class socialists and student radicals out of the Party.
Revolution was in the minds of some of those people, together with the nagging doubt, despite the talk of Trotsky and Guevara, Mao and Marcuse, that the supposed motor of revolutionary  change in the west — or Eastern European bloc — the workers, would not be prepared to do anything about it.
While It floundered between ley-lines, Burroughs, and acid, the first 1968 issue of Oz indicated that the magazine was sensitive to the change taking place.
Much of it was to do with the personality of the editor, Richard Neville.
‘He was aware that Oz had to be diverse’, observes David Widgery, ‘and that there was an interesting debate going on between the hippies and the politicos.
Neville never was a hippy, he used to hate taking LSD, he used to wear the clothes, but he was a bit too shrewd to fall for that.
He was a classic liberal, and was interested in debate.’
The Oz editor agrees.
‘I never used the word ‘hippy’ about myself except in a jocular way.
I was and still am a liberal.
Sometimes then I was a bit embarrassed by it, because I thought I ought to be a little more revolutionary, but I've always completely loathed violence and bloodshed and  every time I dived into Marxism all I could think of was Lenin shooting the anarchists.
I could never come to terms with the Big Idea.
I come from libertarianism'.
That January issue was the ‘Revolutionary Oz’, complete with Quattrocchi on the Russian Revolution; Widgery on the Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara, who had been killed the previous October in the Bolivian jungle, and whose name Widgery and Oz spelt throughout as ‘Geuvara’; and even John Wilcock, whose ‘Other scenes’ reappeared in that issue, put in a piece on Regis Debray.
Debray, later a minister in France's socialist President  Mitterrand's Government, had spent time with Guevara in the jungle, and had been sentenced to thirty years by the Bolivians.
He was then in the full flight of his revolutionary phase.
It must be total, he admonished, ‘not just a coming to terms with the enemy’.
Not that the readers were willing to take Oz's revolutionary package with the seriousness that at least some of the contributors had intended.
By March Ladbroke Grove's J. Russell Wimbush was writing in complaining about Widgery's classic period rhetoric that ‘men like Guevara are too big and angry for our world of typewriters and soft hands’.
‘You said it’, slammed back Wimbush, ‘and I bet he'd puke if he could see the hollow tribute you've paid him.’
And while revolution continued to feature in the magazine — the more parochial Diggers got an outing in the February issue — by that month the caravan had moved on, rather unsteadily to a ‘Flying saucers issue’, where, with some difficulty, Lenin was dragged in for his views.
If Pearce Marchbank had been dubious of It he wasn't about Oz.
Stylistically, politically, socially he was out of sync with the fortnightly paper but Oz ‘was clean, well printed, the complete  antithesis of It, which looked like the Wellington Echo from New Zealand.’
In the April issue that year Oz broke new graphic territory with a cover comprising stickers, removable from the cover.
The idea wasn't completely new, the sleeve for Andy Warhol's Velvet Underground album in the United States featured a removable, stick-on banana, but for magazines- and British magazines in particular— the cover was revolutionary, and got Oz, and designer Martin Sharp, noticed.
The slogans weren't bad either.
An LSE post-graduate, David Phillips, provided ‘We are lepers, give us bells, not degrees’, which further strengthened students' welcome sense of apartness.
Elsewhere in that issue, with the aid of New Statesman contributors like Alex Cockburn and Tom Nairn, Oz provided a parody of that magazine, as it stumbled to come to terms with 1968.
The May Events in Paris enthused the still socialist editor, Paul Johnson, if from a somewhat uncomprehending standpoint, but the NS was very much out of its time.
Neville's take on the time was more acute.
He provided a letter from ‘Richard Neville, Editor, Hippy Review, Turramurra North’, to the New Statesman: ‘Sir: There's a new generation with a new explanation, everybody should get VD, when you come to Notting Hill wear a big flower in your wig.
Why do Alfs still care about politics, Hitler, and Oxfam?
Groove with Laing.
‘Hung On You’ has mindblowing gear.
Cops and clocks are all wound up.
Flying saucers are…(to be continued).’
That spring the slow march of the Situationists through the London of the decade surfaced on the cover of It26, with a Situationist poster.
It was, said the paper, a ‘found object’, but by then David Robins had been in touch with the group, and was to share a house with one of their then leading London lights, Chris Grey.
The poster had been pasted on the building that housed It.
It was a significant moment.
Once there had just been Trocchi drawing on the group's ideas, there had been the  sTigma exhibition in Better Books in 1965, the obituary of Andrée Breton — one of the group's intellectual roots — by Jean-Jacques Lebel in the first It fourteen months earlier.
Now they were seeping into the consciousness of people within a milieu which, rejecting straight left politics, was searching for a route out of a hippy enclave at a time when the political temperature was rising.
The Situationists had been born in the wake of the 1956 upheavals; indeed Trocchi had briefly been a member of their ‘executive’ before being thrown out.
Most of its British followers suffered a similar fate at the hands of its arbitrary organizers — or anti-organizers.
The key document circulated at the time was Raoul Vaneigen's Totality For Kids which was hailed by its supporters as  doing for the twentieth century what Marx had done for the nineteenth.
Since, according to the group —‘the Sits’ as they became labelled in Britain — the problems of production had been solved, the question was one of consumption.
‘In exchange for their real sacrifice’, said Totality for Kids, ‘the workers receive the instruments of their liberation (comfort, gadgets) which, however, are purely fictitious liberation since power controls the ways in which all material equipment can be used.’
All were ‘poisoned by the spectacle’, the problem was to break it.
‘Our guiding element could be the Durutti's Brigade moving from village to village, liquidating the bourgeois elements and leaving the workers to see to their own organization.’
It was an appealing image, and an appealing movement for radicals hunting their red snark, and tired of waiting for Godot.
It promised involvement, rationalized non-organization, it dramatized outcast status, and offered the possibility of action, and, as the next decade opened, provided it for a few.
It also endorsed the hostility which many of those radicals felt for the orthodox left.
It would be propaganda of the deed, if, for many, it remained words.
It also provided another link between the radicals and the radicalized hippies.
For the Farrens might locate their struggle within music, but the music was part of the spectacle, and maybe ‘people's music’ was part of the process of shattering it.
‘Yes!
Men it can be done’ said the ads for ‘Magnaphall’, the underground's most consistent advertiser, which offered larger and more reliable erections for those male members of the underground wilting under the strain of the sexual competitiveness of the era.
So, it seemed, could the political revolution.
Other things pushed students centre-stage.
In West Germany the socialist students' organization, the SDS, had grown into the most successful and radical challenge to the status quo that the state had seen since 1945.
Its de facto leader — or so identified by the right-wing Springer press empire — was Rudi Dutskche.
In March he was shot and seriously injured by a right-wing extremist.
The student left across Europe was outraged; it was also confirmed in the notion that it was being taken seriously.
But was it in England?
The answer came on 17 March, in Grosvenor Square.
By then the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign had grown, but by just how much was to take even the organizers of that day's protest to the United States Embassy by surprise.
The revival of non-Stalinist Marxism had breathed new life into the Trotskyist groups.
While the Communist Party continued its decline, the Socialist Labour League, in isolation, had moved to producing a twice weekly newspaper, Newsletter.
Meanwhile the International Socialists, who had spent the quarter-century since their birth in the wilderness, were growing in numbers.
Six or seven hundred  members — many of them students outwardly scornful of the underground — proved to be quite sufficient to provide an organizational web around which the VSC could be built.
While the most prominent member of the VSC, Tariq Ali, was soon to become a member of a smaller, and less durable, International Marxist Group, it was the IS which did much of the groundwork, and which over the next five years was to reap most of the recruits.
On the day a march estimated at 100,000 people threaded through central London in spring sunshine to Grosvenor Square.
Shunned by much of the old left, the new recruits had proved more than up to the task of filling the gaps.
The German SDS marched in neat formation — provoking racist jokes mingled with admiration — and the crowd was so large that the police lines proved incapable of resisting it.
It was the antithesis of the CND marches.
For many of the committed, for many of the organizers, the issue wasn't peace, it was war: victorious war for Vietnam's National Liberation Front, and class war on the bourgeoisie — a word that had faded from much of the left in the long years of ‘The British road to socialism’.
It was also play-acting, with Guevara look-alikes, berets suitably arranged, posing alongside scarlet flags atop lamp-posts.
There could be none of the early 1960s sit-downs, it was implicitly recognized, this was no passive  Gandhi protest, the state had to be confronted.
The state, in the form of the police line, broke both to their and the demonstrators surprise.
Many of the marchers had never been on a CND march.
Violence ensued.
Abroad other leftists noticed that even the British were fighting their police.
Not all approached it with such seriousness.
‘The impact on me’, recalls Pearce Marchbank, ‘was blowing away all that love and peace shit which I thought was bollocks and complete pretence.
People were on the streets being senselessly violent to the police, which I thought was a good thing at the time.
It was completely anarchic, they could have been fighting for anything, cheaper teabags for all they cared, half of them.
There were a lot of people there who felt seriously about what they were fighting for but people went there for a good fight really, they hadn't been able to show any aggression for the last two years.
So then I was able to put in drops of blood and nasty black and white pictures and get rid of the Paisley patterns and bindweed round the edge of pages everywhere.’
On 4 April Martin Luther King was shot in Memphis.
Violent protest erupted across the United States.
Five days later, as the hysteria about the arrival of Kenyan Asians peaked, Home Secretary James Callaghan published his race relations bill.
Then, on 20 April, Enoch Powell, a member of Edward Heath's Conservative Shadow Cabinet, commented to a public meeting-on the race  war.
Like the Roman of old, he observed: ‘I seem to see the River Tiber foaming with much blood.’
Heath sacked Powell.
Three days later 1,000 London dockers marched in support of the speech.
Suddenly the confidence of the new radicals received a body blow.
They had talked of spontaneous workers' movements, of activity from below, and suddenly there it was.
A few old veterans of the Mosleyite British Union Movement were identified amongst the marchers, and conveniently blamed by some of the more deluded, or self-deluding, but there seemed little escape from the truth.
While the radicals had toyed with revolution, and while the underground had played with toys, workers were on the move, and in the wrong direction.
Yet other messages were coming from elsewhere.
In March Victor Herbert reported from Paris for It on ‘L'Affaire Langlois’ the controversy about the sacking of Henri Langlois from his post as head of the Paris Cinematheque.
The same issue of It reported — as hardly anyone else had — how ‘La Groupe Premiere Mai’ had opened fire on London's United States Embassy.
By April the paper itself had changed.
Abruptly it proclaimed itself a tribe, featured all twenty-three staff, tribe members on the cover, reported on the growth of the yippies, America's politicized hippies, and on plans by Sid Rawle's Hyde Park Diggers to move to the country.
By the following issue Rudi Dutskche was being interviewed, and John Hopkins was writing a critical letter to Tariq Ali on the 17 March demonstration.
Politics were flooding into It too.
Curious reports from France, changing hippies, tribal undergrounds, assessment of demonstrations.
A palace revolution on It saw ‘co-ordination’ put in the hands of John Hopkins with ‘words’the province of Peter Stansill, Dave Robins, and Madeleine Neeson.
Miles was slipping back, and, in his It interventions, more into music.
He interviewed Mick Jagger for the first issue of May.
Things were weird, said Jagger.
They were, and were about to become a lot weirder.
Demand the impossible
Clive Goodwin had done well.
He was what the 1960s were supposed to be about: rich, successful, well placed in the media, what the cant of the time regarded as classless.
That meant that Goodwin was from the working class and had made it.
He held expensive parties and knew London's radical chic: Kenneth and Katherine Tynan, Tony Garnett and Ken Loach the film-makers, Jim Haynes, Richard Neville, David Mercer the playwright.
Indeed the subject matter of many of Mercer's plays — which was often Mercer — could just as well have been Goodwin.
Plays about the fractured consciousness of working-class kids who had fought their way through the old class system, emerged on top, and still felt dissatisfied, still realizing that nothing had changed back where they came from, or where they had arrived.
Born the son of a Willesden waiter Goodwin had worked as an actor, produced magazines, and gravitated into television.
Quitting after a fracas he had gone to work as a literary agent and had prospered.
He didn't suffer fools gladly and was obsessively professional.
Where he'd come from and where he was ensured one thing: like Garnett, Mercer, and Loach, Goodwin was a socialist.
By 1966 he shared the disillusionment with the Labour Government spreading through the intelligentsia.
What was needed, he suspected, was a new paper.
Tribune had tail-ended Harold Wilson into power, and was, to a new generation, an irrelevant joke.
The paper had to be independent, appealing to the new radicals, and to the working class.
There were the papers produced by the political groups, but they seemed fatally restricted to the obsessions of other times, and to backbiting amongst themselves.
Yet Goodwin, through his progress through the media and up the class structure of Britain, had remained, or become, cut off from any grassroots action.
He involved himself in Raymond Williams's ‘May Day Manifesto Committee’ and he talked to others about what could be done.
Amongst them was Tariq Ali, whose background could hardly have been further from his own.
The son of an affluent Pakistani landowning family, he had graduated from Oxford in 1963, with radical political ideas, and few prospects.
He made a living by journalism, in the 1960s version of Grub Street eventually landing the job of drama critic for Town magazine.
Town  — owned by Michael Heseltine — was a monthly, oriented inefficiently to the male equivalent of the readers of Queen, and stumbling blindly towards the market to be opened up within two years by Tony Elliott's Time Out.
Charles Marovitz in It had not been the only reviewer from the left dissatisfied with the Royal Shakespeare Company's US on the Vietnam war.
In Town Ali, too, slammed the play for failing to take sides.
In his memoir of the 1960s Ali records how, following the review, Goodwin rang him, they met for lunch, and the literary agent explained that he wanted to start the new paper.
After the Dialectics of Liberation another meeting was called, more people were drawn in, and the need to raise money was stressed.
Adrian Mitchell, the poet, who had supported It, was there, so was his fellow poet Christopher Logue, Kenneth Tynan, and the television producer Roger Smith.
The plans began to take shape.
An editor was found, D.A.N.
Jones, the Listener's drama critic.
Another Oxford graduate, but from the lower middle class, Jones had apparently the right socialist credentials, but his activism centred on his local south-London Labour Party.
As 1968 dawned and events accelerated Jones's politics began to skew from those of his co-founders.
Sheila Rowbotham had taken a different route after graduation from Oxford in 1962.
She was teaching, living in Hackney, and, as a member of the Labour Party's Young Socialists, became involved in the internecine battles between the Trotskyist groups then active within the Party.
She had also started working for Agitprop, a loosely based collective operating off the Euston Road and concerned with posters, street theatre, action.
But she kept in touch with Tariq Ali.
Indeed, his position as Town's theatre critic meant that she was getting some evenings out free as well.
Then, early in 1968, Tariq Ali rang her; the new paper was going to be produced.
Was she interested?
At the beginning of May the revised May Day Manifesto was launched at Camden Town Hall, on a sunny Saturday afternoon which wasn't matched by the tempers or harmony of the participants.
Ali introduced Rowbotham to Goodwin.
That evening the three of them went out to dinner, and they got on.
Rowbotham the middle-class woman from Leeds, involved in local politics, Vietnam action, and drifting towards the International Socialists; Ali the upper-class Pakistani Oxford graduate moving towards the International Marxist Group; Goodwin the working-class boy made good.
Through Agitprop Rowbotham had extended out of Hackney.
Vietnam activism meant contact with the Stoppit Committee, founded by Americans based in London.
They were different.
The politics she had encountered had been trades councils and Young  Socialist meetings; the Americans wore beads, mumbled, talked about direct action.
And Goodwin was different too, with his emphasis on professionalism, and his links with those other people, older than her, who had moved into the mainstream media.
It was not a world she wanted, but it was interesting, different.
Goodwin, with his contacts, was a bridge, and for him Rowbotham, with her concern with grassroots activity, was an entry into another world too.
Others came into the new paper.
David Mercer joined the editorial board; so did Mo Teitlebaum, involved in TV, the poet Adrian Mitchell, looking for rather more than It could offer, and Robin Fior, a designer.
Offices were found, the Black Dwarf was born, and based in the New Left Review's premises in Carlisle Street, round the corner from the old Partisan coffee bar of the early 1960s.
The title came from the nineteenth-century paper produced by the Chartists that had combined satire with working-class reportage.
Perhaps it too, thought Rowbotham would be able to reach back and tap that radical tradition.
The Powell speech and the dockers' march triggered a response.
Partly through Agitprop and partly through the Black Dwarf group a free-sheet was produced to be handed out on the dockers' march.
Despite the hostility of the right-wing core of the march the sheet went well.
And there were other things to cheer the leafleters: Paris, and the May Events.
The sacking of Henri Langlois from the Cinematheque had, curiously, been a sign of things to come in Paris.
Langlois's sacking didn't shake the state, but it created concern.
So did events at Nanterre, a concrete campus of a university on the outskirts of Paris.
Surrounded by the slums of  Portuguese and Arab immigrants, the campus drew its students from the middle classes, but did so under an authoritarian system of education that seemed hardly to have changed in 150 years.
The underground-as it had developed in the United States and Britain — was unknown.
But Vietnam wasn't, nor was overcrowding, nor petty restrictions.
The shooting in Germany of Rudi Dutskche by a right-wing extremist triggered protest amongst Paris's student population.
They gathered in the Latin Quarter in their thousands.
In comparison with British students, the French were larger in number, and paid — if at all badly.
In the wake of Dutskche's wounding in Berlin the Nanterre students descended on the Sorbonne, the ancient university of Paris.
The ‘Mouvement du 22 Mars’ had begun to take on a momentum of its own, as April turned into May.
Pitched battles took place between the students and the police in the narrow streets around the Sorbonne.
Liberal opinion began to waver as the extent of the violence was revealed on newsreels, on television, in Paris  Match, across the globe.
The students went out from the campuses into the factories, to be greeted, initially, by hostile Communist officials and puzzled workers, but the agitation continued, the slogans proliferated.
‘Be a realist, demand the impossible.’
‘I take my desire for reality, because I believe in the reality of my desires.’
‘The general will against the will of the General.’
‘To bargain is to capitulate.’
‘Run forward comrade, the old world is behind you.’
‘Freedom is the consciousness of our desires.’
‘When the last capitalist will be hanged with the guts of the last reformist, humanity will be happy.’
And the agitation worked: workers became realists, initiated the general will, refused to bargain, and ran forward towards freedom.
What had started as a movement of rich kids in a concrete jungle seized the imagination of urban workers in an efficient, technocratic state, being hailed, in a Times series that appeared the week the revolt became widespread, as the very model of a modern major power.
On 13 May the Communist Party shifted under the pressure of a general strike, on 17 May Renault was occupied.
The day after, General de Gaulle cut short his visit to Rumania and returned to Paris; by then two million workers were on strike, 120 factories occupied; within three days 250 factories were occupied, and eight million on strike.
De Gaulle visited his, hopefully, loyal troops in Germany; tanks were reported on the outskirts of Paris.
The ruling Gaullists and the Communists alike were in danger of cracking under the strain of the May Events.
The Communists put in for wage rises, holiday increases; a new cabinet was formed, Prime Minister Pompidou offered deals, new talks; the strikes continued, but dwindled in number.
Car workers, astronomers, TV producers, students, transport workers, strippers, began to reassess; demoralization crept across the strike zones.
By 6 June the metro had started running again.
A day later the Renault workers were evicted from their plant at Flins, as 2,000 riot police, the CRS, held back solidarity demonstrations.
Slowly the tide turned.
By 12 June the authorities felt confident enough to ban all demonstrations, yet only four days later the students, still fighting, battled with the police around the Sorbonne.
Then, with the collapse of the revolt, new elections took place between 23 and 3() June.
De Gaulle was swept back to power.
The  events were over, but their impact shook Europe that year and echoed down the decade that followed.
The Emperor did indeed have no clothes, and, when challenged, would run.
Everybody within the radical/underground milieu had something to say, to learn, to argue about from the May Events.
It wasn't a proper revolution, argued disgruntled, orthodox Communists, it had been a bunch of rich kids.
‘Revolution is the festival of the oppressed’, came the rejoinder from other Marxists, quoting Lenin.
Eighteen years later Jean Genet commented that he could see the revolution couldn't work after a visit to the Odeon, occupied by students and workers.
Speakers would take it in turn to speak, would be applauded, and would return to the auditorium to applaud more speakers, more poseurs.
This wasn't serious, he suggested; serious revolutionaries would take the banks, the stock exchange, which was fired, the broadcasting stations.
It had been theatre.
Maybe.
But it was theatre which sucked in an eager audience across the channel.
Oz produced a Martin Sharp-designed ‘special’ for distribution in Paris.
It32 appeared as a ‘Special Rush Paris Alternative Society Now’ edition, for 1/6d (7½p) in London, but in Paris it was free.
Inside, Robert Tasher, Sue Haussmann, and Mike Lesser reported, in appropriately breathless terms, and in dayglo scarlet, on the situation, via an interview with Jacques Tarnero of the Mouvement du 22 Mars.
‘We need money’, Tarnero told It.
‘We have no money to buy gas masks.
We have no money to buy dressings for the wounded.
We have no money to buy paper to print pamphlets.’
It was a rush-job from It, complete with copy stripped on to the pages with uncorrected passages hastily crossed out — but it was immediate.
The May Events marked the chasm within the underground, and as the comrades — or would-be comrades — ran forward it became obvious that much of the old American guard on It had become part of the world left behind.
They were a generation for whom Beats, jazz, art, and existentialism was what Paris was really about, not the hedonistic, free-spirited outburst of the revolution.
Not so for Dave Robins.
Suddenly his status as a student was no longer something to be concealed, it was part of his consciousness.
‘Socialism was back on the agenda’, he points out.
‘I went to Paris and I saw with my own eyes — either that or I was young and I dreamt it all — workers and students and young people together, fighting, helping each other-socialism was on the streets.’
On 5 June the opportunistic hope of American liberalism, Robert Kennedy, was assassinated in California.
In London the Ronan Point tower block collapsed, taking with it the certainties of high-rise technocratic change of the early 1960s.
Later in June Valerie Solanas, an habitué with Wilcock of the New York Factory, shot Andy Warhol.
He was having too much influence on her life, she explained.
Suddenly her ‘Society for Cutting Up Men’ SCUM Manifesto became popular reading, if regarded as eccentric, on women's oppression, but interesting none the less.
In Oz13 and It33 a letter from a ‘surrealist group’ including jazz singer/writer George Melly was published giving twenty-one reasons why they needed ‘Danny the Red’Cohn-Bendit, the media's nominee for ‘leadership’of the May Events.
The twenty-first reason was: ‘We are very very frightened.’
Interestingly the traditional centres of student power in England yielded their place to two art colleges, at Hornsey and Guildford, which were occupied.
‘In the six weeks of the Hornsey revolution’, wrote a student the following Christmas in Revelations — the Hornsey students' paper-'I had more education than I had ever previously experienced.
A new sort of freedom emerged, a freedom to work, learn, and develop.
A new surge of life.’
Other colleges erupted.
Essex, one of the new universities born of the last years of  Macmillan's rule, was occupied.
In Hull a student, Tom Fawthrop, later a fixture on It and other underground papers, ripped up his finals papers.
It was a perfect time for the launch of Black Dwarf, but there too there were problems.
The paper's first deadline had been 15 May 1968, but it became impossible to hit it, and there was, as the May Events washed around the staff, another problem.
Jones's politics were more of an older and more traditional left, drawing on roots within the Communist and Labour Party traditions.
He produced a Black Dwarf, 20,000 were printed, but it wasn't, thought the editorial board, what was wanted.
In retrospect, wrote Ali in Street Fighting Years, ‘it was not so bad as we thought’, but it ended up in the incinerator, rather than on the streets.
D.A.N.
Jones quit, to be replaced by Tariq Ali.
On 1 June the first eight-page issue was finally published.
Its page size was bigger than The Times and its front-page message summoned up, with a tinge of pomposity, a degree of wishful thinking, the hope of the month, and indeed the year: ‘We Shall Fight We Will Win Paris London Rome Berlin.’
Rowbotham, meanwhile, had been sucked into the paper, but not on to the editorial board.
For her the idea of the working-class orientation was important, but in those months, as the student tide swept on, other priorities dominated.
Before its publication Goodwin had sent her off to the British Museum to research the old Black Dwarf.
She spent two weeks inside and returned with a vast stack of photocopied originals and a bill for the astronomical sum of f25.
Goodwin was furious.
What, he asked, were the staff supposed to do with the photocopies?
Other women were drawn on to the paper, but as on It they were supposed to know their place.
‘We were sent upstairs to address envelopes as ‘the girls’‘, she  recalls, ‘while Clive got on with the serious business of deciding about the paper.
This was a completely assumed division of labour.
In the Hackney Young Socialists there was formal recognition that women should be allowed to be the chair, or vice-chair, but in Clive's world women were the secretaries, unless they were very sophisticated cool people.’
When not upstairs, in those early days, Rowbotham, in evangelical mood, was out selling.
With the first issue she hitched north to York and on to Hull, where the students were occupying the campus in solidarity with the May Events at first, but rapidly in pursuit of ‘One Man — One Vote’ within the university.
The paper touched a heady mood.
She went on to Newcastle, where Goodwin was speaking on local TV about the Dwarf, and she was selling the paper at the local anarchist centre, giving it away along the roadside.
The wave swept everywhere.
Having tried the Tribe, It, by issue 34 in late June, had changed its (official) owners and its designated organization.
Out went the Lovebooks set up by Miles and John Hopkins; its new holding company was KNULLAR, which could be, the paper suggested in August, the ‘Karmic Neo-Universal League for Liberty and Reality’; but to a Swede, It pointed out ‘it could mean something entirely different’—‘fuck’ to be precise.
It was now also, in keeping with the times, to be a workers co-operative.
Meanwhile Hornsey students moved into the paper to design two covers, and the paper covered the occupation with a two-page feature, next to Steve Abrams's ‘Legalize Pot Rally’.
Abrams, another American, was the director of the Society of Mental Awareness, SOMA.
It, partly through Stansill's interest in the possibilities of an alternative economy, and largely through Hopkins's enthusiasm, had triggered the birth of BIT in late May, which aimed to be an information service for the ‘community’.
Somewhat ironically, by August BIT had got round to recommending the Daily Telegraph's information service as a useful source.
Significantly, in August too, It was promoting ‘a new information publication on what to do and where to go in London, a comprehensive directory of events and places covering clothes, food, help, lectures, exhibitions, groups, jazz/folk clubs, films, theatre, cinema, music, swimming, fairs, puppets, and many other things, telling you how to get there, and what to expect when you arrive’.
It cost a shilling (5p) and its name was Time Out.
The new magazine was just a folded poster-format sheet.
It sold, but it was little-noticed.
Black Dwarf, because of its size, if nothing else, was.
Not that the early issues had learnt anything from the underground.
Pictures were almost non-existent, long columns of grey, illegible type propped up its pages.
The material in the early issues indicated a group high on advice, but low on the reportage for  which at least some of its founders had hoped.
Its fourth issue devoted a page to analysis and views of the smaller, 21 July Vietnam demonstration half a page to strike reports from Manchester and London, two pages to a suppressed BBC script on racism, and almost a page to Malcolm X and an excerpt from American black power advocate Julius Lester's Look Out Whitey.
Huge pages underlined the scarceness of resources, and hot metal setting its distance from the offset litho of It, let alone the colour and verve of Oz.
And while Black Dwarf staff might have protested their separateness from the two underground papers, readers in London, and students and hippies elsewhere, would not.
All were part of the diffuse, confused, but radical mood of the summer and autumn.
Why, even Richard Neville wrote for Black Dwarf.
Sheila Rowbotham continued with her belief in the paper as one with a working-class perspective.
It wasn't a view that sat easily with the Dwarf s student orientation as the autumn and the new student academic year approached.
In July the paper's front page had proclaimed: ‘Students: The New Revolutionary Vanguard.’
Upon seeing it — some said a question mark had fallen off on its way to printing in North Wales — she sat down and wept.
‘I didn't want the students to be’, she recalls, ‘I didn't really want anybody to be, and I certainly didn't think students had any right to be.
It was completely against my dream of the Dwarf which was going to be this working-class paper.’
The debate continued into the autumn.
By then the working class had made it back on to the front page, if only in a supporting role.
‘Don't Demand, Occupy’, it blazoned, addressing its demands to workers in factories and students in schools.
Elsewhere on the left the International Socialists had, that summer, revamped their fortnightly Labour Worker into, under Roger Protz, the sharper, more Fleet Street, tabloid-oriented Socialist Worker.
There was the SLL's bi-weekly Newsletter, there were myriad other left papers, and there was the Dwarf coming out monthly, and severely underfinanced and understaffed.
It did however have commitment and Goodwin's fund-raising abilities.
It was his conception, his baby, and for it he would tolerate most things, including his suspicion of Trotskyism — whether of the IMG or IS variety — and of what he may have seen as Rowbotham's ‘hippy sentimentality’.
But it needed new blood.
One infusion came from Cambridge economist Bob Rowthorne, still nominally a member of the International Socialists, but moving, unfashionably for the time but a precursor of things to come, towards the Communist Party.
Ali rang Rowthorne and invited him round, and an invitation to join the editorial board followed.
‘This is ridiculous’, Rowthorne replied, ‘why don't you ask Sheila to join?’
‘They probably hadn't seen me’, observes Rowbotham, ‘because I wasn't as tall as them.’
Thus Rowthorne and Rowbotham joined the editorial board, and thus also a change began on the Dwarf which was significantly to affect the development of the underground, and ultimately prove its nemesis.
How could the Dwarf expand?
That was the question that faced a group gathered in the Carlisle Street offices one Saturday afternoon that autumn.
Socialist Worker appeared to be soaking up the potential trade union readership, while the audience of students in revolt could dwindle — although with the formation of the Revolutionary Socialists Student Federation there were hopes that the ‘new vanguard’ might survive to detonate the proletarian uprising.
One suggestion was drawn from the experience of the German socialist magazine Konkret, part-founded by the later member of the West German urban guerrilla group, the Red Army Faction.
Why not, I think I suggested, put pin-ups into the paper?
There was no point in being stuffy; it would attract new readers, show that the paper was iconoclastic, broadminded.
It was the time that the women machinists at Ford had gone on strike for equal pay, a struggle that was to continue, intermittently, for the next eighteen years.
It was also the time that the National Joint Action Committee for Women's Equal Rights had been formed.
The Ford strikers had been portrayed in the mainstream media as ‘petticoat pickets’.
Through the IMG Ali had noted that many Trotskyist women had gone into the National Joint Action Committee for Women's Equal Rights (NJACWER).
It made Ali susceptible when Rowbotham exploded at the idea of pin-ups.
Indeed it had been the combination of Rowthorne's suggestion and her fury over the pin-up issue which saw her on to the editorial board.
By then an issue on women's rights was already in the planning stage.
In the United States the women's liberation movement was beginning to emerge.
Not so in Britain.
Back in 1966 Juliet Mitchell had opened the question with her article, ‘Women: the longest revolution’ in the New Left Review, but few had noticed, and its impact had been slight.
Women, increasingly, were engaged in industrial struggle: at Ford in Hull with Lil Bilocca's fishermen's wives.
The underground press survived on female labour, but it remained out of the limelight; the Sue Smalls, Caroline McKechnies, ‘Hamburger Sues’, Madeleine Neesons, Louise Ferriers, Marsha Rowes; and on the Black Dwarf Sheila Rowbotham and Anne Scott, who, at 17, was secretary, organizer, and dogsbody.
The mover behind the women's rights issue had been Fred Halliday, another cross-over from the New Left Review.
Halliday had read the works of Wilhelm Reich, the German Freudian/  Marxist psychologist-cum-sexual revolutionary whose works were by then rivalling Laing's in the attention they were receiving across the revolutionary left and the underground.
The difference being that Laing was alive and living in London and Inner Space, while Reich had killed himself fifteen years before in the United States.
Halliday had not been greatly inspired by the prospect of the women's issue, and increasingly Rowbotham took over its organization.
The future Labour MP Audrey Wise provided ‘Equal Pay Is Not Enough’; through her contacts with the Institute of Workers Control's Tony Topham in Hull, material on Bilocca arrived.
Anne Scott wrote her first piece — on contraception — and a woman whom Rowbotham had met wrote a description of what it was like being an unmarried mother.
A description of what it was like being a female secretary in a male-dominated office received much attention, and much fury and hilarity when it was realized that the office being described was that of the New Left Review.
And Rowbotham wrote a piece based on her feelings as the annus mirabilis of 1968 drew to a conclusion.
Her article was to go far.
It was reproduced in the Boston underground paper, and the following year, when Jean Luc Godard came to England to film British Sounds, Rowbotham read it over the soundtrack.
Godard's intention had been to accompany the reading with its author descending stairs, naked, in order to  confront the viewer, it was assumed, with the contrast between argument, theory, and the sexual objectification of women.
But she declined.
She felt, vaguely, that it wasn't the right feminist thing to do, but also, she suspected, vanity came into it.
Robin Fior had left, and a new designer had arrived.
Contacts between the revolutionary left and the rest of the underground continued, so who better than a designer who had worked for Oz?
‘When I saw the design’, remembers Rowbotham, ‘I went bananas.’
It graphically illustrated the arguments in a style which left little of the arguments, and a lot of dubious illustration.
‘I suppose he thought it was boring stuff about equal pay and women’, she says, ‘I went berserk.
Tariq, to his credit, said we should take out as many pictures as we could, and taking them out cost 70 which at that time was ever such a lot of money.’
The Black Dwarf had, via another route, made news outside its normal orbit.
Working with Rowbotham on Agitprop had been John Hoyland.
Coming from a Communist family background in the early 1960s, the pull of the underground- and a trip to South America — had sucked him away from politics.
The war in Vietnam pulled him back, and into Agitprop's poster work.
It was the year that the Beatles released ‘Revolution’, a record one American critic charged would be suitable for the Democratic Party's 1968 platform, with Lennon's put-downs of people who went talking of  Chairman Mao and weren't going to make it anyhow.
From his eyrie in Euston Road, and through the Black Dwarf, Hoyland wrote an open letter to Lennon challenging his views, with all of 1968's radical fervour.
The system poisoned people, said Hoyland, so it had to be destroyed.
To Hoyland and the Black Dwarf s gratification, Lennon wrote back.
You knock down the system, retorted the grand Beatle, and we will build around it.
It was an instant when the Dwarf found out what it was like to be one of the beautiful people.
‘When I read it now’, says Hoyland, ‘I blush with shame, it was so patronizing.
Basically it said ‘John Lennon, why are you such a hippy, why aren't you a revolutionary?’
It got noticed.’
It also got Hoyland an invitation, which he accepted, to join Black Dwarf.
The promise of 1968 had begun to fade before the year had ended.
After the violent climax to the 17 March Vietnam demonstration, and the anticlimax of the July action, intense organization went into the march planned for 27 October.
It was to be the largest march ever organized by the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign, with profuse pre-publicity, and an obliging media reaction — talking of ‘revolutionary threats’, and Home Secretary James Callaghan being quizzed on television as to whether the gathering should be banned.
Callaghan presented his reasonable, unflappable, policeman-on-the-beat face to the nation, and said that it shouldn't.
He was right.
So successful were the organizers in organizing that the spontaneity of the demonstration quite drained away, and a vast crowd marched around central London and marched away again.
‘How do we feel now’, asked Peter Stansill in It, ‘in these first strange cold days of our next winter, having just had our minds raped by rationality?…
No banner represented a frontal conceptual attack on established mediocrity and habitual thinking with the exception of the International Situationist banner which read: ‘Storm the Reality Studios: Retake the Universe’.
Where were the cosmic slogans of the non-causes and non-movements?
‘Victory to Ecstasy!’
‘Liberate the Global Consciousness!’
Where were the people demonstrating the embryonic reality of a cybernetic age, an Aquarian age?’
Cold winter maybe, but it had been a long summer that ended that afternoon, from Powell, through the May Events and, at the end of August, the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, which had again pulled the demonstrators on to the streets, but on this occasion down to Notting Hill and Olympia, the homes of the Czech and Soviet embassies, and an ill-timed eastern bloc trade exhibition.
Across the Atlantic the riots had continued, and, even as the Red Army moved into Prague, Mayor Daley's police force was in pitched battle with demonstrators outside the Democratic Party's convention.
Eight men were to be charged the following March with  conspiracy in Chicago, and it was to provide cause célèbre by proxy for the British radical movements.
Unrealized at the time, 1968 was It's highpoint.
Behind it lay the Anglo-American fusion that had powered the paper in 1966 and through the first eighteen months.
In the year of revolutionary upheaval It had seen some of its predictions fulfilled, and a movement created which, as it developed, had less and less to do with the first publication out of the underground.
In the autumn It moved to offices in Endell Street, still in Covent Garden.
Although the staff had not appreciated it, the listings of London events were quite crucial, and had given It a stranglehold on the London market, which was to be broken.
While UFO had gone, Middle Earth continued in Covent Garden, and the Arts Lab continued, even if the beautiful people were getting shabbier, and the dossers beginning to arrive.
In November a fracas developed between two factions within the Lab, but Haynes and Moore remained.
Colour had crept unsteadily on to It's pages, and the paper reported in its second birthday issue that ‘hopes of a permanent 24-page It have had to be tempered with reality otherwise we would find ourselves expanding into debt.’
The paper had to wait, It announced, ‘until our much talked about ‘profits’ materialize in the form of hard cash.’
On the facing page Peter Stansill ruminated on the meaning of the second birthday: ‘most of us are roaming through 1968 internally screaming and writhing in the wilderness of our various human relationships.
Things are as sordid as ever.’
It was an indication of It facing both ways, torn between a youth culture stumbling around politics and the embers of 1967.
‘Overwhelming negativity marked this year off from the last’, he observed, ‘…the real revolution is poetry, the revolution is in your mind.’
Up to a point.
The swelling letters pages were occupied with responses to Michael Eaves, a correspondent who had suggested axing the ‘What's Happening’ section, record reviews, and ads from the paper — which would have neatly killed it some years before its time — led by a contribution from one of It's founders, David Mairowitz, ‘who broke his b***s [asterisks his]seeing that It 1–10 got put together and printed.’
‘Established cinemas, theatres etc…exist in the police universe to repress the very things that It stands for.
Michael's letter refers very nicely to ‘export-oriented consumed-productivity bullshit’ and it's all there It…
Live It.
We need you.
Everybody loves you, even me and Michael Eaves.
But we don't need or love you as an organ gone sour that stinks in the wind.
We need you to attack, to rape and plunder, shout and rage, dance and sing all over the graves of bad faith mongers.
Look to it, It, on this your glorious second birthday.
Be beautiful, but don't be too nice.’
Being confused was more It's line, but not Oz's eclectic blend mediated through Neville's editing.
It faced in fifty-seven directions at once, but kept from the old American contingent, and from the anarchic underground, dislike of any political organization, a terror of being bored, or boring, and a tendency, at times, to be both, and incomprehensible with it.
What did remain in that paper, that year, was a hankering after what had survived from 1967, exemplified in the prose of John Peel.
With the effective collapse of the offshore pirate radio stations in 1967 Peel had come ashore and been swallowed within the recesses of Broadcasting House, and its bastard infant, Radio One.
From there he sallied forth to the underground, and by 1969 got profiled in the Listener as the aesthetic end of the underground, and the acceptable face of pop.
Peel's sense of self-parody could sometimes get submerged in the column he contributed to It.
‘I have just been given a flower — the second in two weeks’, he told readers in the birthday issue column.
‘I love you so much.’
But not so much as the readers and staff of Gandalf's Garden.
While the first issue of Black Dwarf was being planned, across London its diametrical opposite was taking shape.
Back in February 1967 John Michell, the ley-lines and saucers correspondent of It, wrote to the paper, explaining his concern with It's ‘interest in political forms of thought and protest…
We must reject political influences in every field.
The great centre which Michael Abdul Malik will build will not be, or look like a political centre.
It will be white with a god-like figure like those Tibetan Buddhist temples which reflect the old vision of the winged disc and prepare us for the new.
It will be ‘religious’ in that it will appeal directly to people's dreams and real desires, not to greed or the lust for irrelevant political power.’
When Michael Abdul Malik's centre — the ‘Black House’ in north London's forbidding Holloway Road — was established eighteen months later, the god-like figure was missing.
So too, by then, was Gandalf s Garden.
Founded by Muz Murray, who was featured on the first issue's cover breaking out of an egg, Gandalf's Garden distilled the essence of the time's peace, love, mysticism, and delusion.
While Black Dwarf could trace its roots back, through Trotsky to Marx, or through radicalism to the Chartists, Gandalf's Garden took as its theoretical base — if theoretical is the right word J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings, and tended to see the unfortunate Peel as its prophet.
It was to be a monthly, the first issue announced, while the second qualified the assertion into a ‘monthlyish periodical published for people with love’.
By issue four a fifth issue was promised ‘when the weather is right’.
The weather turned out to be right, for the last time, in November 1969, when, promoting the shop which accompanied the publication, it  was announced that: ‘The garden is not just a magazine and shoppe set-up, but a dedicated life-style.’
During its short life Gandalf's Garden evolved a style which made It, Oz, and the others that were to come later models of detachment and worldliness.
Published at first from W8 the paper developed its shop-cum-'spiritual oasis' at World's End in Chelsea.
The first issue interviewed Tyrannosaurus Rex, a band which, in their hippy phase, and before their reappearance as a chart group, T. Rex, had long been popular with Peel.
‘Out of the land of legends comes the sound of the Tyrannosaurus Rex, awoken in the incredible voice of Marc Bolan (of Elfin descent) and hairy-toed Steve Peregrin Took’, breathed the introduction.
Bolan himself, setting the standards for pop's comments on the other world and philosophical observation for the underground, observed that ‘Christ must have been a gas.
I think he was a very turned-on guy and very much with God.
God is the coolest thing of all.
I think if I'm just a splinter out of his head, then he must have been a bit like me, not much though.’
Yet the times continued to breed strange bedfellows.
Peter Fryer, the Daily Worker's 1956 correspondent, wrote in, commending the paper; the jazz musician Cy Laurie contributed on the Maharishi; and Timothy Leary, fulfilling his papal role, announced that ‘We have received your wonderful Garden…
It is sweet and good…
It will bloom, blossom and perfume the planet.’
It was Gandalf's Garden's task to carry, assisted by divine and hobbit hands, the purest expression of the hippy philosophy across the city, and country.
It did, on occasions, meet with approval, but, largely, within the underground with incredulity.
But, as Muz Murray pointed out to Bristol's Occult Bookshop's Robert Gilbert who had been attacking other underground papers, it was wrong to be too hard on the others.
‘They may seem Mordor-made’, he explained in the letters column, ‘because of rendering unto Caesar what is Caesar's — uncovering society's hypocritical filth and throwing it back in its teeth.
But the real problem is that no matter how reactionary their articles seem to be the writers still tend to be enmeshed in the thought patterns of the Straightworld even when deriding it, which can only work like walking on a treadmill towards the new World.
Even so they are still honestly doing their thing from the only angle they understand.’
But Straightworld proved closer than Murray thought, in 1969, and a tough place for hobbits, and others.
The hell of it
Jann Wenner in 1967 was living in San Francisco, and enthusiastic about rock ‘n’ roll.
It was the city of the summer of love, the San Francisco Mime Troupe, the Oracle's bizarre psychedelic graphics and ultra-hippy prose, the Diggers, and Haight-Ashbury.
In November it also became the birthplace of Rolling Stone magazine.
Rolling Stone was a serious paper about rock.
So serious on many occasions that it subsided into ponderousness, pretentiousness, and treated the subject as life-style, liberation, and meaning of life.
It also produced some of the best journalism on the underground and the above ground — written in the 1960s.
The Fortune magazine of the rock era, it made Wenner a fortune.
By 1968 it had begun to appear in Britain.
Its format was unconventional: a folded-over tabloid with the cover printed A4 size on the fold.
But its design, contrasted with underground papers, was conservative.
A stack of copies was piled up at the entrance to the Arts Lab.
Some people even bought it, and often assumed, wrongly, that the paper was connected with the Rolling Stones.
This annoyed Mick Jagger, who felt that, since the paper was called Rolling Stone, it should have a connection with him, if not the band.
So it was in March 1969 that an English edition of the magazine hit the news-stands.
Wenner's idea was simple.
London, like San Francisco, Chicago, and New York, was a rock city.
Thus London Rolling Stone's product could be fed back to the West Coast parent.
Autonomy for the London staff was not one of his priorities, but a connection with Jagger was, so the paper was, initially, based at the Rolling Stones' offices in Maddox Street, Mayfair.
By early summer it had moved to still more opulent quarters in Hanover Square.
It appeared to have arrived at the right time.
1969 was the year that rock festivals took off in Britain, and exploded into celluloid myth-and real murder — in the United States.
True since the early 1960s the British had gathered in wet fields to hear jazz, and rock and the movie Jazz: On A Summer's Day with its tantalizing performance by Chuck Berry helped break the hold of cool on popular music.
And then there had been the Pennebaker film Monterey Pop of the 1967 festival in California, complete with Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix.
1968 had seen an outbreak of small festivals, with even a fair-sized event (12,000) on the Isle of Wight.
But then in 1969, following the break-up of Cream, the three-man band for rock fans with artistic aspirations, came the formation of Blind Faith: Ginger Baker, Eric Clapton, Ric Grech, and Steve Winwood.
Its short history provided one album, denounced for a dubious cover by the popular press, and a huge concert in Hyde Park in early June.
The success of Blind Faith's concert encouraged the Rolling Stones to try the same trick, and, come 5 July, three days after the death of the band's Brian Jones, Jagger et al.filled the park with a crowd estimated at between 250,000 and 500,000.
Then? at the end of August, came, in the United States, Woodstock, and in Britain, Bob Dylan on the Isle of Wight.
Both were huge, one, Woodstock, was filmed.
While the Rolling Stones had sucked the counter-culture, hell's angels, hippies, street theatres, and rock fans into the park for a day, the Isle of Wight created an encampment that lasted a week, and peaked, for good and ill, for three days.
Alongside the festivals, the dalliance of the music business with the counter-culture pumped more money into the underground press than ever before.
With the cash came a new direction for much of that press, Rolling Stone or-as quickly was to happen in London — no Rolling Stone.
For Mark Williams the appeal of fund raising for the Birmingham Arts Lab palled in 1968.
He and the residue of the small group around the lab organized all night ‘mixed media’ events entitled, in keeping with the times, ‘Strange Daze’to raise money.
All the right bands came — Love Sculpture, the Nice, Family — and, he remembers, ‘various acid-crazed hippies performed what might obliquely be termed experimental music’.
But no funds were raised, money was often lost.
The living was easy, and based in a squat, since Williams had abandoned his ad agency.
The flak increased on the project as it lurched on, directed from the local authority and the local arts centre.
And the pressure was getting to him.
Meanwhile his sales of It continued as a profitable sideline.
Life was too tame, while the world depicted by Oz and It was exciting.
In 1968 he visited It.
He had been sending in listings, even reports, on the gigs they had been running in Birmingham.
To his surprise they offered him a job as music editor.
He was out of Birmingham; not only that, he got himself space on the floor of a flat above the Two ‘I's coffee bar in Old Compton Street.
Things, he reflected, had worked out well.
There were problems.
One was that Williams knew nothing about being a music editor.
What was one supposed to do?
How was one supposed to cut copy?
To spell?
Peter Stansill provided the bare essentials, and Williams, hurriedly schooled in the importance of  deadlines, learnt on the job.
And It, with the growing new rock culture as a new fixture within the magazine, appeared to be doing well.
‘Where is It at now?’
So asked the paper's business manager Dave Hall in February 1969.
‘Rumours are going around about the bread It is making, the increase in circulation, the increase in ads, and yet that cat is still hustling for bread.’
It's circulation was peaking as it reached its fiftieth edition.
Despite dire tales of distribution being ripped off outside the paper, figures of 50,000 sales were being quoted, and 40,000 was probably being touched.
From a paper selling to dissident literati and the children of CND It was extending out to a new rock culture, and this accelerated the departure of the old American influences.
New transatlantic currents were making themselves felt.
In March the Californian Governor Ronald Reagan cordoned off dissident Berkeley, and the US remained convulsed by the war in Vietnam.
But the aftermath of the European Events of May 1968 still made waves, and the politics of papers like the Black Dwarf meant that alongside It's report of American Ed Berman's Inter Action and its development as a ‘community arts centre’ were stories of ‘Communications for a Revolutionary Europe and World’, and reports from Prague under Soviet occupation.
Another issue was creeping into the paper.
In It52 Lee Harris reported on a new play by Jane Arden at the Arts Lab.
Vagina Rex and the Gas Oven, reported Harris, indicated that women were ‘in a prison of their own making, they are the continual affirmation of man's potency.’
They were, and just as much within the underground as outside it.
Apart from providing substantial contingents of foot soldiers for the papers they, as ‘chicks’, provided a raison d'être as madonna/ whore/'old ladies' for men.
‘There are times when beautiful women come like food to the starving’, wrote Jeff Nuttall in Bomb Culture, first published in 1968.
‘Not to hold or make love to or talk to, but just to be there with their lovely hair and breasts, with their peaceful flesh.’
Having established a role for women — beautiful and otherwise — Nuttall went on to ask: ‘Can we apply a quivering phallic strength to our civic organization and our economy?’
Nuttall was no better — or worse — than the rest of the men within the underground milieu in his choice of language.
It was just that the straight world's men, from Strategic Air Command to the invaders of Prague, seemed to think along similar lines, if leading to different ends.
Which underlined the significance of Harris's note of Arden's play in February 1969.
By October Arden was being interviewed.
‘Meeting her’, reported the interviewer to his male (presumably) compatriots ‘shocked me into realizing how little we normally expect from women.’
Indeed.
‘Women, learn to give of yourselves a bit more (with adequate contraception)’, suggested Emmanuel Petrakis in It50.
‘Even if you don't enjoy it at first, why not give pleasure to others?
Given time, you might learn to enjoy the experience.’
Petrakis went on to urge men to remember ‘that a woman is a human being with feelings too, not just a cosy hole’.
This was too much even for men still undisturbed by the first stirrings of the women's movement.
An angry reader, Ian Phipps, replied, displaying in his language that he too was having problems in moving from being part of the problem to the solution.
It was ‘nothing more than a clearing house for sexually disturbed cranks, the biggest of whom is Emmanuel Petrakis…
Young chicks who genuinely want to be part of, and help develop, the scene will swallow his rubbish (coming from the leading headpaper) and will soon be mentally and physically ruined and incapable of normal deep feelings.’
Young chicks were soon, within the underground, to have other possibilities.
But, meanwhile, on It they still provided the back-up.
For Sue Small this meant working on ads and compiling the ‘What's Happening’ listings section at the back of the paper.
‘Editorial’, she notes, ‘didn't regard it as important, otherwise they wouldn't have let me do it.’
And, she adds, she had no knowledge of the arts scene.
But listings, plus music, plus music ads were the backbone of It's success in that period.
Yet the staff hadn't realized it, and nor had some of the readers.
‘Over the last four or five months we've become static and a little stale’, said a March 1969 editorial under the headline ‘What we want to hear from you’.
What the staff got on 28 April was a second police raid.
The move had been preceded by police visits to the printers of It, Oz, and Rolling Stone.
‘The heat's now really on for It, Oz and possibly Rolling Stone’, claimed the lead in It56.
‘If you want revolution — sexual freedom, freedom of thought, freedom to discover who you really are — in short, if you want a new world and won't settle for less, then these journals are your only overt communications media.’
The raid was eventually followed by prosecution and, the following January, by court appearances for Dave Hall, Graham Keen, and Peter Stansill.
And the police, disregarding the reds, heads, freaks, revolution, and rock at the front of the paper, made their target the gay contact personal ads at the back.
The charge was that the trio had ‘conspired with persons inserting ads and with other persons to induce readers to resort to the said advertisements for the purposes of homosexual practices and thinking to debauch and corrupt public morals contrary to common law.’
A side order was a charge of ‘conspiring to outrage public decency’.
‘Don't compromise’, urged CBS record ads in the Its of the time, ‘because the music doesn't.’
It might have been a suitable sales pitch for conglomerates shifting Blood Sweat & tears albums; it produced some qualms amongst It staffers and others.
At the newborn London Rolling Stone, editor (short-lived) Jane Nicholson was at pains to point out that the paper wasn't, in any way, underground'.
‘Poor baby, it's awful to be so misunderstood’, slammed Germaine Greer in Oz22.
‘You just want to talk about music and fucking and dope and that's all.
We know you have no intention of overthrowing the Vichy government.
Nothing is clearer than that the English Rolling Stone presents no threat to any political institution of any kind.’
Greer's onslaught was rewarded with a reply from Rolling Stone's Gene Mahon replete with the fashionable vocabulary of the times.
‘Revolution is a happening thing’, he admonished.
‘I hope you won't be stuck in your bag of ‘defending’ the underground; like the man said, let's make it for the hell of it.’
Over in Hanover Square, as Wenner began to pull the rug on his London venture the ‘hell of it’ was getting the upper hand.
Back in Endell Street queasiness set in with the raid's aftermath yet it blended with a certain sense of excitement.
‘There was a feeling’, observes Small, ‘that we must be doing something right.’
They weren't sure what it was.
‘Everyone was very worried’, recalls Mark Williams, ‘but very shortly after that an attitude prevailed that: ‘Oh well this is the way the man acts and we are above all this, it's a joke.’
Whenever there was any adversity with the law there was this not quite convincing idea put about that this is the way that society works and we shouldn't take it too seriously.
But I don't think anyone was totally convinced by that.’
Music should have sold It.
Listings should have sold It.
And they did, but there were problems, internal and external.
The centre of the paper, under Williams's editorship, had become the ‘Plug and socket’ section.
He lacked the apparent knowledge, or confidence in the political verities displayed by what he saw as the heavyweight end of the editorial group, and friction occasionally surfaced.
But it was the music that was bringing in the advertising, and maybe the extra readers.
An uneasy balance was maintained.
Outside readers could thumb through the paper and brood on the bread that was doubtless being baked and stashed away by the one-time cultural revolutionaries of It.
The conflict between commerce and commitment, music and movements, had resonances elsewhere.
It got a lot of visitors, passing heads, the curious, the indigent, the bombed out, the Hell's Angels.
In the early summer of 1968 a Keele University student and his friend passed through.
‘Bill Levy had really originated the idea of the ‘25-hour city’‘, says David Robins.
That, later as ‘What's Happening’ under Sue Small and others, was It's key product.
‘We were stupid enough to think that people wanted long and boring articles about sex’, he remembers, ‘how wrong we were.’
Amongst Robins's acquaintances was Robert (Bob) Harris, whom Robins had got to know when he came down from Keele and worked with him on Circuit.
Harris's companion had also visited It before.
Tony Elliott had just finished his third year at Keele University and was preparing to spend a year in France as part of his four-year French and History degree course.
But magazines had already begun to fascinate him.
At Keele he had edited the student Unit, with the future Time Out and City Limits editor John Fordham as deputy editor.
It aimed to be an arts magazine, and had, in the autumn of 1967, produced a special on the underground.
And the arrival of the first Its had inspired him, as it had Williams in Birmingham and Lloyd in Edinburgh.
He offered to sell it on the Keele campus.
Selling fifty or sixty issues a time proved to be good business.
‘And I was probably one of the few people who ever paid It’, he suggests.
Elliott's interest was avant-garde culture and It seemed, almost, ideal.
It had rudimentary listings of events, it had previews, but it didn't really have enough.
The visit that afternoon was a vague affair.
Being in London, and still with the idea of returning to Keele, Elliott wanted to sound out an idea.
The information at the back of It wasn't really adequate.
‘If they had turned round and said to me, ‘That's a good idea, why don't you do it for us here?’
I would have done it', says Elliott.
‘I had no definite idea that a new magazine could be something I could live off.’
But they didn't.
‘We poo-pooed it’, says Robins.
‘Stansill said that a magazine would never last.
We looked down our noses at this pair of student hicks.
But Elliott was shrewd.
He realized that listings were what people liked about It.
That was very smart.’
And there were other factors.
It, like the rest of the underground, encouraged new papers.
Starting more was to be one of its responses to the April 1969 police raid.
Around the country small groups were doing just that.
Alternative information services were another obsession of the times, hence John Hopkins's Bit.
So Elliott and Harris went away with their idea.
It was to be a modest little magazine devoted to telling London what was going on.
The underground had indeed developed its own theatre, music, and politics.
Perhaps alongside giants like Oz and It there was room for an A5-sized fold-out paper devoted exclusively to listings.
And he got other encouragements.
At a new universities festival in Bradford he had run into Richard Neville.
That summer they renewed the acquaintanceship in a coffee bar in Kensington.
‘If you get this into W.H. Smith's’, observed the Australian, ‘put your name down for a Rolls-Royce immediately.’
It didn't work out that way, that fast.
They thought about distribution, and Harris went to see Brian Moore whose Moore-Harness operation had put Private Eye on the road to money.
By then a title had been decided on, they had thought of Where It's At, right for the times, but wrong for any other time.
Idly scanning an LP cover Elliott's eye was caught by two words, ‘time out’, and Time Out it became.
At Moore-Harness Harris received an unequivocal reply.
The pornography squad had just visited Brian Moore and warned him that if he took a new ‘adult contact’ magazine, Way Out, the law would move, fast.
Hearing the word ‘Out’ Moore wasted no time, and without scanning the new publication flung the bemused future disc jockey into the street.
Thus in the initial stages Elliott and Harris were flung on their own resources.
Around f100 was raised as start-up capital.
The staff was small: Harris, Elliott's then girlfriend Stephanie Hughes, and Elliott himself.
Potential sympathizers were rung for assistance.
Activism was obviously important, so Sheila Rowbotham was contacted for help with the ‘Meet the Fuzz’ section.
Over at Bit Jane de Mendelsohn was in situ.
She and her husband Felix had been around the London underground since its birth, apart from a sojourn in the backwater of Munich.
In London she had been one of the founding members of Bit.
A regular caller was Richard Branson, working on an obscure student magazine.
Another was Elliott who explained that he needed access to information, from ‘A’ to ‘Z’.
That was what Bit provided, and she did.
In August 1968 Elliott-Harris Publications, operating out of Elliott's flat, had produced the first edition.
It was indeed insignificant: a single large sheet, folded into an A5 format, with an abstract cover design courtesy of ‘Cybernetic Serendipity’, a heavy reliance on Letraset and a primitive lay-out.
The first Time Out covered 12 August to 2 September 1968.
Over at Oz, busy producing their Agit Oz issue, a little ad for Elliott's plucky little venture was included.
Another feature was by Clive James.
It denounced the purposelessness and anarchy of the underground.
‘I still think’, he observed, ‘on present showing they have their own doom built in.’
The underground, still high on festivals, fuzz, and activism hadn't noticed.
With the first issue of Time Out finished, Elliott went back to It.
‘He came in with this folded mag’, remembers Sue Small.
‘I think I was quite patronizing.
I said ‘jolly good luck, and if you need any help from me, don't hesitate to call’.’
In the 23 August 1968 issue of It the plug was provided, next to news that Knullar had taken over the It workers' co-operative.
‘Time Out is a new information publication on what to do and where to go in London’, It explained.
It was fat and 1/6d (7½p); Time Out was 1/ (5p) wafer-thin, devoid of features, but portable.
By the third issue in late September it had become a little A5 booklet, to Elliott's distress.
He had liked the fold-over format, but printers had disagreed.
With the rebuff from Moore, he and Harris had been forced to split west and north London between them and do their own distribution.
It had advantages.
It meant that a cash flow — an almost unknown concept in the underground-was immediately instituted, and through street sales they gained an instant feedback, instant market research on the product.
The results were encouraging.
Elliott wrote to Keele and announced that his university career was over.
But there was still no real money.
It wasn't until the beginning of 1969 that they realized the paper could provide them with a regular income.
Yet by that third issue ads had begun to appear: ‘Hung On You’, Housmans, the Caledonian Road doyen of pacifist bookshops, the Flying Dragon Tea House, and even a page from Apple, meaning, for the time, big money.
By the following issue record reviews had crept in.
By the New Year comments were creeping into the film previews, the poetry section was expanding, and permanent offices had been found in Princedale Road, Notting Hill.
Such was the success that Elliott took on an ad manager, John Leaver, then contemplating a nebulous publishing project with another newcomer to London, Felix Dennis.
Leaver, then camping out on Oz art director Jonathan Goodchild's floor, joined the staff.
Time Out had effectively sealed It's fate.
Friends and enemies
In 1968, had the staff of It known it, or wanted such a fate, they had the possibility of becoming London's answer to the Village Voice.
True, they lacked the pipe-smoking liberal American politics of Fancher and Wolf thirteen years before, but they had, briefly, the market, caught on the cusp between the old and the new wave of 1968, and they had the listings.
By the summer of 1969 the game was slipping away.
It was under attack from the law, its sexism was earning it brickbats from sections of the readership, and even the new rock reading section of the market was beginning to note the changes coming over the NME.
And then, briefly, in the autumn of 1969 some of the staff, and readers, of the paper took against It.
An almost unquestioned belief in the street people had long been part of It's rhetoric, with or without the romanticization of the drop-out, from Kerouac through to Emmett Grogan.
People just dropped in, even though many had been less than welcome with some of It's staff.
Michael X/Abdul Malik, for example, was respected and liked by some of It's editorial board, such as Bill Levy and Jim Haynes.
For Sue Small, on the other hand, he was an ‘obnoxious bastard’; for Robins ‘a small time Trinidadian criminal with a machete often in the back of his trousers’.
But Malik was, supposedly, a man of the people, a black power activist-or the best that London could, in white media terms, offer in that line — and he was taken seriously.
Before the property boom took off in the 1970s there were still cheap flats around in London.
But there were also new people arriving in London for whom even cheap property was out of their price range.
And there were poor Londoners for whom squatting was the only option.
From the mid-1960s the squatting movement had grown.
Some squatters were incorporated within the local housing orbit, some weren't.
Squatting became part of the rebel ideology, and was sympathetically covered in It.
Squats were ‘repeopling the ghostly empty English houses’, noted It51.
Early in 1969 they also repeopled a ghostly London hotel, the Bell, just up the road from the Arts Lab in Drury Lane.
Renamed the ‘Genesis Hall’ the building was planned as an overspill for Haynes's venture, an arts centre and accommodation for artists.
Divisions emerged.
An opposing faction favoured a ‘digger commune’ and resisted  plans for a 1 rent, and the presence of London's somewhat tame Hell's Angels as a ‘security force’.
Haynes and others strove to reach a compromise of sorts between the warring groups.
It came to nothing, the police moved in, evicted the squatters, and the Bell/Genesis Hall was rendered uninhabitable.
The popular press hailed this triumph of law over anarchic visions of order.
But It had problems over the issue too.
In covering the story they had suggested that dope-smoking in squats might not be a good idea, and that Hell's Angels might be good people to discourage such provocative acts.
In April Alex Trocchi, William Burroughs, Ken Kesey, Dan Richter, R.D. Laing, and stalwarts of the Anglo-American underground gathered to brood on the ‘state of revolt’.
During the meeting Trocchi criticized It's coverage of the affair.
Were orderly, dope-free communes and tolerating authority the right way to fight the system?
The issue was dropped, that evening.
But throughout the summer the squats continued, and received their fair share of It coverage.
And media attention focused on 144 Piccadilly where, on 3 September 1969 the ‘London Arts Commune’ moved in.
But then, on 12 October, It found itself the target of a takeover.
Having ridden the contradictions, the paper suddenly found itself in the middle of them.
Success — or apparent success — had gone to the heads of the dissident group, if not the people on the paper.
It came out regularly, and an illusion grew that the process was almost automatic.
Around It an elite had formed, dictatorial, pontificating, divorced from the streets which had supposedly given it succour, ran the argument.
Some twenty or thirty people staged their invasion that October evening.
One full-timer and three part-timers led the move, with a former guest editor and the ever-present — they had little else to do Hell's Angels.
Sue Small was sitting in the offices, sorting through files, working late.
The invaders, and farce, intruded.
Would she like to abandon the old guard, she was asked?
She wouldn't.
The paper was rocky, as circulation, distribution, legal fees, arguments were building up.
For Small, getting out the magazine that had absorbed her for two years was the commitment, not this eccentric lurch into the unknown.
it got very tearful', she recalls.
‘The whole vision was crumbling around me.
This wasn't the love and peace of 1967, this was something else.
In a fit of madness I started tearing up all the ad records.’
It took her two weeks after the abortive occupation to stick them together again.
Meanwhile she phoned Sue Miles (Miles's wife) Graham Keen, and Mark Williams.
Over at Lord North Street in Miles's flat a council of war of the Old Guard met.
It was suggested that they call the police, and they did.
Back at 27 Endell Street arguments and occupation continued.
But with police assistance, out went the occupiers, off to set up the one and only edition of the International Free Press from a distributors' warehouse off Old Street.
But now It had changed ‘There were ideological arguments amongst the existing staff’, Williams remembers, ‘some argued that we should have allowed them to continue, to take over.
It was the ‘right on man, it's the people taking power’ argument.
They wouldn't have known how to run the paper, but what did it matter?
The atmosphere after that changed significantly.
Some people did feel guilty about having called the police and having stopped the upsurge.
Yet basically it was a team of people trying to wrest power, not a populist-based overthrow.
They were people who thought It was important — and that it could make money.
My leanings had always been towards the listings and music and entertainment side.
By then Tony Elliott was rumbling along and previously It had been providing that function.’
It's long honeymoon with London was ending.
Yet, says Small, plenty of people emerged to help the paper.
‘There was still a lot of affection.’
It's upheavals were echoed elsewhere.
That summer, in Berkeley, the Barb's staff had risen in revolt against the founder/ proprietor Max Scherr.
‘The Barb was not socialist, anarchist, utopian movement, or radical’, a staffer complained, ‘basically the Barb was capitalist, and Scherr was the owner.’
‘Around It’, observes Williams, ‘some people thought that someone was profiteering.
I don't think that ever happened.’
‘We precipitated the 13 October thing’, stated the occupiers, ‘because we dispute the fact that It belongs to, or is owned by, anyone, or any small group of people.’
From the Pacific coast to the Thames, movements which had started without financial backing, and without thinking about money, found that the possibility of cash could crash against fragile structures.
By the time It had gone through its trauma Jann Wenner and Mick Jagger had pulled the plug on the London Rolling Stone.
Its move from Maddox Street to Hanover Square had not been a happy one.
Large spacious offices dominated by a Chesterfield reputedly used by the Rolling Stones singer and Marianne Faithful for amorous interludes attracted the traditional crowd of hangers-on, plus the few who came into work.
Amongst them was Alan Marcuson.
A South African, he had arrived in Britain in 1965 and commenced a never-to-be-completed degree in textile engineering at Leeds University.
In London in 1969 he concluded that Rolling Stone would be an extremely fashionable thing to be involved in, and dropped in at the magazine's Maddox Street offices.
To his amazement he got a job.
It was selling ads, but  it was a start, and things moved rapidly.
The young South African concluded he was in the right place, and at the right time.
It wasn't just bombed-out hippies who dropped in, but the likes of Jagger, Watts, and Brian Jones as well.
Marcuson was interested in magazines, in graphic design, in rock, and in the events convulsing Europe and the United States.
And editor Jane Nicholson's involvement was fading rapidly.
Marcuson found himself increasingly taking on the editorial running of the paper.
Times were confusing.
Wenner would fly in to issue instructions to an increasingly disconsolate staff and Jagger would pay the bills.
Since the Stone and Rolling Stone's founder rarely talked, no clear editorial line evolved from on high.
For Jagger a London paper was probably what he wanted; for Wenner, a service to the San Francisco parent.
Meanwhile the staff got on with producing the magazine.
Mark Williams, freelancing out of It, did some work, and fresh out of Oxford, Jonathon Green was trying to get a job in Fleet Street.
He failed, but did manage to sell ‘a bloody awful piece on rock managers’ to Rolling Stone London.
Did Green want to be news editor? asked Marcuson, by now eased into the editor's chair.
‘Absolutely’, replied Green.
‘What's it worth?’
‘Twenty quid a week’, replied the South African.
In the days of rock bottom underground pay, 20 was not to be sneezed at.
Marcuson, thought Green, was obviously in his element, and while his own job might be more lowly, there were compensations, like Hanover Square parties, with stoned guests graffitiing the immaculate Jagger-financed walls.
It was not to last.
The Dylan Isle of Wight festival piece was commissioned and written, within the London office by a British freelance.
But San Francisco was not pleased.
Wenner ditched the piece for the American edition.
‘Wenner’, recalls Marcuson, ‘was fuming at the bit.
Most of the time he was really uptight, and to be honest, looking back, we weren't truly professional.
I remember one article on Bob Dylan where, throughout, Dylan was spelt ‘Dillon’, which was wonderful ammunition for Wenner to say what an incompetent bunch of shits we were.
He got mad, really mad with us.’
With the first stirrings of Jagger's plans to out-Woodstock Woodstock at California's Altamont race track, the London magazine office was low on the singer's list of priorities.
The simple answer was closure.
Meanwhile, ultimatum followed ultimatum from Wenner.
With Nicholson on her way out, others considered their position.
As Green sat in his Hanover Square office one morning, in came art director Gene Mahon.
‘Right’, said Mahon, ‘you're the art director now.
I'm going.’
Green knew his limitations.
One of them was design.
His old  friend from Bedford School was Pearce Marchbank.
Even before his official graduation from Central School of Art and Design Marchbank had become art director on Architectural Design.
‘It was’, observes Marchbank, ‘the Bucky Fuller version of Architectural Review:’ Bizarrely, but appropriately for the times, the management wanted AD to look like Oz and Marchbank had gone some way to meet their specifications, but was not altogether happy in his work.
‘The Architectural Association was in its phase of producing architects who couldn't design buildings.
Central produced in me, in a way, an art director who couldn't design magazines.
I had to pretend I knew how to mark up blocks.’
So Green rang Marchbank.
Would he like to be Mahon's replacement?
Contemplating his career on a prestigious but uncharismatic magazine, Marchbank made a rapid and fateful decision.
He quit AD and moved to Hanover Square.
As he arrived, amidst a collection of amplifiers mysteriously left behind by Crosby, Still, Nash & young , a fateful meeting was taking place in California.
Wenner and Jagger were finally deciding to kill the paper.
‘He arrived’, recalls Green, ‘as Rolling Stone's designer.
By that evening the poor bastard was the designer of something called ‘Friends of Rolling Stone’.’
‘I was art director of Rolling Stone for about two minutes’, says Marchbank.
‘Not long enough to get a pay-off cheque from Mick Jagger.’
Yet advertising for the next issue had been booked.
Indeed many advertisers, fearful of too close a relationship with Oz and It, dismissive — or completely ignorant — of Time Out, but wishing for a way into a market that the then flagging Melody Maker and NME were failing to tap, seemed optimistic about the prospects for a new alternative British music paper.
Thus the 18 October issue of London Rolling Stone, the last, hit the streets.
‘The new life-style growing in this country feeds on everything and anything’, proclaimed a brief editorial amidst a large white space on page three.
‘Sure the music is important — very important — but a million and one other things have their own potential (and actual) importances.
We want more feedback from you.’
Who didn't?
New offices had to be found.
The evicted and scorned Friends of Rolling Stone moved briefly into Hans Crescent, behind Harrods.
It was a far cry from the squalor and grainy reality of It's Covent Garden premises, or the cosmopolitan chic of Oz in Notting Hill.
And it was just a bad place to produce any magazine.
The magazine teetered from Hans Crescent to Redcliffe Square to Park Lane, with parts of it strewn over Pearce Marchbank's flat in Hampstead.
Eventually, in the first days of the new decade, it was to find a more permanent home in the socially acceptable Portobello Road.
Meanwhile Oz expanded.
In 1968 Felix Dennis had been recruited; in 1969 Jim Anderson joined the paper.
Thirty-two years old, Anderson had been born in Suffolk, but had spent his life in Australia and had graduated in law from Sydney University.
Being gay had done nothing to further his legal career, and he had quit the country to take the hippy trail to London, and to Oz.
His organizational talent, his ability to provide a framework within which the magazine and its designers and writers could operate, was to become central to the magazine.
Anderson tended towards introspection.
Dennis didn't.
Out of Surbiton, with an accent that veered between Sydney — which was where many people located him — and outer London, his initial work on the magazine had been selling it on the streets.
A masthead designation as ‘hustler’ was apt, and he rapidly shifted over to become Oz's advertising manager.
The magazine, through his influence, became more regularized; readers noted that something perilously close to marketing had intruded into its anarchy.
The grammar school boy didn't have Neville's sophistication, Greer's polemic talents, or Widgery's politics, but he had a grasp of the new generation picking up the paper, and, as he was conclusively to demonstrate in the 1970s, he had a great talent for making money, a loyalty to his friends — and talent for paying bills, eventually.
Police and straight media interest in the paper grew.
Neville's genius was to subvert and turn round press attacks on Oz, but they could still cost dearly.
In 1968 the then Labour MP Woodrow Wyatt had an interest in a Middlesbrough printing firm that produced Oz, the contract ceased after an expose in the News of the World.
And the raid which hit It in April 1969 had its effect on Oz too.
Both papers — and Rolling Stone — shared the same printers, and after a police visit 6,000 copies of Oz were destroyed.
The printers demanded changes in the paper's ‘visual content’, and then threatened to ditch the printing contract.
The result, once again, was that Oz had to move on.
It had been the pattern of Oz's early production, and it remained so until the end.
With the magazine's success, Neville had begun to pull back.
Wilcock had edited an issue back in 1967.
By January 1969 Andrew Fisher was in charge for Oz17, while for Oz18, under Dennis, the magazine briefly adopted a Rolling Stone format, complete with an acknowledgement for ‘the inspiration of San Francisco's great music paper’.
The following issue found ‘staff writer Germaine’ talking to ‘Dr G., a celebrated (and over-educated) international groupie’.
Greer's introspective interviewing gave way in the following issue, post-police raid, to a defence of a movement under attack.
‘The underground…is where the life is, before the establishment forms a crust on top and changes vitality for money…
The people  who belong to the underground all the time are very few, but almost everyone had spent a season there.
The establishment has to draw nourishment from it, and plunders and is plundered by the underground.’
But being under attack could become boring, as the summer of festivals, Blind Faith, Stones, Dylan, wore on.
And Oz's response was to draw further out to explore new avenues.
A key turning point was the issue, Oz23, produced to coincide with the Isle of Wight Festival that August.
‘They look a bit, a bit dossy, don't they?’ said a skinhead, surveying the beaded middle classes fighting their way on to the site.
‘I like rock steady myself.
I'll remember to bring my mallet next time.’
Sometimes it rained, but mainly the sun shone on the army first summoned into existence, without the impact of commercial pop, back at the Albert Hall in 1965, and the Roundhouse in the cold October of 1966.
‘I got up at four in the morning to wash’, complained a Geordie.
‘Four, and there were ten people in the queue then.’
As in 1966, inflatables made their appearance, bigger and more erratic than ever.
Joss-stick and Asian artefact merchants added to the atmosphere of the Indian countryside suddenly taken over by the children of the long boom.
But there were key differences.
Release's Caroline Coon wrote in It that 1969 was the year of the festivals.
But it was also the year that the class structure of the underground, under pressure from a voracious music industry, ensured that a sizeable enclosure was partitioned off, in front of the stage, for the great and expensively attired of the new aristocracy.
Not that the foot soldiers of the movement were completely excluded.
A girl, overcome by enthusiasm for the occasion, took off her clothes and sprung forward through the crowds.
Her nudity provided a carte blanche that hours of queuing at the press tent could never have done.
The multitude parted, the enclosure opened its gates, the press photographers descended and engulfed her, shielding her from the view of all but the tabloids.
By the autumn her image was to be used to sell records and Oz in ads.
By the following year that innocence of 1969 had turned into the appearance of the first page three girls in the freshly Murdoch-bought Sun.
The festival was an ideal opportunity to shift papers: It, Rolling Stone, and, most of all, Oz.
And, once again, the magazine pulled its trick of producing the right issue at the right time.
In the spring Petrakis's survey of sexuality for It revealed, amidst a cluster of curious statements, that ‘it is true to say that homosexuals are neurotic’.
On 27 June 1969 homosexuals had done something about such designations.
At the Stonewall Inn in Greenwich Village eight cops moved in for another raid on a gay bar.
Only this time the  subjects of their attention fought back.
It was the birth of the American Gay Liberation movement.
Despite the recent legalization of homosexuality between consenting adults, in private, gay politics and gay life-style remained resolutely unnoticed even within the underground press — a silence only broken by the occasional tabloid expose.
True, gay sexuality had featured with the Beats, with Kerouac's ambivalent relationship with Ginsberg, his semi-love affair with Neal Cassidy; and the subject had been touched on by the early underground, but rather in the way that Ezra Pound's fascism had been treated, as an interesting eccentricity.
Oz's contribution was different, low on analysis, but high on shock content, complete with a naked black man and a naked white man embracing on the cover.
The article inside was an import centring on Angelo d'Arcangelo's Homosexual Handbook, published in New York.
It was about sex — not about sexual politics — but another show was about to go on the road, and Oz had got there first.
Neville was at the Isle of Wight festival, as Oz sold amidst the joss-sticks and damp grass.
There were too many people, he thought, but on the other hand there were so many people.
It looked as if the entire world was suddenly on the side of the underground, and they were buying Oz.
Not that the gay Oz had been his idea, or even that he had provided much input, apart from advice on the telephone.
Just then he had another preoccupation, and he left the compilation and editing of the issue to Sebastian and Tina Jorgensen, and to the new arrival from Australia, Jim Anderson.
That the core of the issue was hedonism was unsurprising, it was a key credo of the paper.
It always had the problem that, no matter what it dealt with, the copy came out in the blacks and greys of its newspaper format.
Oz, with its use of colour, could somehow, at the time, get away with an approach to sexuality which was condemned in retrospect — and occasionally then — but which somehow retained an innocence.
Across the Atlantic things were different.
In mid July, at Ann Arbor, the ‘revolutionary media’ conference had come out against sexism in the underground press.
The seriousness with which the good intentions were taken varied.
The women's movement was, then, more deeply rooted in the United States, but within the left male contempt for the ‘diversion’ that the phenomenon represented was also entrenched.
This was to change.
In January 1970 in New York women staffers seized control of the city's leading radical underground paper, Rat-both a continuation of staff revolts as on the Barb the previous summer- and a sign that the new movement was coming of age.
But in 1969 women and Oz effectively meant Germaine Greer.
And women's responses to Oz's sexual attitudes were muted.
By that time Sheila Rowbotham was beginning to come into peripheral contact with the magazine.
And Oz pornography didn't outrage her, because it wasn't the old-style pornography, and because within the underground, she supposed — unlike on the different Black Dwarf — they did that sort of thing.
‘It was giving a symbolic shape to sexual fantasies.
They were male-defined, but they were beautifully drawn.’
For Michelene Wandor, the night-tripper to the It launch in 1966, her husband Ed's connections had brought her into contact with Oz too.
The upheavals of 1968 had almost passed her by.
She dabbled in the outer reaches of the publishing world from her position as a wife and mother: after the birth of Time Out she began to contribute to its nascent poetry section.
But left politics and feminism for her remained unformed.
She complained, she got fed up, but there were no ideologies.
The first meetings with Ferrier and Neville had been soon after their arrival, via Jill Neville.
By 1969 Victor had suggested that Neville wrote a book; it was to be Playpower, and the foursome went to stay in a Devon country house where the Australian worked on the manuscript.
The couple were fascinating, she thought, very different.
They had the edge, a way of living for the moment that she envied.
It created, for that holiday, a family of innocents.
And for her Oz wasn't identified with sexism, not that the word existed.
She felt uncomfortable with some of the material but she didn't know why.
‘The life-style itself was so charismatic.
There was something that seemed very easy for lots of these people, and I was looking at it as somebody who didn't feel quite so easy about what they were doing.
‘Sexual liberation’, the appearance of pornography seemed, again, to have a freedom and an ease that I thought I didn't have.
So I might have thought ‘well, why aren't I much younger and having this wonderful and exciting life?’’
But at another level she didn't want it.
She and Ed were, after all, young marrieds.
And perhaps lots of people were wondering why they weren't having this good time.
‘Yes’, she says, two decades on, ‘maybe even Richard and Louise.’
‘Maybe we did look like an ideal exciting couple’, says Ferrier.
‘But it wasn't really.
A lot of things were happening, sometimes I was having a good time, sometimes it was ghastly, and I used to get totally paranoid smoking dope.
Richard and I didn't have a fantastic relationship.’
Which would probably have cheered an angry Oz reader, who signed himself ‘J.F.’ in a letter to the magazine that year.
‘Reading your magazine makes me feel very small’, he wrote.
‘There was the time I turned up at the Arts Lab (first and last time) to see the Dylan film and couldn't afford it.
Fifteen bob for a fucking film!
I was  thrown out by some irate trendy who kept muttering something about royalties.
I thought the idea of kids doing their own thing was that it would be cheap and for everybody, not a clique.
I can't play the guitar, I can't write poetry, act, paint or sing and my understanding of politics and economics is very limited.
So what happens to me in the great cultural revolution?
In my nineteen years I've had three women, a nervous breakdown and some poor education.
Can't you people in London realize that twenty miles north of It, Oz, Arts Labs, etc., nothing has changed!
So what's all the fuss about?
Do I hear smug laughter?’
In March of 1969, as Vagina Rex had opened, so the conference of the grandiosely titled Revolutionary Socialist Students Federation had taken place.
‘The eventual aim’, wrote Alexander Cockburn in Student Power ‘is the cementing of a revolutionary bloc with working-class forces; but the immediate power of the student lies in his university, his college, where he works as a student.’
While the masses went to the Isle of Wight, the inheritors of 1968 contemplated the declining value of their capital.
For Cockburn, by then a 27-year-old journalist, student days were behind him.
The same was true of much of the core of Black Dwarf.
The RSSF, of which much was trumpeted, yielded little.
Members of political groups went on brief raids into its ranks, and returned with little except contempt for its prospects.
Factionalism was rife, and the British Situationists — what there were of them — did their best to recruit amongst the underground-oriented malcontents despairing of the prospects of that movement.
Yet Tom Fawthrop could write in It52 that the RSSF represented a move away from‘the sectarian left’ and ‘the move into a deeper, more imaginative level of politics…we will be the first generation in history to consciously plan and map-out its own future, and create a society of its own.’
Which map?
For Dick Pountaine, fresh out of his Imperial College science degree, and moving within Notting Hill's underground milieu, a visit to the RSSF's inauguration had been a gloomy experience.
The proceedings were enlivened by an intervention from the producers of King Mob Echo, which would have been Britain's Situationist paper had not the local branch — if branch is the right word — been excluded by its international secretariat from membership.
John Gravelle, one of KME's luminaries, culminated his intervention by pointing at the RSSF's freshly produced banner, in Richard III style: ‘As for this’, charged Gravelle, ‘dogshit by any other name would smell as foul.’
The rhetoric might not have been original, the problems were genuine.
The more traditionalist Marxist elements within the student movement rubbed shoulders uneasily with those who  claimed to be — or occasionally were — of the streets.
Around the latter group were many who had tried the traditional Marxist left and found it wanting.
For some the Situationists were to be appealing.
For the Black Dwarf, that June, celebrating a year of publication, it had been a rocky time, financially and politically.
A division was appearing between those on the paper linking their politics to Ernest Mandel's branch of the Trotskyist Fourth International, and those — like Clive Goodwin — anxious to keep its independence, and relationships within the paper had begun subtly to shift.
‘A revolutionary socialist newspaper should exist for a specific purpose; it should have a clearly defined perspective’, wrote Tariq Ali ominously in the anniversary editorial.
‘For a revolutionary journal…
We would obviously like to see ourselves as the organ of a revolutionary party, however embryonic it may be.’
No such party existed, he added, but the tension between those who backed Ali's International Marxist Group and the rest grew as the year advanced.
And the tensions coincided with a downturn in sales that indicated both the ebbing of the 1968 wave, and the growth of other revolutionary papers which did have links to particular groups.
Something was draining out of the movement as 1969 ended.
Hippies believed in love and peace, they had said back in 1967.
On 8 August 1969 Sharon Tate and four others were found slaughtered at her home in Beverley Hills.
On 9 December the long-haired devotee of the Beatles' ‘White Album’, Charles Manson, and five of his followers were indicted for their murder.
The day before, in the same city, Los Angeles, a four-hour battle between 300 police and 12 members of the Black Panthers ended with the Panthers' surrender.
Twenty-one-year-old Fred Hampton was shot dead.
The Panthers, were beginning to crack.
The trial of the Chicago Seven dragged on, and received heavy British underground coverage.
In Oz David Widgery took time off from musing on the revolution to provide an obituary for Jack Kerouac, one of the people with whom the entire movement had started.
At It Hall, Keen, and Stansill were contemplating their freshly arrived charges.
Michael X moved into his Holloway Road ‘Black House’.
Others were moving on too.
The Drury Lane squat and the police evictions were a sign of the times for the Arts Lab.
By spring 1969 the Lab was deep in debt; sponsorship from the Arts Council an impossibility; the wealthy of 1967 had vanished; and Camden Council was pursuing Jim Haynes for an accumulating rate bill.
The end had come in October.
The Lab closed, and Haynes moved on.
‘The end of the sixties came as a kind of incredible collapse’, wrote Haynes, ‘a collapse of hope, and of the innocence and the naïveté of the decade when everyone felt we were changing the world.’