

Report of the Keele Convention 1992
WELL over 100 members and students gathered again at Keele this year to benefit once more from the lectures, demonstrations and social gathering which makes this Convention unique.
Some had travelled a considerable distance for example from Australia, Germany, Belgium and the USA and were not disappointed by either the welcome or the expertise offered them.
After a splendid dinner on Friday evening most people managed to find the bar.
Beverages were drunk, stories were told and the eyes of newcomers and students grew wider as, true to form, the ‘old hands’ began to enjoy the weekend.
Some of us were bright and early to breakfast on Saturday morning and even more made it to the opening ceremony by the President in the Physics Lecture Theatre.
We stood in silence to remember David Pym who rarely missed a Keele Convention and who had organised two of our speakers.
His name was to be mentioned many times during the weekend and we missed him.
Our first session was presented by a Southern Division Member, Vince Hull, who, ably supported by Geoff Taylor and two pretty girls, demonstrated and explained the value of the Death Mask.
Since everyone had recovered from their outing in the bar the previous night, Kevin Sinclair and Phil Gore braved the terrors of claustrophobia and, straws pushed firmly into their noses, allowed ‘life masks’ to be made of their faces.
As their heads disappeared under a pile of plaster of paris and alginate we were shown what a relatively simple and inexpensive process this was.
The time passed all too quickly but later all were able to see the resultant masks of heads and hands thus produced.
Our thanks were properly offered to Vince, Geoff, Carol and Sue for their expert demonstration and we shall never see either Kevin or Phil in the same light again.
Their courage knows no bounds!
The Second Session was entitled, ‘Is there any real value in Embalming?’ and was presented by Mr Arnold Dodge.
He demonstrated clearly from various pathological and statistical studies that the well embalmed body was virtually free from all micro organisms.
His second point was to discredit the idea that environmental pollution may be caused by the release of formaldehyde, used during embalming, from the decomposing body after interment.
It was evident from the research carried out in the USA that no trace of formaldehyde could be found in surrounding soil or samples from the water table in the area of such burial grounds.
The third area of the value of embalming stressed by Mr Dodge was the definite and positive benefits to the family.
He declared that it provides time for the family to gather or the body to be transported home and it offers an opportunity for them to see the person in a state of peaceful repose.
He quoted many authorities, both in the USA and GB who made it clear that the viewing and the funeral ceremonies are extremely important in bringing the bereaved to a state of acceptance and eventual recovery.
Finally we viewed a most moving film which clearly demonstrated the pain of grief unresolved and unsupported by the rituals at which others may offer love and remembrances.
This film, made in courage by bereaved parents, strengthened the resolve of those present to continue to offer only the best to those whom they serve.
This was a session packed with facts as well as emotion and delivered with skill and we are all grateful to Mr Dodge who supports the BIE so loyally and in so many ways.
After a simply splendid lunch, Bari Logan introduced us to the art of long term preservation from the medical school anatomist's point of view.
The value of prosection was stressed since it offered three dimensional knowledge to the medical students and post-graduates and many future surgeons would be trained to dissect and explore the body through these preparations.
The embalming procedures were explained and illustrated and he went on to show examples of vascular preservation and plastination of body parts and sections.
The audience was left spellbound by the skills and techniques shown.
Dr Balfour, the RAF pathologist, known to many through their joint work on the disaster teams, spoke about fatal air crashes and other disasters and illustrated his session with slides and fascinating tales.
His dry sense of humour spilled over into what might have been a harrowing session and by carefully chosen words and clear illustrations we came to see the value of the painstaking work required by those at the scene of a major accident.
A Special General Meeting called by the National Council was held at this time, a report of which is to be seen on page 13.
Mr Philip Martin, an embalmer currently researching HIV at the University of Sydney, Australia, then presented a paper on ‘AIDS and the Funeral Service’.
He spoke compellingly of the need to protect the embalmer, the funeral staff and the family by taking ‘universal precautions’ when handling all bodies.
He made out a clear case for embalming all bodies and for treating them all similarly, bearing in mind the long incubation period and uncertain diagnosis in HIV infections.
The danger of not recognising the risks potentially present in ANY body were demonstrated.
Since this notion cut across the advice given by other sources and the guidelines issued by the profession in the UK, considerable discussion was provoked.
It was pointed out that all cases were embalmed in USA and now in Australia and yet in GB we were advised not to embalm any body known to have any infection.
Was this a reflection on the quality of our care or skill?
Keele is the place for such controversial discussion and conversation upon this very important subject continued long after the speaker and the audience had left the lecture room.
We are grateful to this member for bringing the subject before us.
Saturday night dinner at Keele is always special and this year proved to be no exception.
The excellent food and wine, the service and the good company, combined to offer a relaxing end to the day.
For some, Saturday and Sunday merged into one, but the rest of us managed some well earned and undisturbed sleep.
Sunday dawned and Charles Largefeuille appeared, immaculate as ever, for the first session (despite the night  before!).
He presented a video showing the embalming and restoration of a young lady whose face had been badly damaged in an accident.
The patience, care and steady hand of Charles was an inspiration and all were impressed by his results.
After coffee our final speaker was Dr Findlater who kept us all enthralled by his expertise and enthusiastic approach to the history of human anatomy.
We will never take our anatomy books for granted again!
The final act of this Keele was to ballot for the sessions for Keele 1994.
The idea for this had been offered at a full NEC meeting by Mr Wallace of the Irish Division.
Each Division would be allocated a Unit of the Modular Teaching Material and should provide a session of approximately 20–30 minutes in length, based upon the whole or part of the Unit content.
The Ballot results were as follows:
Our National President, Steve Gauld, closed the Convention and we offered our thanks and gratitude to all those who had made the weekend such a success, to Tim Cain who kept all the sessions to time; to the exhibitors who supported us so well; to all the members and outside speakers who made presentations; to the staff of Keele University who served us so well in all areas; and to Joe Bennett who organised the whole thing, sorted out the speakers, took our bookings and generally made sure it all went well.
This was a simply splendid event yet again.
It was the ideal opportunity to learn and develop new ideas and think about new techniques.
Those who missed it should start putting a few pennies away each week from now on and book the second weekend in September in their advance diaries, so that they have no excuse to miss Keele 1994.
TOM HORSFIELD
AT the time of going to Press with this edition of The Embalmer, we received the sad news of the death of Past President and Fellow Tom Horsfield on Sunday 4th October.
In the ‘Heard on my Rounds’ column of this edition a piece mentioning Tom has now been deleted.
Readers would have read that Tom and Sylvia celebrated their Golden Wedding Anniversary on Sunday 27th September.
The celebration took place for family and close friends at Jeffrey's conference hotel in Preston.
With the magazine deadline now passed, a tribute to Tom is not possible for this edition, but one will be included in the Winter 1993 edition published in January
Obituary — David Richard Pym
It was with great sadness that we heard, first of the illness and then of the death on 29th August of David Pym.
David was a man of energy and activity and he will be missed by so many people.
David was a family man and, whatever he did and wherever he went, he always put them first.
On those occasions when June was unable to accompany him to a meeting or activity, David would always ensure that she and Judith were alright and never failed to keep in touch.
A man of action all his life, David went into the Army in the RAMC as a young man and later trained as a State Registered Nurse in a civilian hospital.
Those of us who knew him well see this as the beginning of his caring career which was evident in all that he did.
As well as gaining his SRN David was a qualified Gas Fitter and Driving Instructor and was a competent builder and decorator.
Whatever he did, he always did it thoroughly and well.
In 1978 he completed his Embalming training to gain his BIE Certificate and this was followed in 1982 by his Diploma in Funeral Directing.
David and June met and married when he was running his own funeral business and she was the florist
He was a born teacher and soon found that he gained great fulfillment by teaching and training others for the profession for which he was so ably fitted.
He took his Tutors examinations in both disciplines and he set up the Euro School of Funeral Studies which flourished and gained a name for excellence.
He was fond of saying that he could not have done any of it without June, and this was undoubtedly true.
However, it was the dynamism and sheer energy of the man which his colleagues saw so often.
David never missed a training session, seminar or meeting, he always managed to fit everything into his busy schedule.
He supported the BIFD and was a most energetic tutor for the Diploma in Funeral Directing.
He was a member of the BIE National Education Committee where he did sterling work in a quiet and unassuming way and represented the Institute on the TEFS Committee where he was involved with the revisions required for NVQ.
He was currently Chairman of the Midland Division.
In 1991–1992 David was National President of the BIE, an honour he well deserved.
His illness began to manifest itself during this time but, being David, he refused to allow it to interfere with his duties as President.
The Annual Conference at Northampton in May 1992 was a triumph of willpower over weakness.
David must have been very ill then but he carried out all his duties with the dignity that characterised all he did.
For many people this was the last time they were to see or speak to him and they are left with a good memory and a triumphant one.
To me, as to so many others, David was a friend on whom I could rely.
He always found time to talk and would be willing to help anyone anywhere.
It is traditional to praise those who have died, and there are times when it is hard to recognise the person from the fine words, but in this case the words merely reflect a small insight into the very big man and loyal friend called David Pym.
We have said goodbye to a person who cannot be replaced and the rest of us will have to work the harder and care the more in order to try to fill the gap left by his passing.
Making Post-Mortems Safe
Vera Crummey outlines how to minimise risks to nurses, technicians and pathologists in the mortuary
(Reproduced with acknowledgements to Nursing Times)
MORTUARY buildings, including post-mortem rooms, cannot be described as the most popular or easily accessible areas on a hospital site.
They are often at the rear or side of the main hospital building, or even sited completely away from the main thoroughfare.
Most healthcare staff seem to feel the mortuary is ‘out of sight, out of mind’.
Not wishing to think about dying is a natural response for those who wish to direct their care and attention to the living.
Regrettably, not all hospital employees are in a position to forget about this inevitable outcome — in fact, their daily work may be involved with the direct handling of the dead.
The workers who are exposed continually to the risk of acquiring an infection include mortuary technicians, pathologists, domestic assistants, porters and nurses.
Most hospitals retain records relevant to deceased people received into the mortuary, together with the numbers of post-mortem examinations, and any infectious conditions found subsequently.
These conditions include pulmonary tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, streptococcal septicaemia and various other diseases.
However, even if a death in hospital does not warrant an autopsy, the corpse may still present a potential source of infection to porters and mortuary staff, particularly if they have not been immunised.
An awareness of this fact, supported by existing Health and Safety legislation, led to the publication in 1974 of a code of practice for the prevention of infection.
The ‘Howie’ code identified the head of department as the individual responsible for the safety of staff within the laboratory, and outlined measures that were considered necessary to prevent the acquisition of an infection from the laboratory or post-mortem areas.
Copies of the code can be found in most laboratories, and the detailed contents are included in the educational programme for mortuary technicians.
Several important recent developments affect work involving microorganisms.
First, the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 was extended to include the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations (1988).
These regulations are designed to protect people against immediate or delayed health risks from substances which may have an adverse effect on their health; for instance, disinfectants such as glutaraldehyde.
Work involving contact with microorganisms, both in the laboratory and the mortuary setting, also puts staff at risk.
Therefore, employers are now required to apply a risk assessment score to specific situations, and also to implement measures that will address the identified risks.
Two additional documents dealing with safe working arrangements in clinical laboratories and mortuary rooms were published in 1991, by a working group of the Health and Safety Commission's Health Services Advisory Committee.
These guidelines are now considered to supersede the Howie code, and will be used as a reference by health and safety inspectors to indicate acceptable standards.
The guidelines appear to be comprehensive and realistic, and should prove effective.
They offer an opportunity to managers, clinical staff and health and safety officers to reappraise the function of the mortuary services, and rectify any deficiencies in physical structure or in clinical practices.
Areas that deserve attention within the mortuary building include the design and work flow of the rooms, cleaning and disinfection regimes, availability of hygiene facilities, usage of equipment and staff training.
First, the structure of the building must be adequate in space and design to fulfil the needs of the department.
It is not unusual to find small, cramped and cluttered mortuary rooms, which give the impression that little consideration has been given to the work carried out in the department.
Rooms used by undertakers should be easily accessible, and accommodate the use of trolleys and other relevant materials.
Body storage areas require refrigeration facilities, and the design of post-mortem rooms must allow sufficient space for ease of movement around the postmortem table.
It is essential that all equipment and instruments in use are inspected and regularly maintained, and effectively decontaminated after use.
Where applicable, equipment will require safety handling devices (for example, protective guards and extractor hoods fitted to bandsaws).
To avoid spillage of body and other fluids onto floor surfaces, drainage pipes leading from the post-mortem table must fully reach the gulley pipe at floor level.
The positioning of electric equipment is important because of possible splashing with waterjets; therefore, it is imperative that such equipment is specially protected and that outlet sockets are placed at a level where there is no danger of their coming into contact with water.
It is essential during post-mortem examinations, when the level of environmental contamination increases, to have a ventilation system in operation which follows the principles of air circulation and extraction effectively.
Regrettably, it is still possible to find outmoded, noisy extractor fans in use in some facilities.
They can be so noisy that they are often switched off during an autopsy, increasing the level of air pollution and the risk of acquisition of air-borne infections.
If windows are to be left open — a controversial point — they need mesh or other guards attached, to prevent the entry of insects.
Routine cleaning and disinfection regimes must be a high priority in the mortuary.
Duties and responsibilities need to be clearly defined for staff, and cleaning schedules monitored on a regular basis by line managers or supervisors.
Copies of the hospital's disinfectant and other infection control policies must be made available to mortuary technicians and the necessary education and training given in their use.
Instruction in first aid is another necessary part of continuing education for mortuary technicians.
Practical advice should be given on the immediate treatment required following an accident.
The most commonly  occurring mishap will be either a sharps-related injury, or mucosal splashing with blood or other body fluids.
Materials need to be supplied for first-aid purposes that are simple and accessible to use.
There is little point in providing equipment (for example, undines), to staff who have no idea of its purpose.
Equally, technicians must be encouraged to report sharps injuries, and be given follow up and support when necessary.
It is important that proper arrangements for staff hygiene are available.
These should incorporate showering rooms, washbasins and provision for regular laundering of uniforms.
Emphasis should be placed on strict adherence to a policy of changing into protective clothing before conducting a post-mortem examination.
The importance of thorough hand-washing at all times, especially following the handling of infected materials, must also be stressed.
A protocol aimed at safeguarding visiting staff needs to be clearly defined and enforced.
Visiting staff must use an observation area, if available; if not, they must conform to local safety rules, including the use of protective clothing.
To update and reinforce good infection control practices for staff in the mortuary setting, it is important to conduct regular in-service educational programmes.
The training sessions could be extended to include nurses, who have a vital role to play when preparing a body after death.
Infection control nurses are ideally placed to coordinate continuing education.
It is hoped that this introduction to measures which will help control infection in the mortuary setting will stimulate some thought among managers, consultant pathologists, and others who may be involved in the provision of a mortuary service.
Now that updated guidelines on the prevention of infection in the mortuary and post-mortem rooms are available, it would seem an opportune time to review local current arrangements, and if necessary, take appropriate action that will demonstrate a true commitment to staff safety and welfare.
Skeleton in the Cupboard, Mr or Mrs?
HOW many of you have stood in front of a skeleton, usually in some quiet corner of a school or institution and thought to yourself, who was he or she? and then some bright spark walks past and informs you that ‘Oh yes, that's a female skeleton’!
You ask how they know and they give you a vague description about the pelvis, etc. etc., and you go away not altogether satisfied with the explanations.
I have, in my capacity as Senior Anatomical Pathology Technician, been called upon to collect and look at bones discovered in various places, i.e. sealed behind walls, found in shallow graves, fields, etc. and so it was that a few years ago I became very interested in some questions of osteology.
For example, what is the sex, the age, the race, was there any interesting pathology?
I thought it would be of interest to members if I tried to illustrate how the diamorphic diagnosis can be made, even with a dusty old specimen in a cupboard somewhere.
Sexing Skeletons
Before discussing specific features used in determining the sex of an individual, a number of general points must be emphasized.
First it must be appreciated that the value of certain features varies with the group being studied.
Thus, the degree of supraorbital development which serves in Europeans to identify males, may be found in a number of females among Australian aborigines.
Similarly, the robustness of female Australian aboriginal bones may be far greater than is generally found in male pygmies.
Secondly, it must be remembered that both as regards measurements and general shape, there is often considerable overlap in the range which is found in the two sexes.
Yet another complicating factor is the frequent incompleteness of skeletal remains, with the result that sex may have to be determined provisionally on only one or two features.
Ideally, it is necessary to have a large series of fairly complete skeletons of one particular ethnic group, for it is in most cases only by noting the variability in the collection that any degree of certainty in sexing can be achieved.
For convenience, the various parts of the skeleton will be considered separately.
The Skull
This is not the easiest region of the skeleton to sex especially if broken and fragmentary.
Keen (1980) has recently discussed sex differences of the skull in some detail.
In general the male skull may be distinguished from the female by the following characteristics:
a.
It is generally larger and heavier.
b.
Muscular ridges, such as the temporal lines and nuchal crests, are larger.
c.
The supraorbital ridges are more prominent and the frontal sinuses larger.
d.
The external occipital protuberance and mastoid processes are more developed.
e.
The upper margin of the orbit is more rounded.
f.
The teeth are often larger.
 h.
The posterior root of the zygomatic process extends for some distances past the external auditory meatus as a well-defined ridge.
i.
The mandible is more robust with more developed and flaring gonial regions.
j.
The ramus of the mandible is broader with a better-developed coronoid process.
k.
Lastly, it may be noted that the male skull is less rounded, the female skull tending to retain more the adolescent form.
Vertebral Column
a.
In males the general size, especially in the lumbar region, is greater.
b.
Overall ruggedness and the extent of markings for muscle and ligament attachments are more in evidence.
c.
The estimated total length of the spinal column is greater.
Cunningham (1951) and Smith & Fiddes (1955) find a mean difference of about four inches between the sexes, for total length.
A rough estimate of column height can be made by adding together the vertebral-body heights (excluding  sacrum and coccyx).
Such estimates, however, cannot be considered entirely reliable (Harrison, 1953).
d.
The atlas vertebra is distinctly more massive in the male (Boyd & Trevor, 1953) with a number of dimensions particularly the breadth, greater than in the female.
e.
The sacrum is longer and narrower in the male, this difference being clearly expressed by the sacral index.
f.
The abdominal aspect of the sacrum in males displays a uniform curve with the deepest part of the hollow at the third segment; whereas in females, the upper portion is flattened and the lower portion sharply angulated (the deepest part being at the fourth segment).
g.
The auricular surface (articulating with the ilium) is limited to the first and second sacral vertebrae in the female, but in the male it often extends to the middle of the third vertebra.
Sternum
In the male, the body is at least twice as long as the manubrium, while in the female, it is relatively shorter.
This fact probably has over a fifty per cent accuracy.
In European sterna, the combined midline length of manubrium and mesosternum usually equals or exceeds 149mm in males, but is usually less in females (Ashley, 1956).
Clavicle
Although this bone does not  yield any absolute sexing criteria, it may be noted that the male clavicle is generally more robust and on average over 1 cm longer than the female (Parsons, 1916).
Scapula
The scapula of the male differs on an average from that of  the female, in size, proportions and shape.
Probably the most useful study so far is by Bainbridge & Genoves (1956).
Olivier & Pineau (1957) have also undertaken a metrical analysis of male and female scapulae (presumably using European material).
This biometric method is of value in specialist reports but probably of no value in general work.
Pelvis
There is no doubt that this bone yields the most reliable sexing information of all, and it is probable that between 90 per cent and 95 per cent accuracy in determination can be achieved (Krogman, 1946; Washburn, 1948; Genoves, 1959).
Many features of the pelvis have been stated to show sex differences, but only those which are particularly important and can be described easily are mentioned here.
The characters used may be divided into two groups:(i) those depending upon visual examination,(ii) measurable dimensions.
i.
By far the most important diagnostic features for the excavator are those which can be sexed upon inspection.
These differences are related to the fact that the female pelvis is specially adapted for childbirth, with the result that there is more accommodation within it than in the male, while the relative depth is less.
The morphological points to note are as follows:
(a.
As a whole, the male pelvis is more robust, with well marked muscular impressions.
(b.
The depth of the pubic symphysis is generally greater in the male.
(c.
The acetabulum is larger in the male.
(d.
The obturator foramen is larger in the male and rather oval in outline, whereas in the female it is smaller and more triangular in shape.
(e.
The sciatic notch is narrower and deeper in the male.
Although in all groups this is an excellent diagnostic feature, variations in the general shape of the notch do occur.
Genoves (1959), for example, found that its general shape in Anglo-Saxons was quite different from that in British mediaeval individuals of the same sex.
Even in non-adults the notch may have some utility.
Imrie & Wyburn (1958) consider the notch difference to be ‘inborn’, and Thomson (1899) noted that it is larger even in the female foetus.
This dimorphism has also been noted in the infant (Reynolds, 1945, 1947), and is well defined even before puberty.
of minor value
of great value
(f.
The pre-auricular sulcus is more constantly present in the female ilium, although sometimes poorly developed or present on one side only.
This groove also appears to be an ‘inborn’ difference (Imreie & Wyburn, 1958).
ii.
Differences between some parts of the male and female pelvis have also been described in metrical terms.
The important ones may be stated briefly as follows:
a.
A sub-pubic angle of 90 degrees or over usually indicates the female sex.
b.
The ischio-pubic index (calculated from ischial and pubic lengths as defined by Schultz, 1930) is lower in the male.
This index was devised to replace the sub-pubic angle.
c.
The angle of the sciatic notch (estimated on a shadow tracing) is much smaller in the male.
This means of discrimination takes the place of  visual examination of the area.
The value of the last two characters is seen clearly in the scatter diagram produced by Hanna & Washburn (1953) for Eskimo pelves.
However, the landmarks for these measurements are somewhat ill-defined and may lead to inaccuracy (Stewart, 1954; Thieme & Schull, 1957).
With the definition of more precise points, metrical procedure for sexing will be valuable in the study of large series, especially as measurement lends itself to more reliable statistical analysis (as Pons, 1955a, b; Thieme, 1957; and Thieme & Schull, 1957, have shown).
To what extent such metrical methods will be used only in specialized analyses remains to be seen, for as Stewart (1954) suggests, it may be rather a waste of effort to measure such specimens simply to verify what can so quickly be seen by eye.
For general purposes the ‘visual’ features can be relied upon for sexing the pelvis.
The angle of the sciatic notch in degrees plotted against the ischium-pubis index in per cent.
Diagonal line separates ‘males’ and ‘females’.
(By courtesy of R. E. Hanna & S. L. Washburn.
Long Bones
Hrdlicka sums up the value of the longbones in sexing by saying that in the male they are longer, heavier and have larger attachment areas for muscles,(including the linea aspera, crests, tuberosities and impressions)(Stewart, 1947).
Moreover, he considered that the most important and constant sexual difference lies in the regions of articulation.
These comments certainly apply if a series is being sexed, but if only one or two long bones (or fragments) are available, it may be difficult to draw any conclusions unless the bone displays very clear indications of maleness or femaleness (Boyd & Trevor, 1953).
Vallois (1957) considers that the weight of a long bone (which takes into account the size-differences of various areas) to be a better discriminant than other long-bone characters which have been employed.
However, the value in weight in archaeological material seems debatable, for one would have to take into account differences in preservation, as well as the possibility of soil occurring within the bone.
Femur: As in the pelvis, sex has been judged both on morphological and metrical grounds.
In small series of femora, and as supporting evidence of sex, visual observations are sufficient.
In males, the bone as a whole is  longer and generally larger, but  especially the head and distal condyles; while the shaft is broader and (in section) thicker, with a more prominent linea aspera.
Metrically, a number of features have been considered of value.
Parsons (1914), in a study of English femora, found the vertical diameter of the femoral head and the bicondylar width of the distal end to be the most reliable sexing dimensions.
Pearson & Bell (1919) undertook a far more extensive analysis, but it seems probable that Parsons' original measurements are still the most reliable known, especially those of the femoral head diameter (Thieme, 1957).
Two major sexing features of the pelvis
Estimation of Age
Assessments of age based on skeletal remains are most likely to be fairly accurate with immature or young adult individuals.
Remains of older persons present more of a problem, and when dealing with earlier populations, it is difficult to be sure that significant age-changes took place at the same time, and that they showed the same group variability, as in modem populations.
Work on skeletal ageing is still far from complete; most of the ossification periods and eruption times have been worked out on American and European samples, and may not apply exactly to other parts of the world's population.
Climate and diet have a considerable effect upon maturation, as for example the work of Weiner & Thambipillai (1952) on West Africa children suggests, and therefore any estimates of life-expectancy in earlier populations must be accepted with reserve.
As certain parts of the skeleton are more valuable for age estimations than others, it is well to deal with these separately.
Ageing by sutures has now fallen into disfavour.
The Skull
In abandoning the sutures as a method of ageing, few features of the skull except the dentition are of much use for our purpose.
 If the skull is noticeably thin and light, it may well be an immature specimen, though it is difficult from thickness alone to give an accurate age.
Well-formed mastoid processes and external occipital protuberance, as well as frontal sinuses extending into the supraorbital region, suggest an adult individual.
These features are not usually so well marked in females.
In most individuals, the basi-occipital begins to fuse with the basisphenoid at about the seventeenth year, and they are usually completely joined by the twentieth to twenty-third year.
There is also evidence to show that the sphenoidal sinus may extend into the occipital bone after the age of twenty-five (Dutra, 1944).
Reconstruction of Bones
If this has not already been done, the bone fragments should be separated, those of left and right bones being differentiated as far as possible.
If preservatives have made any of the break-surfaces badly fitting, then the appropriate solvent should be used to clean them.
Every care should be exercised in reconstruction, for inferior work may result in considerable distortion.
If a fragment is stuck badly, a solvent should be used to loosen it again, but it is advisable not to use force for this may result in fresh breaks.
A number of quick-drying cements are available: probably the most efficient is Alvar 1570 in chloroform.
Balsa cement has been widely used, but is less strong.
In the case of none-compact bone, it is advisable to apply the adhesive to both surfaces, and afterwards to wipe off the excess.
Not more than two adjoining fragments should be stuck at the same time, but for quickness different areas  of the same bone can be reconstructed to some extent independently.
Most post-cranial bones can be reconstructed on a flat surface, with supporting pillars of plasticine at strategic points if necessary.
In the case of the long-bones, extra strength can be given to the shafts by placing a cylinder of wood in the central (medullary) cavity.
The skull is best assembled in a sand box, where suitable depressions can be made as supports.
Harrison (1953) found that dental wax and Sellotape were useful in provisional reconstructions of very fragmentary skulls.
Plasticine is also helpful in keeping bones in position while they are being stuck.
Even when the skull is in more than fifty pieces, good reconstruction should be possible if the broken edges are clean and not eroded.
The skull bones should be separated before reconstruction is attempted.
When possible, the vault and face are best reconstructed separately, and afterwards applied to one another.
Before these two areas are completely fixed together, the condyles of the mandible should be applied to the glenoid cavities, checking to see that the teeth occlude properly.
If the skull is extremely fragmentary, pieces of wood can be used as supporting props.
Fibrenyl dough is useful for filling gaps in skulls in course of restoration.
It is light, is an adhesive in its own right and can be removed at any time by soaking in methylated spirit.
Unless the skull is weak and fragmentary, no plaster of Paris should be used to fill in gaps.
If this is unavoidable, then the preparator should avoid covering any craniometric points, and as much of the endocranial (internal) surface as possible should be left visible.
Plastered surfaces should be made smooth.
It is better not to colour it to match the bones, as the natural while clearly shows future workers what is false.
The mandible should not be glued or plastered to the vault.
Finally, both during and after the reconstruction of cranial remains, correct orientation of the pieces should be attempted.
Incorrect orientation may lead to the distortion of vault form, and may also give a wrong impression as to the morphology of a particular area.
In Fig. 1, for example, it will be seen that if the front of the vault is not correctly placed, the size of the brow ridges and degree of frontal recession may be unduly accentuated.
Particular attention should be given to finding and identifying the larger epiphyses as these are more likely to be preserved.
The knee region is thus probably the most useful in ageing preadolescent skeletons,(Hunt & Gleiser, 1955), and the best reference work in this connection is the atlas compiled by Pyle and Hoerr (1955).
Perhaps it is as well to remind the reader here of the nature of the epiphysis.
An epiphysis may be defined as ‘a  cartilaginous area present at each end of every long bone of the limbs, on the upper and lower faces of the vertebral bodies and in certain other locations where special processes are required for the attachment of muscles’(Watson & Lowrey, 19512).
Ossification begins apart from that of the main centre of ossification for the bone.
Later, the  epiphyses fuse with the main centre to form one solid bone.
(See illustrations 1 & 2.)
Example of skull restoration — quite common in forensic investigation
What can be deduced from a single skull
Recently Le Gros Clark (1957) criticized the over-confidence of earlier anthropologists who were often prepared to draw far too many conclusions from a single specimen.
Singer (1958), in a critique of the Boskop Skull which was discovered in 1913 on a Transvaal farm, points out that what may have been justifiable speculation at the beginning of the century is inexcusable now.
Even the sexing of fossil human remains appears to be far more difficult than was previously imagined, as Genoves (1954) has emphasized in his study of Neanderthal remains.
This is not to say that a single find is valueless.
Certainly in the case of Palaeolithic remains, each bone demands rigorous examination and description.
In later man, where it is necessary to study less outstanding differences between groups, series of at least forty or fifty skeletons of the same sex are needed before reliable statistical analyses are possible.
Thus, if only one or two dated skeletons are excavated, sex, age, disease and measurement may be noted but deductions as to the morphological affinities of these individuals with other peoples of the period could only be very tentative, if they are possible at all.
The value of reports on one or two skeletons is not to serve as the basis of any theory of morphological relationships, but to provide standardized data which may eventually be built into a general picture of population at one period or through time.
Dating a skull on the morphology has also severe limitations.
In the case of British archaeological remains, if there is some doubt whether a robust brachycephalic skull is of Neolithic or Bronze Age date, one may say that there is a greater likelihood of it being Bronze Age, for most Neolithic individuals were noticeably long-headed, whereas many Bronze Age invaders were very short-headed.
However, we cannot be sure, for it is clear that from Mesolithic times onwards the frequency of brachycephaly was increasing continually in some parts of Europe.
After Bronze Age times, British groups became more heterogeneous with each successive invasion, and although some skull ‘types’ or ‘forms’often predominate in a series, morphological distinctions between populations must rely even more on statistical analyses of measurements.
Can the race of an individual easily be determined?
The answer is that an isolated skull cannot always be so classified.
Even if it is possible, the individual may be assigned only to the broadest concept of ‘racial stock’.
Although evidence of ‘race mixture’ in earlier times is of considerable interest, it is a field which must be studied with a great amount of caution, even by the specialist.
The times of epiphyseal union of various part of the skeleton.
All numbers represent years, the difference between each pair showing the time span within which the particular epiphyses unite.
Data from various sources
News from the Special General Meetings at Northampton and Keele
IT'S a while since the Institute held a Special General Meeting but this year there have been two.
The first was held at the conference hotel in Northampton on Saturday, May 30th, when members considered the voting rights of the Institute's Officers at National Council meetings.
It was decided, by majority vote, that only Officers who were Divisional representatives should be entitled to vote, the one exception being the President.
Members present also considered an appeal against expulsion.
The member concerned addressed the meeting but failed to achieve the required 75 per cent majority to overthrow the expulsion.
At the second Special General Meeting held at Keele University on September 12th, the proposal to create a register of Dormant Members for members who cease active participation of funeral or embalming work but do not qualify for Retired Membership status was rejected.
The same meeting approved voting rights to Retired Members, providing there was a continuous and unbroken record of payment as a Full Member for at least 25 years.
Ratification was also given for the inclusion of the recently renamed Irish Division in the Rules & Regulations of the Institute.
Heard On My Rounds…
WEDDING bells have been active during the summer with two of our former National Officers finding a new lease of life.
First it was Past President Jeffrey Horsfield who married Deborah on the idyllic island of Mauritius on June 22nd.
The ceremony took place on the beach followed by a private trip on a catamaran at sunset.
On July 4th there was a blessing at St. Cuthberts Church, Lytham, conducted by Rev. Cragg who officiated at Jeffrey's conference.
Jeffrey is now the owner of a 39 bed, sea front Nursing Home at St. Annes-on-Sea.
Any members needing a rest will be most welcome!
Jeffrey Horsfield with his new bride Deborah.
The other marriage to report is that of former National General Secretary Paul Babington who married Jacqualine on July 20th.
I am unsure of any catamarans at sunset but Paul and Jacqui spent their honeymoon on Skiathos (it's a Greek island).
It doesn't seem that long ago that this column reported an addition to Matthew Hall's family and hey presto he's done it again.
This time its congratulations to Matthew and Dorothy on the birth of Tobias Matthew, a brother for Rosie.
The birth was on July 1st and at 7 lb 7 oz he's got a long way to go to catch up to dad.
Past President Jack Lee had a surprise whilst on holiday with Shirley in Austria.
Like everyone else on holiday, he thought he had ‘got away from it all’ for a few days until he arrived at the famous White Horse Inn and was confronted by…fellow Fellow (!)
Andy Hogg.
More news about Jack is the announcement that he has handed over the reins of the Midland Embalming School to John Davis who, apart from being a trade embalmer has a varied background in nursing, counselling, laboratory work and school teaching.
Jack remains connected as a consultant.
This announcement comes only months after retirement from Midland Embalming Services and I have already heard stories of breakfast in bed and other luxuries associated with retirement!
Any Radio 4 fans who settle down to ‘The Archers’ had a bonus on August 2nd if they stayed tuned in after the programme, because it was followed by a programme called ‘Performing Miracles’and featured Sheila Dicks.
The interesting fact was that it was recorded back in 1990 as part of a series of people at work and was delayed because of the Gulf War.
The programme makers were so impressed by Sheila's contribution that they featured it as a programme in its own right.
A cassette recording of the programme is available for loan if anyone is interested.
This column has already reported an addition to Matthew Hall's family and now it gives me pleasure to report another addition at the Dodge Chemical Company — but this time its not another birth, it is the news that Adrian Haler's daughter, Patricia Lewis joined the company on August 17th.
Finally, I notice that the Scottish Division is holding a Dinner at the Caledonian Hotel in Edinburgh on November 7th.
The fact that we have a Scottish President combined with the fact that this Division do not hold their dinners every year should guarantee an evening to remember!
I hasten to add that the North West, Yorkshire and Southern Divisions have notified me of their annual events and members will be most welcome on these occasions as well.
The Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh — venue for the Scottish Division Dinner/Dance.The event will be held on Saturday, November 7th, at The Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh.
Tickets, priced at £25 each, can be obtained from either David Jordan () or John Hopkinson ().
And the news is…
NOT only the Daily Telegraph, but the Daily Sport, would you believe, recently took delight in observing that the editor of The Embalmer was called D. Kaye.
Geddit?
It had obviously escaped them that their pun was something of a contradiction in terms!
Letters to the Editor
A  thank-you from June Pym
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation for all the cards, letters and offers of help sent to wish David well when he was ill and then in sympathy when he died.
It is good to know that he was thought so highly of and that we have so many friends.
Thank you also for the many beautiful tributes and the donations sent for the Cynthia Spencer Unit.
An idea for a ‘problem page’
I AM at present a registered student who has passed the theoretical examination and awaiting a date for my practical examination.
The reason for writing to you, is an idea for the BIE Journal.
I thought a good idea was to have a problem page where embalmers could write in with their problems that have occurred whilst embalming, and other members can write in giving tips and ways to overcome these problems.
This would be of great educational value to new members giving tips and ways of how other embalmers around the country practice their work.
Maybe the use of certain instruments or lotions, machinery etc. can be discussed giving the new member a wider knowledge?
I know space may be limited, but a problem shared is a problem halved; as every embalmer has his own ways and methods used and these can be passed on.
If you think this is a good idea let me know.
Ed.
The 1953 Conference
Further to our recent telephone conversation I now enclose the 1953 Conference photograph.
The president is my grandfather Walter, with my grandmother to his right, his daughter Eileen is in the second row fourth from the right.
Grandfather died in 1958 and grandmother in 1966, but my aunty Eileen is still enjoying good health at the age of 84.
My father Arthur was secretary of the Southern Division for a number of years and is still enjoying life to the full.
He was in Tobago in May this year with us for my daughter's wedding and is planning a month or two in Canada later in the year.
Formaldehyde fumes haven't done a lot of harm to dad!!!
Arthur Sherry celebrates his 83 years this coming December.
My own aspirations are more lowly — I am just an ordinary member.
We would like the photo back at some time but after nearly 40 years, time is not of the essence.
Below: The Official 1953 Conference photograph, kindly submitted by Robin Sherry.
VHPB identifies need for widely applicable International Guidelines
THE Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board is concerned that many European healthcare workers, and others at occupational risk, remain unprotected against hepatitis B.
At its second meeting the VHPB reviewed the extent of hepatitis B vaccination throughout Europe and in Australia.
This revealed that between 30 and 50 per cent of healthcare workers at risk still remained unprotected against hepatitis B infection.
The VHPB identified two main problems:
Confusion and uncertainty over which occupational groups are at risk
Employers (especially small employers) who fail to comply with national recommendations and legislation to establish hepatitis B vaccination programmes for their employees.
The VHPB aims to develop pan-European guidelines suitable for use in other areas of lower endemicity such as Australia — which will help reduce these two problems.
The VHPB believes many bodies and organisations have a role to play in reducing current levels of occupational hepatitis B infection.
They include:
Trade unions
Governments
Inter-Government organisations (such as the European Commission, World Health Organisation etc.)
Professional associations
Government agencies (such as bodies in charge of health and safety at work)
Employers.
Campaigns led by professional associations or trade unions can have dramatic effects on vaccine uptake by those at risk, as the British Medical Association campaign shows.
The BMA campaign was aimed at raising the profile of hepatitis B risk among medical students, junior doctors, occupational health physicians and deans of medical schools.
Before the campaign, between 50 and 60 per cent of medical students were likely to be unvaccinated.
After the campaign, only 11 per cent had not been protected against hepatitis B infection.
The VHPB hopes that providing independent information to such bodies will encourage equally successful initiatives across Europe.
The VHPB agreed a consensus statement detailing measures to improve effectiveness of vaccination programmes, and established some principles in its discussion on risk which will continue in future meetings.
At the meeting the VHPB reviewed what is actually happening in different countries against what is recommended.
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom has a ‘selective hepatitis B vaccination programme’, Dr John Lunn, director of Occupational Health at Harrow Health Authority said.
He identified four factors to explain the variation in employee protection:
Financial
Attitudes of local microbiologists
Authority and degree of development of individual occupational health departments
Different interpretations of guidelines and recommendations.
Dr Lunn questioned the policy of only vaccinating nurses in ‘high risk’ jobs.
‘This kind of selection is a problem because many nurses rotate between so-called ‘high risk’ and ‘low risk’areas during the course of their work,’he said.
Dr Lunn identified a problem in both hospitals and primary care.
‘Uptake of vaccine is very variable — one study showed that only about 49 per cent of GPs have had the vaccination, for example, even though the GP is just as much at risk as any other doctor.’
‘In hospitals there are varying coverage rates for staff in infectious disease departments.
In some places there is 95–97 per cent coverage, whereas in others they get little over 75 per cent.’
The VHPB aims to develop clear guidelines to help identify those at risk, and to implement successful vaccination programmes to overcome this uneven protection of at risk workers.
Other countries
Australia: Three factors hinder uptake of hepatitis B vaccine by healthcare workers: fear of needles, failure to appreciate the risk of hepatitis B, fear that measurement of markers of hepatitis B infection will affect career.
Germany: Although a law exists requiring employers to vaccinate healthcare workers, healthcare employees of small private practices are most likely to be unprotected against hepatitis B infection as many employers are ignoring the law
Italy: Since October 1991 it has been compulsory for employers/appropriate authorities to offer hepatitis B vaccine free of charge to a wide range of occupational groups including: police officers, fire fighters
Spain: Every day nearly 20 Spanish healthcare workers risk infection from personal injuries involving blood known to be infected with hepatitis B
France: Since a law making it compulsory for employers to offer hepatitis B vaccination to healthcare employees was passed in January 1991, usage of vaccine has risen nearly four-fold.
The VHPB will work to improve action on hepatitis B as an occupational hazard across Europe and Australia by providing clear, authoritative information and advice and through a review of current practice, develop guidelines to ensure protection of all workers at risk.
Survey shows concern over blood-borne diseases
BLOOD-borne diseases such as hepatitis B are considered to be the most important occupational hazards facing healthcare and public service workers, according to the results of a major European survey of trade unions, professional associations and health insurance companies.
The survey — carried out in the UK, Germany and Spain — found that unions felt that blood-borne hazards outranked back injuries and strains, occupational stress, chemical exposures and assaults and violence as the main occupational risk causing greatest concern to workers.
The survey was commissioned by the viral Hepatitis Prevention Board (VGPB) to identify perceptions of the occupational risk of hepatitis B, to assess current measures to protect against hepatitis B and to identify the readiness of organisations to support the VHPB's aim to improve action on  hepatitis B as an occupational hazard.
The trade unions and professional associations surveyed in the UK said that vast inconsistencies in the prevention of occupational blood-borne hazards exist between employers of healthcare and public service workers in different regional authorities.
They also revealed that employers were trying to cut costs on essential precautions such as vaccination and protective equipment and clothing.
There was further criticism that safety training and vaccination programmes are often inadequate and ‘selective’, being limited only to those groups of workers most at risk.
Accidents and injuries involving blood or other body fluids were widely believed to be under-reported.
The survey respondents felt that there were often delays in producing official statistics and that employees were not always made aware of the reporting procedures or the risks involved in certain work activities.
Most organisations surveyed were aware that hepatitis B is spread by blood-to-blood contact; however, not all realised that it can also be transmitted through other body fluids.
Some organisations knew about the different types of viral  hepatitis and that there is a long incubation period.
These factors, said some respondents, could make claims for compensation more difficult to pursue, even though hepatitis B is an acknowledged occupational disease for some healthcare workers.
Better education of employers as well as employees was seen to be vital in improving the protection of workers against hepatitis B infection.
Many of the organisations claimed to provide supplementary training and disseminate information through their own journals and leaflets to raise awareness of the risks.
Often this is out of necessity, ‘to fill the gap that employers are not providing’ explained one survey respondent.
The unions were particularly keen to have more official documentation on hepatitis B to use as a negotiating tool in discussions with management.
A key aim of the VHPB is to provide information to professional associations, trade unions and employers and, through vaccination, to protect workers from the risk of hepatitis B infection at work
Hygiene with style for mortuary and undertakers' premises
THE problems of keeping walls in mortuary and undertakers' premises clean and hygienic, while still keeping them attractive for the staff, is one which has been around for many years.
Tiles are an obvious choice, but tiled surfaces can still attract dirt between the tiles and in the grouting.
Skanform wall panelling from Norske Interiors could well be the answer for anyone seeking an economic, stylish, easy to clean, wall covering designed for the exacting demands of a hygiene-conscious environment, say the manufacturers.
Skanform panels are claimed to be ideal for covering large wall areas in environments where surfaces are constantly cleaned and a high degree of hygiene is necessary.
The panels can be fitted over a variety of surfaces including existing tiles and uneven walls without the need for stripping or replastering.
The panels can also be attached to timber frames or ductwork to create new walls or partitions, allowing existing facilities to be refurbished, and new facilities to be created quickly, without the need for bricks and mortar and the inherent hygiene complications which arise from refurbishment.
The panels, comprising a 9 mm plywood core with a high pressure, decorative laminate surface, measure 2400m × 600mm, need little or no maintenance, and are long lasting, effective, and attractive.
The tongued and grooved joints, in addition to allowing concealed fixing with neat joint lines and removing the need for grouting, negate the need for special skills thus reducing installation costs.
The joints, when sealed with an appropriate mastic, are fully watertight, aiding the maintenance of clean conditions.
The panel design enables installation to be completed quickly and without mess, reducing the time the area being refurbished is out of use.
Skanform panels enable refurbishment of existing clean environments to a high standard of quality and hygiene without expensive and complicated installation procedures, while allowing investment in long term reliability and cost effectiveness.
Further information and a list of stockists is available from Norske Interiors (UK) Ltd.
Skanform wall panelling from Norske Interiors — designed for the exacting demands of hygiene-conscious environments.
CORRECTION
The Fax.
number for Malcolm Smith, secretary of N.E.B.E., was wrongly given in the last issue.
It should have read:
Book reviews
Human Cross-Sectional Anatomy
Ellis Logan Dixon: Butterworth £29.50
Periodically text books are received which require reviewing from the point of view of practising and practical embalmers.
An interesting facet of the technical editor's job is to anticipate uses of miscellaneous texts to assess how useful to embalmers such texts could be.
Cross sectional reference has obvious applications to the embalming student and practitioner.
Accurate and true representation is an important prerequisite governing potential worth of a visual aid such as this.
Members will have noted a familiar name among the authors above, which engenders confidence in the presumption of correct and thorough irrigation techniques and thereby an accurately sectioned subject.
The use of the well-known Logan technique for long term preservation and fluid composition guarantees a well embalmed subject with a good level of colouring, little bleaching and the ‘soft preservation’ characteristic of this fluid formula.
It is obvious from the detailed texts accompanying the sections that this reference book would be of use to practising members and the inquiring student.
As a visual aid to anatomical familiarity, a reference book such as this has undoubted value.
The body is presented in chronological sections, starting with the crown of the head and ultimately ending with the feet.
On each page a clear diagram of the point of section, a colour photograph with reasonably ‘normal’ colouring and clear, convenient labelling enables one to locate and follow anatomical features.
A convenient notes section on each page points out major features encountered and emphasises detail  occurring in the plate illustrated.
The publication ends with a handy index of notes enabling quick location of the anatomical point required.
The acquisition by schools would seem sensible as this forms a useful and accurate guide to vessel and organ location.
The book is spiral bound and the hundred and eighty pages, many with two or three photographs, are printed on a ‘glossy’ finish quality paper.
It is gratifying to see such a reference book for less than thirty pounds, another factor that should prompt members to invest in this handy anatomy guide.
Making the Most of a Funeral
by Jenny Hockey PhD
Foreword by the Archbishop of York
Nearly all of us experience the death and the funeral of someone we love.
This is a vulnerable moment in our lives and the way the funeral and its aftermath are handled can affect how people subsequently come to terms with their bereavement.
How do ministers and clergy approach the difficult task of coping with bereavement and funerals?
What do bereaved people think of their efforts?
Some of the answers are revealed in this study, which was based on a project originated by the Sheffield Branch of Cruse.
The book also shows how  sensitive preparations and aftercare can help ministers overcome some of the difficulties of a funeral.
The book will be of interest to bereavement counsellors, sociologists and, of course, to ministers and those who train them.
One theme constantly emerges: that a funeral should be as personal an event as possible, and should reflect the unique nature of human life.
Making the Most of a Funeral is available direct from the publishers: price £3.25 plus £1 p&p.
John Davis takes on Midland School of Embalming
JACK Lee, whose name will always be associated with the Midland School of Embalming, which he founded just after the war and from which he has trained many hundreds of embalmers the world over, has decided to take more of a ‘back seat’ and has handed over the principal's chair to John Davis, although he will still be ‘in the wings’as an advisory tutor.
John Davis brings to the school a varied background of knowledge, based in the fields of the medical sciences and communication skills.
He has experience in nursing, public health, laboratory and post-mortem work, microbiology and skills gained from drugs and AIDS counselling.
He has a B.Ed.
(Hons.) degree and has taught Maths, English and Social Sciences at both Primary and Middle schools, added to which he has 13 years experience in embalming.
The administration offices are based at  The  telephone numbers are .
Both theory and practical tuition will be held at the Central Midlands Co-op funeral home at Great Brook Street, Birmingham .
Cryonic Suspension: Another Technique for Embalmers?
IN THE summer of 1991 Southern Division were fortunate enough to visit the premises of ALCOR UK and this short article aims to explore the similarities between cryonic suspension technique and arterial  embalmment and discuss the role of the embalmer in future applications of this technology.
This article does not propose to discuss philosophical, practical, theological or moral questions related to this subject but to take the opportunity of examining it in technical detail, as befits those who practise the science of embalming.
The library is fortunate to have acquired a text book concerned with the details of a) perfusing the tissues with agents to minimize freezing injury and b) transporting to minimize the interruption of circulation and respiration after cardiac and respiratory arrest.
This article will concentrate on the former procedures.
What is apparent is that this manual is aimed at the non-specialist technician, possibly an embalmer, who has good knowledge of some medical procedures.
Indeed reference to embalming tables and embalming abound in the text and the assumption is made that families would initially come to a funeral director for this alternative to burial or cremation, without warning.
Detailed introductory administrative information is given, bearing in mind the possible reaction of hospital staff to this choice of ‘funeral’ and the need to induce their cooperation.
(Others besides embalmers need to worry about public reaction!)
The technician is required to introduce cardiopulmonary resuscitation after legal death since the continued oxygenation of tissues is vital for successful cryonic suspension.
Before external cooling with the use of water ice, temperature probes should be inserted to monitor the  patient's temperature.
The administering of specialised intravenous solutions then forms the next phase of the procedure, where similarity to embalming techniques is most pronounced.
Adequate perfusion of tissues is obviously vital for embalmers and cryonicists.
Discussion of the best or most accessible vein is strikingly similar to embalmers' discussions about arterial accessibility.
Catheter access is necessary for the administration of transport medications into the venous system and may include the following:
Tromethamine, a potent organic buffer, restoring the pH of blood and body fluids to near normal levels.
Sodium Heparin, preventing coagulation of blood, aiding infusion of cryoprotectants, 20% Mannitol, preventing cell swelling, due to hypoxia, ischaemia and injury.
The organ most at risk is the brain, being enclosed within a rigid bony shell.
Verapamil, a slow calcium channel blocker minimises cellular injury resulting from calcium influx into cells during hypoxia or ischaemia.
Naloxone, an opiate  antagonist , blocks the actions of endorphins and  enkephalins , resulting in higher blood pressure and better tissue perfusion.
Erythromycin prevents bacterial overgrowth in the gut etc. during transport.
Finally Aluminium Hydroxide/Magnesium Hydroxide is administered orally, as a neutralizer of gastric hydrochloric acid.
Blood samples are drawn during transport to establish patient condition, to evaluate efficacy of cardiopulmonary support and as a baseline for quality control of the sterile technique employed during perfusion.
Ultimately transferral to Alcor would need to be organised.
Although members may doubt the validity of the procedure, one cannot but agree that every possibility is given for the cryonic patient to experience minimal cellular injury, prior to eventual freezing.
Similarity to embalming procedures abound.
Every effort is made to ensure thoroughness of saturation, although subjects are technically ‘dead’.
There is a desire for minimal time interval between cessation and treatment.
Appropriate vessels are selected.
Infusion of specific tissue treating chemical fluids occurs.
There is a ‘one attempt only’ scenario, neither process can be repeated.
The major difference appears to be that of timescale; perfusion is spread over a much longer time scale than arterial infusion.
There is no question of cryonic suspension being an alternative to embalming as the two practices are poles apart in both outlook and philosophy.
Embalmers, after all, care for the dead; whereas the cryonic technician would be concerned with the ultimate aim of reanimation.
Whether one agrees, disagrees or maintains a neutral attitude to this technique is a matter of personal choice, but how one would respond to a professional call to administer this procedure is a different situation entirely.
Could a member of the public expect a professional response, or one based on superstition and prejudice?
The mental barriers encountered regarding suspension are similar to those found even today about the need for embalming.
It would be interesting to be able to monitor educative efforts by Alcor etc. to see if moderation of attitudes ensues.
Could cryonic suspension become an optional module for aspiring student embalmers?
Whether attitudes to this change or remain, two questions remain to be answered by embalmers, the potential cryogenic technician of the future.
Would you perform this process?
Could you perform this process?
Examinations Information:
End of Module Tests
THE National Examination Board is concerned that some Tutors are not conforming to the national pattern in this manner.
We are asked to reiterate that ALL Tutors must apply for the End of Module Tests from the N.E.C. Application for the Tests should be accompanied by the following information, giving three weeks notice or more.
1.
The NUMBER of test papers required to be sent to the Tutor.
2.
The number and name and address of any invigilator who is acting for Distance Learning Students.
(So that tests may be sent direct to them).
3.
The Date and Venue of the Tests.
The Tutor will then be sent the correct number of tests sealed in an envelope, together with a marking guide and the name of the Moderator to whom they should be sent after marking.
A marking sheet will also be included and should be completed and included in the envelope (parcel) with the Student's written papers, and the sheet with the final grades awarded by the Tutor.
(this latter (*1) sheet is included with this letter).
RETURN POSTAGE MUST be included in the package sent by the Tutor.
Moderators should not be expected to pay to return work, this is simply not fair on them.
The final (Moderated) mark is needed by the Secretary of the N.E.B.E. when we apply for the final Written Examinations of the Board.
It is suggested that we send the Secretary copies of the final grades awarded by sending a photocopy of the sheets as returned by the Moderators, as well as a clearly written or typed composite sheet (example included (*2)).
We realise that names may appear on several sheets if a Student failed a test and resat but the Tutor can easily strike out or blank out information not required by the Board.
These sheets do provide evidence of Moderation and correct procedure.
The Board have further pointed out to the Committee that some Tutors are sending in End of Module Test Results for Students who have not reached a pass mark (60%) in the Tests.
This is not only damaging to the final exam marks of the Student (since a Student who had managed 60% in the Final Examination could fail because their End of Module Tests reduce the mark), but foolish, since they can take as many retakes of the End of Module Tests as they wish in order to achieve a good pass-mark.
(A new test must be applied for from the N.E.C. for each re-take.)
The N.E.B.E. have decided that they will ONLY accept applications if the Students have achieved a pass mark of 60% in the End of Module Tests.This is felt to be in the best interests of both Students and Tutors since they do form 25% of the final Written Examination Marks.
CLOSING DATES FOR ENTRY FOR WRITTEN EXAMINATIONS
Because several tutors failed to keep to the new time table for applications the Board has decided that they will have to revert to the original dates for the Written Examination entries.
These will be as follows:
1st February for the Spring examinations.
1st September for the Autumn examinations.
1st January for examinations in foreign languages.
(This includes those in French and German.
Foreign language examinations will ONLY be held in the Spring.)
French fees: £110.00.
German fees: £200.00.
No telephone applications or any amount of pleading will ensure exception to these dates.
All fees and Application Forms must be with the N.E.B.E. Secretary by the closing dates as above.
End of Module Test Results should accompany applications wherever possible but, in any case, they MUST BE RECEIVED BY THE SECRETARY OF THE N.E.B.E. BEFORE THE DATE OF THE EXAMINATION.
Any which arrive late will result in the student being refused admission to the Examination Centre.
THE AUTUMN 1992 WRITTEN EXAMINATIONS WILL BE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 4TH NOVEMBER 1992.
Skills Checklist
The Board have agreed that a copy of the completed Skills Checklist for each candidate (showing only the Registered Student/Candidate Number and NOT their name) must be submitted with all applications for Practical Examinations with effect from the 1st January 1993.
This will be forwarded to the Examiner prior to the Examination taking place.
(It would be advisable to make a copy of this and keep it in the ‘Record of Achievement’ as insurance against loss of the original.)
The Record of Achievement should be available, complete and containing all end of Module Test Papers, all Coursework completed, the signed record sheets of attendance, and records of all practical work, for the Examiners if they wish to see them.
Tutors are responsible for seeing that these are completed before the Practical Examination.
SKILLS CHECKLISTS MUST BE SIGNED OR COUNTERSIGNED BY THE TUTOR.
Students with Dyslexia (usually called ‘specific learning difficulty’)
Students with Dyslexia (or any other specific learning difficulty) will be given the appropriate consideration by the Board provided the Tutor makes the request IN WRITING and that this is accompanied by a report from an Educational Psychologist to the effect that such consideration is necessary.
If it is not made clear in the psychologist's report, the Tutor should recommend the type of assistance which would be of most help to the Student.
The alternatives are either up to 25% additional time (because some people take longer to read and write because of the specific difficulty) or the use of an  emendatory writer or whatever the psychologist may recommend.
These requests and reports must accompany the application to take the written examination.