

AMAZING SEX SLUR ON ANDY
‘Dark secret’ riddle
A NEW royal row erupted last night after Prince Andrew became the victim of a disgraceful sex slur.
Society columnist Taki Theodoracopulos claims in a high-brow American magazine that Andy has a ‘dark secret’.
The multi-millionaire Greek playboy, who spent three months in a British jail for possessing cocaine, wrote in the New York Observer: ‘It is not hard to guess what the secret is.’
Only months ago, he caused another row by repeating slurs on a U.S. television show about Prince Edward being gay.
— FULL STORY: Pages 4 and 5 
ONSLAUGHT: Prince Andrew
EL CHOP!
BBC axe ELDORADO in shake-up
ELDORADO, the biggest soap flop in TV history, is to get the chop.
Following non-stop criticism and appalling ratings, BBC boss-to-be John Birt has had enough of the sun, sex and sangria shambles — launched with a huge fanfare just two months ago.
More than 10m went into what some saw as a last-ditch attempt to compete with ITV.
Now Birt, who takes over as BBC director general in March, is determined to cut the Corporation's losses — and axe up to 8,000 jobs too.
— FULL STORY: PAGE 11 
SOAP SUNSET: Farewell to Eldorado's Polly Perkins and toyboy Dieter
NAZIS RIOT IN 10 CITIES
NEO-NAZIS launched renewed attacks on refugee homes in at least 10 German cities at the start of the weekend.
A crowd of 150 young extremists threw rocks and firebombs at a refugee processing centre in Eisenhuttenstadt, near the Polish border.
They were driven back by police, who arrested seven people.
In the northern city of Greifswald, a kindergarten to be used to house refugees seeking asylum was burned down.
Firebomb and rock-throwing attacks were also reported in the east German cities of Brandenburg, Koblenz, Lubbenau, Prenzlau, Kremmen, Neustadt, and Wernigerode.
Police arrested 11 people in Kremmen.
About 50 Left-wingers clashed with 20 Right-wing extremists in Chemnitz.
The violence was a continuation of more than two weeks of attacks on refugee homes in economically depressed eastern Germany.
They have coincided with a sharp rise in refugees taking advantage of liberal asylum laws.
Fury over Halal con
OUTRAGED Muslims are to set up their own meat inspections to make sure animals have been slaughtered according to Islamic laws.
Leaders of the Muslim ‘parliament’ disclosed the plans exclusively to The People after it was learned that unscrupulous British dealers have been selling ordinary meat as Halal
PAY UP, MA'AM!
MAJOR IN TAX PLEA TO QUEEN
Balmoral showdown
NIGEL NELSON
PREMIER John Major will tell the Queen today: ‘If you want to save the Monarchy pay your taxes, Ma'am.’
Mr Major fears the antics of younger royals threaten the institution's future.
During an unprecedented Balmoral summit, he will thrash out a pay-as-you-earn plan with the Queen and stave off a constitutional crisis.
He will also suggest that only the Monarch and a hard core of ‘working’ royals should be entitled to Civil List cash for public duties.
‘The Queen has indicated she might now be prepared to pay tax,’ said a senior Privy Councillor.
‘It is nonsense that the royals are excluded.
‘Mr Major will tell the Queen a slimmed down Royal Family is more in tune with the times.’
Under the plan, she would pay about 8 million a year on an estimated personal income of more than 20 million.
She would still get 7.9 million Civil List payments tax free.
Palaces
The Government would continue footing the 46 million upkeep of palaces, the Queen's Flight and Royal Yacht.
Political pressure has been growing for the Queen to pay.
Liberal leader Paddy Ashdown believes it is time she coughed up.
But Labour boss John Smith remains undecided.
Top Tory Michael Ancram yesterday joined calls for taxpayers' cash to be restricted to the Queen and Prince Charles.
And Lefty MP Ken Livingstone urged Mr Major to ABOLISH the Monarchy.
— TORY MPs want the PM to ignore Cabinet opposition and appoint ex-Labour leader Neil Kinnock as a 108,000-a-year Euro Commissioner.
TAXING TIME: Queen
STAB KILLING OF DAD-TO-BE
A PREGNANT wife returned from a family night out to find her husband dying from a stab wound to his chest.
Karen Randall, 22, discovered shopworker David, 19, at their home in Swansea early yesterday.
Karen, four months pregnant with their first child, tried desperately to revive him, but he died six hours later in hospital.
Police said David had been to a pal's engagement party at a nearby pub but how he was killed remained a mystery.
Det Supt Colin Jones of South Wales police said:
‘We are trying to trace everyone who was at the party to try to piece together the last hours of his life.’
Five nightclub customers were being quizzed by police yesterday after a man was stabbed to death in the early morning.
John Twitchet, 44, of Hammersmith, West London, died in hospital after staggering, covered in blood, out of The Three C's at nearby Chiswick.
Green Cross Code tragedy
A SIX-YEAR-OLD boy died in hospital after being hit by a car while his father taught him the Green Cross Code.
The tragedy happened when Stewart Davis was being shown how to cross the road safely near his home at Yate, near Bristol.
NEO-NAZIS attacked refugees in at least 10 German cities at the weekend.
They threw rocks and firebombs in Eisenhuttenstadt, near the Polish border, before being driven back by police, who arrested seven people.
A kindergarten housing asylum-seeking refugees was burned down in the northern city of Greifswald.
Pray take a seat, Rev
LABOUR MP Norman Hogg plans to introduce a bill that will end the 200-year ban preventing vicars, Catholic priests and Scottish ministers from being elected to the House of Commons.
The ban doesn't apply to Methodists, rabbis and other denominations.
Mr Major, it's just not cricket…
PREMIER John Major was fiddling about at a cricket match yesterday while his overburdened Chancellor struggled with Britain's burning economic problems.
Mr Major — attacked as ‘Inaction Man’ by Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown — took his gentle ease at the NatWest cricket cup final between Leicestershire and Northants at Lord's.
While the Premier had fun in the sun, Labour's Mr Brown bowled him a bumper by accusing him of REFUSING to act and REFUSING to speak.
His only decision of the summer, he added, was REFUSING to recall Parliament.
— Voice Of The People, Page 6
Soldiers accused of murder
TWO soldiers appeared in court charged with murder yesterday after father-of-two Peter McBride, 18, was shot dead in north Belfast.
Scots Guards Mark Wright, 19, and James Fisher, 24, were both remanded on 2,000 bail into secure military custody.
McBride's weeping dad shouted: ‘Bastards, you scumbag’ as the soldiers stood in the dock at Belfast magistrates' court.
NHS AID FOR WAR VICTIMS
SICK and wounded victims of the Yugoslav civil war are to be airlifted to Britain and treated on the NHS.
A civilian Dutch Airbus has been converted into a flying ambulance to evacuate 70 of the most seriously -ill casualties.
The Government gave the go-ahead despite last week's shooting down of an Italian relief plane.
Hospital medical teams have been put on stand-by.
Health spokesman Vic Shroot said: ‘We are now looking for a pilot willing to fly the plane.
If everything goes all right, there could be more airlifts.’
The plane is expected to fly alone, without a military escort, into one of two airports at Banja Luka in northern Bosnia.
WHAT A CHEEKY BAGGER
A CRIME poster with a teasing message to two scantily-clad girls has enraged women's libbers.
The ad shows a crook gazing at the busty, mini-skirted girls and asks: ‘Who's giving your bag the eye?’
But an Equal Opportunities spokeswoman slammed the Home Office ad as ‘blatantly sexist’.
And women in Newcastle, where the poster will be on display in shops and clubs, also hit out.
Boss Christine Powell said: ‘It is crude and insulting to women.’
Police said a humorous ad was more effective
Thieves no kendo
A BUMBLING thieves who broke into a medical electronics company in Milton Keynes, Bucks, made a surprising haul — a computer that speaks only in Japanese.
‘It won't be much use to them,’ said a police spokesman
YES WE DOOOOO!
NEWLYWEDS Andrew and Tina-Marie Hine quickly learned the ups and downs of married life yesterday — by getting married on the top of the Grand National ROLLERCOASTER at Blackpool Pleasure Beach
TV Timmy presents his chip off the old Mallett
Oh baby!
Now whacky kids' star is a proud dad
Words: MICHAEL BURKE
THERE'S no hope now that children's TV presenter Timmy Mallett will EVER grow up!
The man who is every parent's nightmare has become a dad himself, with a new-born son to keep him as whacky as ever.
Timmy, 34, and his Australian wife Lynda proudly show off five -week-old William Theodore Mallett here for the first time.
‘He's got a rather grand name but we simply call him Billy,’ said dad, who wouldn't let go of his famous foam mallet with which he bashes kiddy guests on his long-running TV-am show, Wacaday.
Timmy, who also made sure his pet cockatiel Magic was on his shoulder, was present at Billy's birth.
But did he enjoy the experience?
Of course— it was ‘utterly brilliant.’
Tiny Billy quickly proved he's a chip off the old Mallet.
Our photographer swears he gurgled: ‘Bleugh,’ another one of his daffy dad's catch-phrases!
NUTTY: Timmy in Wacaday action
FAMILY OF FUN: Timmy in full cry with Billy and wife Picture: ALAN OLLEY
HULLUVA VOYAGE
THREE yachtsmen were plucked from the Atlantic yesterday after they'd clung for seven hours to the hull of their overturned racing sloop.
The two Frenchmen and an Italian were located by an RAF Nimrod 700 miles off Cornwall
A LOVE CURE FOR KEIFER
HOLLYWOOD hunk Keifer Sutherland has finally mended his broken heart — by falling for another film beauty.
He met former James Bond girl Alison Doody in a Dublin nightspot on the last day of his trek around Ireland in the footsteps of ex-fiancee Julia Roberts.
Julia, who called off their wedding at the last minute a year ago, was recently in Ireland with new lover Jason Patric.
Keifer, 24, visited the same beauty spots Julia and Jason went to.
But friends said after meeting bubbly Alison, he looked a changed man
Virginia puts oar in to help
HEALTH Secretary Virginia Bottomley (second right) was pulling her weight yesterday — and helping raise money for Save the Children.
She took part in the annual Great River Race on the Thames, crewing a rowing skiff with sister Nicola Mardall and brothers William and Christopher Garnett.
TEAM SPIRIT: Virginia and family yesterday
Life is Agassi
TENNIS heart-throb Andre Agassi smashed his way into the last 16 in the US Open yesterday — and won a kiss from movie star Barbra Streisand (inset) who must have pulled some special strokes to get past the minders at New York's Flushing Meadow.
GAME, SET, SNATCH: Barbra gives Andre a smacker
Hols failure No 2
ANOTHER tour operator collapsed yesterday — the second within 24 hours.
Carlisle-based coach operator Impact Holidays announced it was to cease trading just hours after DHG (UK) Ltd, of London, which specialises in Turkish holidays, shut up shop.
The Association of British Travel Agents said Impact Holidays’ customers were protected by its ABTA membership.
COPS' 25m DRUG BUST
JEFF EDWARDS
A PLOT to flood Britain with 25 million of the designer drug Ecstasy has been smashed by Scotland Yard.
Detectives announced yesterday they had uncovered a drug-making factory in London's Highgate capable of producing a massive quantity of tablets.
In a simultaneous raid at a house in Cranham, Essex, they found more than A MILLION capsules waiting to be filled with the chemically-produced drug.
Detectives believe they were about to be shipped to the manufacturing base in a spare room of the house in Highgate.
There officers seized a special press for packing capsules, more than 1,000 filled capsules, plus quantities of cocaine, heroin and LSD.
Two other homes were raided in Dagenham and Rainham, Essex, and a total of four men arrested.
One detective said: ‘We have smashed a record-breaking operation.
This business was all set to flood the club scene with Ecstasy capsules worth around 25 million.’
PEOPLE ROYAL SPECIAL
HOUSEWIVES THINK THERE IS A ‘DI PLOT’
PEOPLE POLL
BRITAIN'S housewives have united behind Princess Diana, claiming she IS the victim of a Buckingham Palace conspiracy.
A nationwide poll conducted by The People reveals that most women believe high-powered courtiers are behind a ‘dirty tricks’ plot to smear the Princess of Wales.
They are convinced anti-Diana stories are being deliberately leaked from within the Palace as part of an undercover slur campaign.
But, amazingly, most MEN quizzed DON'T believe the conspiracy theory.
In a poll of 1,000 people, The People asked: Do you think there is a conspiracy from within Buckingham Palace to discredit Princess Diana?
The vast majority of WOMEN answered: YES.
But most MEN answered: NO.
In fact THREE TIMES as many women as men believed there is an anti-Di plot.
Britain's women fear Diana is suffering a Palace backlash after Andrew Morton's book, Diana: Her True Story, painted Prince Charles in a bad light.
Diana was said to have used bachelor friend James Gilbey and other pals to tell her side of her troubled marriage.
Speculation that supporters of Prince Charles are hitting back by leaking hurtful items to the media has increased with the number of anti-Diana stories that have proved false.
Of the 493 people who said YES, there is a conspiracy, 73.4 per cent were women and 26.6 per cent were men.
Of the 507 who said there is NO conspiracy, 45.2 per cent were women and 54.8 per cent were men.
One thousand people were polled, either by telephone or in person, between 7pm on Friday and 3pm yesterday
CHARLES POPS TO HOSPITAL FOR QUICKIE KNEE OP
PRINCE CHARLES made a hush-hush trip to hospital yesterday for a knee operation.
Total secrecy surrounded the morning surgery in Nottingham's Queen's Medical Centre where he was treated for an arm injury two years ago, after falling from his polo pony.
The op — under general anaesthetic — was to remove a damaged cartilage in his left knee.
It was a complete success and Charles walked out of the hospital unaided.
He returned to Highgrove to spend the evening with Princess Diana and their two sons.
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said he would be well enough to attend a promenade concert at London's Royal Albert Hall tonight — and is expected to make a full recovery in seven to 10 days.
Royal wedding fever gripped spectators at a Highland Games meeting yesterday — as they hoped for an announcement on the possible marriage of Princess Anne and Commander Tim Laurence.
Thousands flocked to see the Royal Family at the traditional Braemar games as rumours spread about an October wedding.
One royal aide said the Queen, Prince Philip and the minister of a church near Balmoral have held discussions with Anne and Tim.
But a Buckingham Palace spokesman denied that a wedding announcement was imminent.
The Queen looked drawn and unsmiling as she arrived at the games with Prince Philip, Prince Edward and the Queen Mother.
Meanwhile, a royal insider said Princess Di had been ‘toughened up’ by the controversy about her private life.
The insider said: ‘She is frighteningly different from the self-effacing person she used to be.
‘It seems as though there was not just one Princess Diana, but one who evolved into someone quite different and much, much tougher than the one we first knew.’
The Princess's relationship with the Queen has also dramatically changed over the past weeks.
‘She is now very formal with the Queen,’ said the insider.
Good old mum!
WITH son Wills at her side, Princess Di stepped out jauntily yesterday in trainers, baseball cap and cricket -style sweater for her favourite Saturday sport — shopping.
The pair took an impromptu break from a family weekend with Charles and Harry at their Cotswolds home Highgrove, and popped into a couple of high street stores in nearby Cirencester.
Unusually for Di, she emerged empty-handed.
But Wills, ten, bagged a present and smiled: You're a real sport, Mum
MI5 WERE SNOOPING ON DIANA!
JEFF EDWARDS
SECRET service agents HAVE been snooping on Princess Diana and other members of the Royal Family, The People can reveal.
MI5 — the ‘spycatcher’ agency charged with rooting out subversives — routinely studies reports on the private lives of the young Royals.
And it is believed to have compiled a file on James Gilbey, the Princess's friend alleged to be the male voice on the ‘Dianagate’ tapes.
The news will fuel claims of a ‘dirty tricks’ campaign against Diana.
The suggestion is that MI5 officers may be leaking some of the information.
On Friday, Scotland Yard strongly denied reports that Royal Protection Group officers were asked to supply details to the security services of secret visits to a man friend, said to be Gilbey, by the Princess of Wales.
Names
But The People can reveal that MI5 officers, as a matter of course, scan a detailed log kept by the Royal police bodyguard at their HQ in Buckingham Palace.
The log is filled in every day by protection officers detailing their duties.
It contains information about official and personal engagements and also reports when a Royal has asked minders to stay discreetly in the background.
Copies of the log are sent every week to MI5.
One Royal Protection officer said: ‘If one of our charges wanted to spend the night with a friend, all the details — who, where, when and for how long — would be recorded.
‘The security services can see these reports any time they want.
‘We all know they do their own checks on the Royals, especially the young ones, and their circle of friends.’
The officer added: ‘They have almost certainly been scrutinising James Gilbey.
‘Officially they are trying to identify any threat or risk.
But the information could be used any way they wanted.’
GILBEY: Spy target
AMAZING SEX SLUR ON ANDY BY THE TACKY Mr TAKI
PHIL TAYLOR & BRIAN WELLS
PRINCE Andrew has become the victim of a disgraceful sex slur in a magazine article by a society columnist.
Taki Theodoracopulos claims that the Prince has a ‘dark secret’.
And the Greek playboy, who spent three months in a British jail for possessing cocaine, wrote in the upmarket New York Observer: ‘It is not hard to guess what the secret is.’
He also repeats gay allegations he made last April against Prince Andrew's younger brother Edward on a controversial American TV show.
The explosive interview was repeated on TV last week.
Taki, who has homes in London, New York and Italy, wrote in the Observer article: ‘The Queen is titular head of the Church of England, yet three of her four children have made unsuccessful marriages.
‘Her fourth child is paid out of the public purse to pursue a theatrical career and assorted bachelors.’
Tacky Taki also claims that Andrew's estranged wife Fergie could be planning to sell her story — and that her ‘financial adviser’ John Bryan is negotiating on her behalf.
‘I am now told that he's hawking her story around for a six-figure sum,’ he writes in the 100,000-circulation journal, which is read mainly by journalists, stock-brokers and media personalities.
In a scurrilous attack on the Queen, the divorced father-of-two adds: ‘She must get out of her gilded cage and realise it is 1992, not 1772.’
Taki caused a huge uproar in April when he appeared on America's Fox TV, owned by Rupert Murdoch.
Steve Dunleavy, who is the host of the show, A Current Affair, said: ‘I was asking Taki about all the royals when he came out with this claim about Prince Edward.’
He revealed: ‘I have interviewed Taki again for an upcoming show, and he told me that he has been in Prince Andrew's company on several occasions.
‘After dinner at Annabel's one night, he told me he came to the conclusion that Andrew is ‘boorish and extremely dumb’.
‘Taki told me they were all sitting at a table telling jokes over dinner when suddenly there was a royal command — a spoon tinkling on a glass.
‘Andrew wanted to tell a joke, and it was not very good.
It was simply crude.’
Last night, Princess Di's step-grandmother Dame Barbara Cartland said at her Hertfordshire home: ‘This is just another one of these nasty anti-Royal stories that come out in America.
Jealous
‘The Americans are so jealous because they haven't got a Royal Family of their own.
They are always doing this kind of thing.
‘As for the claims about Prince Edward, I have never heard any suggestion that he's gay.
I am sure this is completely untrue.’
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said of Taki's allegations: ‘I wouldn't waste my time commenting on this.’
Meanwhile, the Duchess of York's mother, Mrs Susan Barrantes, denied giving a sensational interview about her daughter, which included claims that the Duchess may be the victim of an ‘establishment plot’.
The interview with the Italian magazine Gente, widely reported in British newspapers, was ‘complete fabrication’, she said.
But the magazine hit back by producing a picture of Mrs Barantes with one of their journalists.
NEW CALL ON MELLOR TO RESIGN
LABOUR'S Bryan Gould last night called on Minister of Fun David Mellor to quit.
Rumours suggest the Heritage Secretary won't be able to steer a Press privacy bill through the Commons following his affair with actress Antonia de Sancha.
‘If he can't do his job he should consider his position,’ said Mr Gould.
‘If not, John Major should do it for him.’
Golly!
BT has gone and lost a gooli
BE PREPARED to take a ribbing from the Scouts, British Telecom — you've really dropped a gooli in your new advertising campaign!
Every woggle-wearing youngster who's ever sat round a campfire knows there are four ‘goolis’ in their favourite chorus, Ging Gang Goo.
But Telecom's latest expensive ads only have three — AND they're spelt wrongly.
A Scout Association spokesman said: ‘They didn't contact us and now they've got it wrong.
I'm afraid they didn't do their homework.’
The song, sung by generations of cubs and scouts, begins: ‘Ging gang gooli, gooli, gooli, gooli watch-a.’
Campaign
But Paul Simons, boss of the ad agency which dreamed up the campaign, insisted: ‘The song can have either three or four goolies.’
Mike McGear, brother of Paul McCartney, and ex-member of The Scaffold which took the song into the charts in 1969, said: ‘Speaking as a world expert on goolies, there are definitely four of them.
‘Funnily enough, I was doing a charity show two weeks ago to raise money for our local scouts and I had to sing it so I know there are four goolies in the song.’
A BT spokesman said: ‘It's not worth getting your woggles in a twist over.’
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE
Ready when you are, Mr De Mille
THE incredible saga of our dear Royal Family gets more bizarre by the minute.
Allegations and denials about country hideaways, romantic recordings and Princess Di's secret assignations fly in all directions.
Now Fergie's mum has entered the fray.
She's refuting claims that she thinks the famous topless photos were a Palace plot to discredit the Duchess.
No wonder Hollywood can hardly wait to make the House of Windsor movie.
CALLED SEX, LIES AND AUDIOTAPE?
Crisis?
What crisis?
JOHN MAJOR is acting like an ostrich with his head stuck in the sand.
Despite the country's mounting problems at home and abroad, the Prime Minister arrogantly rejects Labour demands to recall Parliament.
He says there is no justification for doing so.
No justification?
Mr. Major must be blind as well as blinkered if he can't see the serious, dangerous and dismal developments which have reached crisis point since MPs went on holiday six weeks ago.
EUROPEAN UNITY and the whole future of the EC is threatened if the French vote No in the Maastricht referendum two weeks from today.
BRITISH troops have become involved in both Bosnia and Iraq.
THE POUND is under pressure, its value propped up only by massive Government borrowing of more than 7 billion.
UNEMPLOYMENT edges towards the three million mark, the highest for five years.
SMALL BUSINESSES are collapsing at the rate of one every 10 minutes.
HOUSE PRICES have fallen even further, with no sign of recovery.
Not only that, but the Royal Family is in turmoil and the weather's been awful.
Sometimes it seems the entire nation is falling apart!
Yet Mr Major turned up to watch the cricket at Lord's yesterday looking like a man without a care in the world.
Talk about Nero fiddling while Rome burns.
Just what would convince the Prime Minister that the country is in crisis.
AN INVASION FROM OUTER SPACE?
Classroom cover-up
RECORD-BREAKING pass levels in the GCSE examinations were a complete sham.
Some of the questions were so easy that they could have been answered by a 10-year-old, let alone a student of 16.
Blame for this fiasco is being laid at the door of everyone from teachers to examiners.
But the whole thing smacks of a cover-up to conceal the truth about falling standards in our schools.
What good is an educational system which fools youngsters into thinking they are much cleverer than they really are and lets them loose on the working world (not that there's much work there) with worthless qualifications?
The GCSE debacle has shown up serious shortcomings not only in our examination process but also in our whole education policy.
LET'S HOPE THE GOVERNMENT HAS LEARNED THE LESSON
Kill bid charge
STABBED soccer ace Mickey Thomas's ex-sister-in-law was remanded on bail in Prestatyn, accused of trying to murder him.
Erica Dean's husband has also been charged
HIGH-SPEED TRAIN DRAMA
TWO HUNDRED passengers escaped ‘near disaster’ last night after vandals laid metal seats and railway sleepers across a main line.
The inter-city train from Liverpool ground to a halt near Berkhampstead, Herts, after hitting several obstacles at full speed.
Insp David Taylor of the British Transport police said it was fortunate that the train did not career off the track.
‘We came very close to a serious accident, a near disaster,’ he said.
Pamela's on guard!
PLAYBOY beauty Pamela Anderson is more than just a pretty face — she's got real sax appeal.
The actress who appeared nude in the glamour mag has now got a slightly more covered-up role as a saxophone-playing lifeguard in ITV's Baywatch.
Pamela, 26, plays sexy newcomer C.J. Parker in a series of the beach saga currently being filmed in California.
Pamela reckons Baywatch will be a good showcase.
She know women in the show are called the beach blonde bimbos, but she thinks she will have fun with her character.
She said: ‘They have incorporated a lot of me in the role.
and, like C.J., I play the sax.’
BRAVE STAR JOE HUNTS FOR A MIRACLE CURE
Mix-up in his cancer fight
JOHN DEIGHTON
ENTERTAINER Joe Longthorne has been involved in an amazing drugs mix-up in his search for a miracle cure for his cancer.
Britain's top singer-impressionist told The People and friends he was planning to take the AIDS wonder drug AZT in a desperate fight against lymphoma, a rare and deadly form of cancer which he contracted four years ago.
But The People can reveal that brave Joe, famed for his take-offs of Tom Jones and Shirley Bassey, had got horribly confused because of his intense worry over the disease.
Romany-born Joe, 38, had twice told us: ‘Apparently they've found the AIDS drug can help cancer victims.
‘I don't know if it will work.
If there is a chance, I'll give it a go.’
But Wellcome, the company that manufactures AZT, said: ‘It is registered as a drug for the sole treatment of HIV infection and AIDS.’
And when The People spoke to Joe's specialist, Dr Tony Child, of Leeds General Infirmary, he said: ‘I have never suggested Joe takes AZT.’
After we told Joe, he wrote to us explaining he had mixed up AZT with the cancer drug Interferon, known as IFN.
‘I may have said AZT in our interviews but that was a mistake,’ he wrote.
‘They all sound the same to me!
I apologise for any confusion.’
IFN is not a cure but can stabilise a tumour.Dr Child said: ‘Joe's present chemotherapy has reduced the disease to a minimal extent.
‘But he still has a malignant disease in the background.
How he copes is clearly going to influence what he says to people.
‘IFN might be helpful to Joe but no decision has been taken.’
Joe, given only three months to live when his lymphoma was diagnosed, was on 30 pills a day.
Now he takes only a ‘blast’ of pills monthly.
He said: ‘Every day is a bonus.
I'm sure the cancer will come back.
‘I'm not frightened of dying because Dr Child gave me the right attitude: Think of the future and be hopeful.’
Joe admits to being ‘not a very happy person.’
But he says he isn't hurt by gay slurs.
‘I have a lot of friends who are gay.
But I won't go screaming about saying I'm gay or not.
As far as I'm concerned, it's live and let live.’
Joe — finishing his Bournemouth shows last night before a national tour — added: God has been a great solace to me, plus the love of my fans.’
CONFUSED JOE: Drugs sounded the same
Poisoned food rap
UNEMPLOYED Paul Smith, 27, of Cheltenham, Glos, was remanded in custody yesterday, accused of threatening to poison food on sale at the town's Boots the Chemist
WEDDING STREAK
RUGBY streaker Erika Roe, 34 — the girl who shocked Twickenham in 1982 — married her Dutch boyfriend yesterday in Blandford, Dorset
VOLCANO MUD TERROR
THOUSANDS of islanders fled in terror yesterday as 20ft walls of boiling mud and ash roared down the slopes of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines.
The scalding flood swamped hundreds of homes and many people were plucked to safety by helicopter.
More than 800 islanders died when the volcano erupted last year and 31 have been killed by mudflows since mid-August
ASIAN CABBIES SET TO QUIT IN MURDER FEAR
Killing sparks racist terror
VIKRAM DODD
A CITY'S terror-stricken minicab drivers are threatening to quit their jobs in fear after the murder of a young cabbie.
Twenty-year-old Ashiq Hussain was knifed outside the office of the Birmingham city centre taxi firm where he worked, coming to the rescue of a fellow driver who had been racially abused and harassed by three white passengers.
Police say the attack on Ashiq, married with an 18-month-old daughter, appeared senseless and that they can't rule out a racial motive.
Eighty per cent of Birmingham's 3,000 minicab drivers are Asian and they are facing shocking levels of violence.
Pat Murtagh, who chairs Birmingham's private hire car federation, said that drivers face a nightmare every time they sit behind the wheel.
She said last night: ‘All the night drivers put their lives on the line.
Fear has driven many of them out of the job.
Violence
‘Asian drivers are coming under pressure from their families to quit.
Every passenger is a potential attacker.
‘But we can't really protect them.
Drivers are in such close proximity to passengers and there is no grille between them as in black cabs.
Attacks on taxi drivers are a social sickness.
Ashiq Hussain won't be the last driver to be killed if this level of violence continues.
‘The number of violent attacks is increasing.
Asian drivers suffer considerably.
They get picked on more than white drivers.’
Some drivers are reported to have taken the law into their own hands by illegally carrying weapons to defend themselves.
Police revealed Ashiq was also attacked just a week before his murder.
One passenger put a rope round his neck as he was driving and another robbed him.
Colleagues at his firm, Red & White Taxis, said Ashiq dismissed it as a hazard of the job.
On the night of Ashiq's murder, another young Asian cabbie was stabbed in the arm during a robbery.
Some of Ashiq's shocked colleagues have been off work since the murder.
Anti-racist campaigners say Ashiq was the sixth racist murder victim this year.
George Adamson of Birmingham Racial Attacks Monitoring Unit, said: ‘It looks like there was a racial motive to this killing.’
Police have now identified a man believed to be one of Ashiq's attackers from a video recording and are trying to find him.
Forensic scientists are examining banknotes the three used to pay for a meal at a restaurant just yards from the depot where Ashiq was killed.
THREE Asians have been murdered in London this year and two killed in Manchester.
VICTIM: Ashiq died helping a colleague
ROBBED OF DAD: Ashiq's daughter, Samaira
TERRY MARSH'S SEX-SWAP BROTHER NICKED WIFE'S DRESSES!
PAUL DAVIDSON
GENDER-BENDER Billy Marsh walked off with half his wife's wardrobe…and left her with a pile of debts.
Billy — big brother of boxing hero Terry Marsh — insists on being called Jilly after announcing he is planning a sex-change.
The thrice-married father-of-seven now wears a blonde wig and struts around in high heels and slinky skirts.
But his angry third wife, Kim, revealed yesterday: ‘Most of his clothes are mine.
He filched them from my wardrobe when I kicked him out.
He left me struggling with 4,000 owing on loans — and two children to bring up.
Then he has the cheek to say he needs another 6,000 for his sex-change operation.
‘If he comes round here I'll do it for nothing.’
Pretty dark-haired Kim, 30, married Marsh in 1989.
But three months ago social services worker Marsh, 40, started wearing women's clothes.
‘He was so macho — I never suspected a thing,’ Kim said at her home in Basildon, Essex.
‘But then he told me he wanted to be a woman.
It's a shame he didn't say that before he asked me to marry him.’
Now Kim wants a divorce and has barred Marsh from seeing their children, Scott, two and Kayla, one.
Handbag
‘When he first told me, I tried to understand him and agreed he could dress up once a week at home.
‘But in the end I couldn't take it any more and told him to leave.
‘We had a massive fight — I hit him with my handbag and he hit me with his.
‘Next day he packed his bags and I found he had taken a load of my clothes,’ added Kim.
‘His favourite outfit, a leather jacket with a black polka-dot mini-dress underneath, was mine.
He even took some of my old bras and tights.’
Marsh said: ‘I don't blame Kim for being angry — I did leave her in a bad financial situation.’
He said he hadn't heard from his former light-welterweight world champ brother Terry since revealing his sex-change plans.
‘I used to be the black sheep of the family,’ he said.
‘Now I suppose I'm the black ewe.’
ALL CHANGE: Billy as Jilly Picture: MIKE MALONEY
WEDDING DAY: Bride Kim and her ‘macho’ man Billy
BROTHER: Boxer Terry
LAST-RACE DEATH OF BIKE CHAMP
MOTORBIKE champ Craig Mason died in his last race before quitting the sport.
He hit a kerb and spun out of control in a TT race on the Isle of Man.
Surgeons battled in vain for ten hours to try to save the 32-year-old National Clubman's 250cc champion from Syston, Leics.
Grieving father Wally yesterday said: ‘This was going to be Craig's last race because he couldn't afford to carry on.
‘It was costing him thousands.’
Insurance salesman Craig re-mortgaged his house to buy the bike he crashed on.
His mother Joyce said: ‘Craig lived for racing.
He didn't worry about the risks.’
Fellow-rider John Judge of Burnley, Lancs, died in another crash in the same race.
Policewoman attacked in churchyard
THREE teenage youths who attacked a lone policewoman were being hunted yesterday.
The woman constable went to speak to the youths, aged 16 to 19, as they loitered in a churchyard in Guildford, Surrey.
‘She was attacked, punched in the stomach and kicked repeatedly on the ground,’ said a police spokesman.
‘It was a particularly nasty and vicious assault.’
NEWS DIGEST
Bofors row
INDIA'S Supreme Court suspended a High Court ruling blocking a bribery case probe of a 1987 arms deal with AB Bofors of Sweden
Rail tragedy
FORTY-ONE people were killed and 200 injured in a train crash at Kirodimal Nagar in Madhya Pradesh, India
Peace move
PREMIER Nawaz Sharif has invited India's P V Narasimha Rao to visit Pakistan to discuss the Kashmir issue
300 Sikhs go
PAKISTAN has deported 300 Afghan Sikhs who fled last month's faction fighting in Kabul.
SCHOOL FOR BOUNCERS
BOUNCERS are facing a crash course in ethnic minority awareness as part of a campaign to reduce weekend violence.
The move comes as the number of violent assaults in Newcastle upon Tyne last year reached an all-time high of 500.
Some were race-related.
From next week, all bouncers will undergo a compulsory two-week training course and examination run by Northumbria police.
A spokesman said: ‘There are ways of calming an aggressive drinker more acceptable than a head butt or kick between the legs.’
FAST-THREAT MUM WINS VISA BATTLE
MARTYN HALLE
A PREGNANT mum who threatened to starve herself and her unborn child to death in an immigration row is toasting victory this weekend.
Desperate Jatinder Puri said she had been left with no alternative after her husband had been refused an entry visa three times.
After four days of fasting, High Commission officials in Delhi relented and gave the go-ahead for the couple to be reunited.
Jatinder, 25, from Stoke Newington, North London, who is eight months pregnant, has a two-year-old son, Taaran.
Her husband, Gurinder, married her after they met while she was on holiday in Delhi in 1989.
Jatinder, who was born in London, said: ‘I decided to fast because life without my husband would have been unbearable.’
Jatinder came back to England two years ago as their son could not cope with the Indian climate.
The couple's life together has been restricted to holidays.
A delighted Jatinder said: ‘Gurinder will be home in time for my dad's birthday and well in time for the birth of our baby.’
British immigration officials had refused to allow the couple to be reunited because they feared the marriage would not last
STORM OVER ‘CUT OFF THIEVES’ HANDS'
JOHN BURKE-DAVIES
A FURIOUS row has erupted over a Muslim leader's call to lop off thieves' hands.
He said it would enable Britain to cut its police forces by half.
Dr Kalim Siddiqui, head of the Muslim ‘parliament’, urged the drastic action in a candid radio interview.
He said: ‘If we cut off the right hands of thieves in this country, we would be well off— because then there would be no burglaries.’
And he added during the chat with Ludovic Kennedy on Radio 4's Beyond Belief: ‘Theft would disappear.
‘A few people would lose their hands to begin with — but very soon we would be able to cut down the size of our police forces by at least 50 per cent.
We would save money all round.’
But Sahib Mustaqim Bleher, general secretary of the Islamic Party of Great Britain, slammed Dr Siddiqui's idea.
He said: ‘He knows perfectly well how to hit the headlines and there seem to be no depths to which he will not plummet.
Culprit
‘Islamic laws are more just and effective, as far as the offender is concerned — and as far as the public that needs to be protected is concerned.
As a whole they are better laws.’
But he added: ‘Islamic laws only apply in a just society — not one where society itself is the culprit.
‘To call for them to be applied to a non-Muslim society is nonsense.’
Other Islamic penalties include stoning to death those found guilty of indulging in extra-marital sex.
And anyone found guilty of drinking alcohol may be subjected to 80 lashes of a cane.
The punishments, known as Hadd, are in force in many Islamic countries including Iran, where Dr Siddiqui is a frequent visitor.
The outspoken doctor was a friend of the late Ayatollah Khomenei.
ROW: Siddiqui
CHAT: Ludovic
TWIN SUCCESS
TWINS Damon and Adam Shilton, 17, both passed their driving tests on the same day in Dudley, West Midlands.
Proud mum Anita said: ‘They make a habit of doing things together.’
DOG ALERT TO TRAGEDY
GRIEVING Alfie Barney discovered his wife Daisy was dead after their dog limped home alone.
He rang police to say she was missing — and was told she had been killed under the wheels of a tractor.
Daisy, 57, of Hindon, near Salisbury, Wilts, was hit as she walked the dog to a nearby village.
The pet was injured, but managed to stagger home
WE'VE GOTTI A LOTTI OF PAVAROTTI
Lookalike Jeff gets in tune for a new class act
PAY attention, class.
Here's a nice simple question to ease you back into school.
Who's this larger-than-life character with the outstretched arms, the tenor who sings Nessun Dorma like a dream?
Si, it's your new music teacher Jeff Harding.
The spitting image of Luciano Pavarotti begins a fresh career on Tuesday at Sir James Smith School in Camelford, Cornwall.
Jeff, 38, has other remarkable similarities to the Italian maestro.
He's a classically trained tenor and concert entertainer — and even performs Pav's World Cup theme Nessun Dorma.
‘I do get some funny looks from people,’ Jeff said.
‘But Pavarotti is a little fuller in the face.’
And probably a little more full by now.
Pav rushed through Heathrow yesterday on his way home from New York, panting: ‘I can't stop — I'm late for dinner.’
JUST ONE CORNISH TEACHER: Jeff bears a remarkable resemblance to maestro Pavarotti (inset).
‘I do get some funny looks,’ he say
Street's Emily saves donkey
CORONATION Street's Emily Bishop has saved her donkey namesake.
Eileen Derbyshire, who plays Emily in the TV soap, adopted four-legged Emily in a sanctuary at Buxton, Derby.
She said: ‘It's an honour to share a name with such a sweet little thing.’
Squeeze for blind babies
A CHARITY that helps blind babies and teaches them how to smile is running out of money.
Manchester-based Eyeline faces closure unless it gets an urgent 12,000 cash injection.
Consultant surgeon Alan Ridgway said: ‘It would be a tragedy because they provide a vital service.
‘But there are so many demands on the public's compassion these days that funding is hard to find.’
Eyeline spokesman Rosie Johnson said: ‘We don't need a vast sum but without it, we'll be forced to close.’
Pimp we exposed is jailed
A VICIOUS pimp — exposed by The People — who beat up prostitutes working for his vice ring has been jailed for three-and-half-years.
Jobless Mohammed Aylaus, of Surbiton, Surrey, nabbed after The People handed evidence to police, threatened to shoot a prostitute and her children when he discovered she had been witholding money from him, Reading Crown Court was told.
‘After twisting my arms, he pulled out a huge knife and said: ‘Start speaking or I'll start slicing’,’ another prostitute told the court.
Prosecutor Nigel Rumfitt said: ‘Aylaus had previously had a number of taped telephone conversations with Mr Ray Levine, a reporter with The People.
‘He began an investigation after complaints from local residents and visited the premises at Maidenhead but, in the traditions of The People, he then made his excuses and left.’
SONGBIRD LISA BLOWS FUSE AT LIGHTS SHOW
FURIOUS singer Lisa Stansfield threatened to ‘deck’ a councillor's wife, it was claimed yesterday.
She angrily warned that she would quit a resort's big night if the woman didn't stop filming her.
And Lisa and her minders were ‘disgusting’ during a swanky dinner, an MP alleged.
The row erupted after the 26-year-old star switched on Blackpool's famous illuminations.
Gaynor Wynne was filming her with a camcorder during a champagne reception at the Imperial Hotel.
Her husband Robert, a Liberal councillor, said: ‘Lisa threatened to deck her if she didn't stop filming.
Then the minders threatened to smash up Gaynor's camcorder.’
He said he had made a complaint to the police.
Harold Elletson, Tory MP for Blackpool North, slammed the dinner table antics of Lisa's group.
He said: ‘They had no respect.
They flicked bread at people during the meal and showed no manners.’
Lisa was heckled during her speech of thanks for some crystalware — given to her as part of the Diamond Jubilee celebration of the Blackpool Lights.
The star also invited the 300 guests to ‘get drunk’.
Blackpool tourism spokesman John Hall said Lisa felt Gaynor's filming was too intrusive.
He add-ed: ‘She had co-operated earlier for photographs.’
Lisa's publicity manager Jacqueline Keeley said: ‘It was a fun day — let's just leave it at that.’
FUMING: Star Lisa
FLISH ‘N’ CRIPS GO DOWN A TREAT IN HONG KONG
PETER WOOLRICH
DANNY BUCKLAND
BRITAIN may be pulling out of Hong Kong but trusty Tykes are putting the chips down in the battle for the hearts — and stomachs — of the Chinese.
A branch of Harry Ramsden's fish and chips, a legendary name in the world of Yorkshire grub, opened in the colony this week and business is booming.
Surrounded by sizzling noodle stalls and noisy restaurants offering such delicacies as sea slug, the chippy in old Chinatown is doing roaring trade as the Chinese clamour for haddock and chips with mushy peas.
‘My old dad would have been right proud,’ said 68-year-old Harry Ramsden junior, who opened the shop.
‘I just wish he could have been here to see it.’
Some of the first customers were the crew of aircraft carrier HMS Invincible on a courtesy visit to Hong Kong.
‘This is great.
This is brilliant grub,’ said sailor Russ Haines, from Cornwall.
‘Word spread around the ship and most of the lads have been down now.’
But there have been a few problems in trying to explain to the Chinese the finer points of a fish supper.
Waitress Joanne Stevenson, 22, from Belfast, said: ‘The Chinese have never heard of most things on the menu.
Mushy
‘Mushy peas are described as the Caviar of the North, but the average Chinaman has never heard of caviar and thinks the ‘North’ is Outer Mongolia.’
They're also baffled by the large glassfuls of warm beer the expatriates drink with their meals.
But the taste is clearly addictive.
In one day last week customers ate more than 8,000 pounds-worth of grub — which is more than the takings at the original Harry Ramsden's restaurant in Guiseley last Bank Holiday.
Harry junior said: ‘I knew the ex-pats here would buy it but I never dreamed it would be so popular with the Chinese.
‘They love it and there are more of them coming all the time.’
He chuckled and added: ‘Who would have thought it.
Good old fish and chips in Hong Kong.’
It's all a far cry from Harry Ramsden senior's original restaurant — a humble green and white hut at the gateway to the Yorkshire Dales.
‘Harry had a chip shop in Bradford and it was because of his wife's health that he decided to move out to the Dales in 1928,’ said Richard Richardson, Harry Ramsden's marketing director.
Soon the hut was transformed into a palace with chandeliers, stained glass windows and pristine white table-cloths.
‘He decided that people wanted something completely different and he spent 6,000, a fortune in those days, fitting the place out.’
‘No bank would lend him the money but Harry made it work.’
Business is still booming today with chippies in Blackpool, Glasgow and Heathrow airport.
Batter
Harry senior died in 1963, but his son is convinced that his dad is still around.
‘He's there, all right.
If the chips aren't right or the batter mix isn't quite what it should be, he lets us know,’ he said.
And he's sure to be keeping a fatherly eye on the Chinese as they tuck into their flish ‘n’ crips!
GLUB'S UP: The Chinese tuck into fish and chips at Harry Ramsden's
PLAICE YOUR ORDERS: Harry opens shop
Scottish 1 saves wee fortune
Gurbir Dhillon
SCOTTISH pound notes are saving hard-up guests a fortune at Asian weddings.
Friends and relatives are expected to give paper money to the happy couple after traditional ceremonies, writes Gurbir Dhillon.
Sometimes parents even decorate the couple with a garland made of paper money.
But, since the introduction of the 1 coin, the smallest English note is 5.
Now people are saving cash by giving Scottish 1 notes, which are legal in England.
Newly-wed Sandeep Gill, 23 admitted she received more than 300 of the notes at her wedding in Woolwich, South London, last week.
She was also given old 1 notes from some cash-strapped couples.
‘We got quite a few people giving us their old notes which was quite naughty — especially as the bank refused to change them.’
At a typical wedding, the bride and groom can expect to collect more than 5,000.
Newsagent Baldev Bhoma, from Gravesend, Kent, said he saved all his Scottish currency for his Asian customers.
‘Every weekend I get a rush of Indians wanting 1 notes for weddings,’ he said.
‘I can't keep up with the demand.’
The Royal Bank of Scotland said demand for Scottish notes in England rocketed after the introduction of 1 coins
Cops set up no-go areas for Asians in the frontline
MARTIN BURTON
POLICE are setting up special no-go areas to carnival revellers in a bid to protect frightened shopkeepers and residents — many o f them Asian — at a carnival next weekend.
They are shutting off 35 roads in Handsworth, Birmingham, to create 28 ‘public safety zones’ for the event which is expected to attract 500,000 visitors.
This is the first time the tactic has been used, effectively creating a barrier between the residents at risk and the revellers.
Fears are growing that the event will trigger violence following the trouble which broke out during a recent ‘warm-up’ session for the reggae extravaganza.
Dozens of youths went on a mugging rampage.
Now Asian residents, many of whom run businesses, fear they will be in the front line of any flare-up and even be picked out as special targets.
Police Chief Superintendent David Baker said of the flare-up: ‘It was a family day out with a carnival atmosphere right up to the end of the evening.
That was destroyed by a criminal gang of youths who took advantage of people on the streets.’
During last year's carnival, an electrical sub-station was sabotaged, plunging the area into darkness, allowing troublemakers to embark on an orgy of looting and vandalism.
Chief Supt Baker added: ‘The carnival is too big for Handsworth now and there are more suitable parks, big and accessible enough to cope better than the cramped Victorian streets of Handsworth.
‘But that is a matter for the City Council.’
CARNIVAL organiser Tex Flint said: ‘Floats come from all over the country to take part in the festivities, but sadly some criminals also come for their own reasons.’
One Asian supermarket owner said: ‘It will be lights out and shutters down.’
And Inderjit Singh, of the Council of Sikh Gurdwaras, said: ‘Handsworth always finishes up as a chaotic dump and the traders are scared.
‘It does not make any sense to hold it here any more.
Because of its reputation, the traders cannot get insurance cover and they don't report all the crimes.’
A council spokeswoman said: ‘By its nature the carnival is very noisy, but we will listen to any representations that are made for future events.’
NEW MEASURE: Chief Superintendent David baker, who hit out at thugs behind the street violence that spoiled the recent carnival warm-up and (inset) carnival organiser Tex Flint
Big Macs are OK!
THE McDonald's fast-food restaurants in Singapore now have a certificate to use halal meat, allowing Muslims to dig into their first Big Mac
Girl, 4 hunted
LITTLE Laura Konan, four, was being hunted by Interpol last night after her French father failed to return her to her mother Rosalyn Wigham's home in Blyth, Northumberland, after a day out
Najma earns praise of fans but not mum!
GEOFF ELLIS
SULTRY Najma Akhtar was voted most popular international artist in the UK Asian Pop Awards this week — but her mother STILL thinks she'd be better off as a doctor or a chemical engineer.
Najma's family tried to talk her out of a singing career as not quite suitable for a good Muslim girl, but she persevered and in 1984 won Britain's Asian song contest on her first public appearance.
Four albums later and with a growing number of awards to her daughter's credit, mother Safiqua is reconciled to Najma's career.
‘I would still prefer her to be a doctor or an engineer,’ sighs Safiqua, who is the one who usually fields family criticism.
Najma, who has a degree in chemical engineering, sets off next Saturday on a tour arranged by the Arts Council -funded Asian Music Circle starting at Dundee University.
She goes on to Glasgow, London and Peterborough.
Title
Her new album, Pukar, is selling strongly and she makes her acting debut soon, playing an aspiring young musician in the Asian TV soap Family Pride.
In 1991 Najma was voted best female singer in the pop awards.
This year that title went to Sangeeta, at the Dome in Birmingham, with Balwinder Safri voted best male singer and Dippa the best male newcomer.
Malkit Singh was voted most popular international male artist.
In the group awards, Pardesi and Achaanak shared top spot for the best band, with Apna Sangeeta the best live band and Shaktee best upcoming band.
Best newcomers were Arnki.
Safri cleaned up in the song awards, with Par Linghade judged best dance song and best cover song and Bomb The Tombi the best album.
It shared the best single award with Bhangra Muffin
£2,200 bill for a cold
WHEN publican John Cockerton, 40, caught a cold on a sunshine holiday island, he ended up with a medical bill for £2,200.
Within 15 minutes of entering a clinic in Tenerife, he was diagnosed as having possible terminal bronchial pneu-monia.
John, who runs the Bowerham Hotel, Lan-caster, spent five days in hospital before signing himself out.
Now his insurance company is investigating the clinic's demand for £2,200.
John — fit and well — said: ‘The clinic's doctors just tried to fool me I was dying so they could make money.’
‘SANTA’ RUNS OFF WITH £1m FROM PENSIONERS
BRIAN RADFORD
RAT OF THE WEEK
A ROBERT MAXWELL copycat has disappeared after looting £1 million from his company's pension fund.
Just like Maxwell, he used the fund to prop up his ailing company and got a family member to countersign cheques.
To complete the link, he even bought his factory from the disgraced newspaper publisher!
Shocked and furious pensioners of Peak Design Ltd are hunting silver-tongued chairman
Ted Hunter 65, and his third wife, Jenny, 36, formerly his company secretary.
Hunter paid Maxwell £900,000 for his factory at Somercotes, near Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
Like Maxwell, smoothy Hunter tried to come across as everyone's friend, especially at Christmas when, dressed as Santa, he handed gifts to children of staff.
Before its recent collapse,
Peak Design supplied furniture to MFI and other major stores throughout Europe.
Altogether £1m is missing from the pension fund and a further £1m is owed to creditors.
Hunter's financial adviser David Carter, from Dartford, Kent, was last month jailed for two years for conspiring to defraud the pension fund of a large engineering company in the Midlands.
Jacuzzi
Hunter owns a villa in Spain and thrives on mixing with millionaires in jet-set Marbella on the Costa del Sol.
His enormous Elizabe-than country home is now for sale at £600,000 in Gainsborough, Lincs.
Set in 4.3 acres of superb grounds, it has a full security system, including video-controlled electric gates, an all-weather floodlit tennis court, heated indoor swimming-pool with jacuzzi, six-bedrooms, three bathrooms and five reception rooms.
Independent trustees Bradstock & Blunt are now administering the pension fund.
A spokesman said official documents indicated that Hunter and manag-ing-director Paul Thomas were sole trustees.
But Mr Thomas emphatically denied this to The People, stressing that he had resigned as a trustee two years ago.
‘His wife Jenny Hunter took over,’ he said.
‘Anything that needed to be countersigned was done by her.’
Former managing-director Peter Marrison said: ‘Hunter has run off with my pension.
I had pushed it up to £25,000.
‘The facts show that he was helping himself.’
Irate pensioner Kevin Higgins told me: ‘Just like Maxwell, he tried to play the good guy.
‘He had the same smarmy patter.
Two peas from the same pod.
The only difference is that Hunter is still alive.’
Derbyshire Fraud Squad have launched an investigation.
A spokeswoman said: ‘We are making inquiries into Peak Design.
We are looking at the pension and life assurance scheme.’
Hunter's solicitors, Shepherd and Harris, of Enfield, Middlesex, refused to come to the telephone to talk about their client.
IF there's anything you'd like investigated, write to People Investigations, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ.
Or phone 071 822 205 
ST NICK: Santa Claus Hunter hands out gifts
FOR SALE: Hunter's £600,000 Lincolnshire home
MISSING: Boss Hunter
STAR CAINE'S MUTINY A REAL DRAG!
DANNY BUCKLAND
SUPERSTAR Michael Caine got the sack from his first job in the movie business — after being caught smoking in the loo.
The Cockney multi-millionaire was just a 17-year-old hopeful working as a messenger with the Rank Organisation in London.
And he boobed when he sneaked off to an isolated toilet for a crafty fag — because his foreman was in the next cubicle.
‘He smelt the cigarette smoke and I was fired, typical of my luck during the first 30 years of my life,’ recalls Caine, 59.
‘Still, it's picked up a bit since.’
Caine says the sacking was the first of many set-backs before he broke into the big time more than a decade later with films like Zulu and Alfie.
‘I was only a messenger but it was the closest job to actually being in films that I could get,’ he told Expression magazine.
‘Unfortunately, no-one had explained the strict ruling of Sir J. Arthur Rank that you couldn't smoke anywhere in the building.’
SETBACK: Michael
AIDS WITNESS DIES
AIDS victim John McGugan has died after making British legal history — by becoming a key witness in a forthcoming sex pervert trial from beyond the grave.
The People revealed how the 35-year-old Scotsman was quizzed and cross-examined on his deathbed in Newcastle upon Tyne.
His evidence will be used in a homosexual rape trial.
It follows Operation Orchid, a police investigation into missing boys after a gang rape murder in London.
PHONEY TV SOAP GOES DOWN DRAIN
IAN BRANDES
A SELF-STYLED showbiz entrepre-neur's widely-publicised claims for a brand-new TV soap to rival Coronation Street and EastEnders were nothing but a load of froth.
Smooth-talking Pat O'Rourke said companies were clamouring for the rights to screen the yarn, Lifeboys.
He claimed it came from his fully- equipped TV centre above the pub he runs in the centre of Liverpool
A 45-minute show and six half-hour episodes were in the can.
Anne Diamond was so impressed, she even featured advance clips on her TV show.
But the project was all massively exaggerated by O'Rourke, a Walter Mitty conman just declared bankrupt.
There was no TV centre and the only filming was done in the pub by the local university's media studies department.
Lecturer Keith Birch, who set up the project, said: ‘Not even one episode was completed.’
Wild
O'Rourke, in his late forties, got involved when regulars at his pub, the Shipperies in inner Liverpool, said they wanted to stage their own soap and contacted Mr Birch.
His accomplished team started them off but with-drew support when O'Rourke started promot-ing the soap.
‘I kept hearing wild public statements and was disgusted,’ said Mr Birch.
Stevie Faye, one of the original TV Comedians, was recruited to play a wisecracking vicar.
‘But nothing ever happened,’ said Stevie.
‘I became very suspicious when he got several of us to sign contracts never to talk about Lifeboys.
‘He said a big TV deal was coming off.
That was obviously a load of rubbish.’
At his pub, deluded O'Rourke insisted last week that Lifeboys could still be going ahead.
And he claimed he was the victim of a ‘mystery’ vendetta.
O'Rourke with comic Stan Boardman and singer Lee Brenon
O'Rourke with his wife on their wedding day…before his wild soap stories
Gran-tastic!
Here are our great eight
Rose-y prospects of a super Barbados holiday for two
HERE they are, folks — the super grandmas (plus one grandad) who have won their way through to the final of The People/Cadbury's Roses Grandparent of the Year Competition.
We teamed up with Age Concern to find Britain's best grandparent and were delighted by the avalanche of heart-warming nomina-tions you sent in.
Now here are the great eight selected by our judges to take part in the Grand Final at London's swish Sheraton Park Tower on Friday, September 18.
The winner will receive Age Con-cern's prestigious Grandparent of the Year Award, a luxury 14-day holiday for two in Barbados and a year's supply of Cadbury's Roses chocolates.
The seven runners-up can choose a leisurely five-day holiday for two in Britain, from Shearings, plus a special box of Cadbury's Roses.
We'll be announcing our winner next week as a curtain-raiser to Age Concern Week.
In the meantime, don't forget it's Grandparents Day on September 26, when it's your chance to say a special thank-you.
Our eight finalists are: Mrs Helen McNulty from Armagh, Northern Ireland; Mrs Rose Collier, Liverpool; Mrs Ann Mooney, Manchester; Mrs Pauline Rushforth, Wakefield; Mrs Mary Edwards, Prestatyn, N. Wales; Mr Brian Aveyard, Nottingham; Mrs Shirley Lukic, Peterborough; Mrs Gladys Mortlock, from London.
Gladys Mortlock
Brian Aveyard
Ann Mooney
Rose Collier
Shirley Lukic
Mrs Rushforth
Mary Edwards
Helen McNulty
Mr Universe muscles in
FORMER Mr Universe Terry Phillips, 53, has been elected as a Conservative councillor in Knowsley, Merseyside.
MURDER LOVER IN FILM FURY
SOLICITOR Ken Pigot last night slammed ‘heartless’ TV chiefs for dramatising the murder of his lover.
The brutal contract killing of Shirley Rendell in 1983 is to be told next month in Deadly Obsession, part of ITV's Crime Story series.
But Ken, 69, of Yatton, near Bristol, said: ‘Everyone will be upset all over again.
It will reopen so many old wounds.
‘It's an insensitive and heartless thing to show.’
Jealous spinster Kath-leen Calhaem, who doted on Ken, hired part-time detective Julian Jones to batter Shirley to death at home in Yatton.
Calhaem and Jones were later jailed for life.
HTV West spokesman Jon Day said: ‘We are extremely sympathetic but the murder was horrific.
‘By televising it we are showing that the fight against crime is continuing all the time.’
Wooden it make you sick!
BRITAIN'S first X-rated puppet show is going out on Channel 4 — with full-frontal nudity and sadistic violence.
The film, Screen Play, features whipping scenes and has the naked wooden puppet hero being tortured with a cigarette.
DI'S HOME, THE GHOST AND THE EXORCIST
Spirit ousted to save dad
PRINCESS Diana's ancestral home was exorcised in a desperate attempt to save her dying father Earl Spencer.
The Spencer family feared the ghost of the Earl's father was slowly killing him following a stroke.
So wife Raine asked a clergyman to perform an ancient exorcism ritual at Althorp House, near Northampton.
The wandering spirit was ousted, Diana's younger brother Charles revealed in an exclusive interview, and their beloved dad recovered.
But the ghost was seen again just weeks before the Earl died from a heart attack earlier this year.
FULL STORY: Pages 2 and 3 
BELOVED FATHER: The late Earl with Princess Diana
‘WE'LL KILL YOU’ THREAT FOR DJ'S
VIKRAM DODD
AN Asian radio station has been rocked by a terror campaign just days before it launches.
Sunrise Radio bosses revealed that staff working for their new Leicester-based Midlands service have received chilling death threats in the middle of the night from a mystery caller.
And threats have been made to firebomb the studios of the new station.
Bosses have responded by placing a round-the-clock guard on the studios and have called in police.
But Sunrise Radio chief Avtar Lit has vowed that the service will go on the air on Tuesday as scheduled.
The telephone threats against three Sunrise DJs were made last Monday night.
One victim, who asked not to be named, said he was frightened for his life.
He said: ‘My wife took the call shortly after 1am.
The caller was a woman who shouted abuse.
‘Then the caller said, ‘Remember what happened to Rajiv Ghandi.
That's what will happen to your husband’.’
Furious
The launch of Sunrise has been surrounded by controversy.
A rival Asian service, Geet FM, was awarded a temporary licence by the Radio Authority to broadcast in Leicester, but that runs out tomorrow.
Furious Geet FM bosses have organised huge public meetings and demonstrations calling for it to be allowed to remain on the air.
But they denounced the death threats.
Hitin Majithia, from Geet FM, said: ‘We deplore and utterly condemn this.’
Geet FM complains that no franchise was ever advertised for an Asian service in Leicester.
Sunrise got the go-ahead for its new station after striking a deal with another radio station, Midland Radio, to take over one of its frequencies.
Hitin said his station should serve Leicester's 80,000 strong Asian community.
He said: ‘Asians want a local station run by local people.
Only 10 out of the 24 hours of Sunrise's daily programmes will be local.
The rest will be piped in from their station in London.
Leicester's Asians support us.’
Sunrise shines — Asian Extra, Page 3 
DEFIANT: Avtar Lit vows to carry on
FEUD CLAIMS NEW VICTIM
THE outlawed Irish People's Liberation Organisation yesterday admitted shooting dead father-of-three Michael Macklin at his West Belfast home.
The killing was alleged to be part of a continuing internal IPLO feud over money, guns and drugs.
Flying in the face of tradition!
THEY really have changed the guard at Buckingham Palace — to women.
These girls were pushed to the front line of the RAF's Central Band, in tune with equal opportunities.
The girls broke a 155-year male tradition by taking part in the Changing of the Guard ceremony yesterday.
And hundreds of sight-seers agreed: ‘They make sweet music.’
Griffin's People — Page 6
CLIFF-FALL ESCAPE
A YOUNG boy who fell 150ft from a cliff top at Pilgrims' Way in Reigate, Surrey, yesterday, escaped with only a broken leg.
Bogus copper fines driver
A BOGUS cop tricked a woman driver into paying a £37 on-the-spot fine for speeding.
The conman, driving a white car with POLICE on its sides, stopped his victim on the A14, near Barton Seagrave, Northants.
HOW THEY EXORCISED A GHOST TO SAVE DIANA'S DAD
Amazing story of why family feared grandad's spirit could kill Earl
DAN SLATER /MARK THOMAS /VICTOR OLLIVER
A SECRET exorcism took place at Princess Diana's ancestral home in a bid to save her dying father, The People can reveal.
Diana's family took the drastic action after the late Earl Spencer suffered a stroke — because they feared the ghost of his father Jack was KILLING him.
As the Earl lay close to death, they called in a clergyman to rid 16th Century Althorp House of the phantom.
The Church of England vicar blessed the Northamp-tonshire stately home, splashed holy water on the walls and said prayers to ward off the spirit.
Amazingly, the ghost disappeared after the exorcism — and the Earl made a speedy recovery.
The spooky ceremony was arranged by Di's step-mother Raine.
She believed her husband was troubled by the ghost of his father, the seventh Earl, because of an earlier feud.
The Spencer family kept mum about the exorcism at Althorp — visited by thousands of tourists every year.
But now Diana's younger brother Charles, who became the ninth Earl following his father's eventual death earlier this year, has exposed all the ghostly goings-on.
And he admitted he was shocked that an exorcist was brought in.
Charles, 27, said: ‘When my father had his first stroke, everything was tried as it was very likely he was going to die.
‘The exorcism was to get rid of my grandfather.
His ghost was seen as a negative force which might have something to do with my father's illness.
Visits
‘It is surprising that my stepmother resorted to something like that.
‘She was not somebody who would strike you as particularly religious or spiritual.
‘But it shows she was trying everything and it did put an end to the sightings at that time.’
Despite the rift between her father and grandfather, Diana was taken to Althorp for regular visits from her home on the Sandringham estate in Norfolk and became close to her grandparents.
Diana, then 14, was heartbroken when her grandfather died aged 83 in June 1975 — six years after her father's bitter divorce from her mum, now Mrs Frances Shand Kydd.
It was the following year that the ghost was seen at Althorp for the first time.
Five guests at a party thrown to welcome the Earl's new wife Raine, daughter of novelist Dame Barbara Cartland, spotted the ghost in the crowd.
Later the phantom was seen twice by the butler's wife.
She was so startled the first time that she said to it: ‘How nice to see you, my lord.’
Later, a painter working in the house fled in terror after seeing the late Earl walk past him down a corridor.
But it was only when Raine, now 62, decided the sightings were upset-ting her ailing husband that she decided to try to kill off the spook.
So, in 1978, she called in the Rev Victor Malan, of All Saints Church, Northampton, to exorcise the ghost once and for all.
However, in an amazing twist, the phantom reap-peared in January this year.
This time a tour guide at Althorp saw ‘the ghost of an old man’ going up the main staircase.
Just weeks later the Earl died from a heart attack in hospital, aged 68.
Consider
At the time the Princess — a firm believer in astrol-ogy, spiritualism and the after-life — was abroad skiing.
Charles Spencer said: ‘There was no thought of exorcising a second time because my father wasn't believed to be very ill.’
The new Earl insists the ghost must be genuine because so many down-to-earth people have seen it — particularly in the library and the corridor outside.
He explained: ‘One of them was the old house-keeper, Mrs Pendry.
She is a very steady person who worked here for years.
‘He was also seen by one of my first cousins walking up and down the corridor.
People who've seen it say it makes the hair stand up on the back of their necks.’
Before his death, the late Earl himself revealed how he suspected the estate was haunted by his father's spirit.
He told People writer Victor Olliver: ‘One of the first things we did in 1976 was to repaint the China Corridor.
Warning
‘Then one evening this down-to-earth painter from Harrow got down from his ladder to talk to someone at the end of the passage.
He said: ‘When I got there, he wasn't there.’
‘He described the person he saw and it was obviously my father.
There is something odd — I don't know what it is.’
We asked top clairvoyant Nella Jones to turn her powers on Althorp without telling her of Charles Spencer's revelations.
After studying photos of the 100-room house, she was certain the home
IS haunted.
She said: ‘I feel a gen-tleman appears quite often.
But he cares about the family and appearing is his way of warning that there is some kind of tragedy coming up.’
Nella also sensed that an exorcism had been tried on more than one occasion — but without success.
‘However, no-one should be frightened,’ she added.
‘I would certainly stay the night without any fears.’
SHOCKED: Charles
WANDERING SPIRIT: Painting of Diana's grandfather, the seventh Earl
SO CLOSE: Diana with grandad Jack in 1969
DESPERATE REMEDY: Late Earl and wife Raine
CRASH GIRL DIES
A 15-YEAR-OLD girl died and four other people were injured yesterday in a head-on car crash near Halber-ton, Devon.
KIDNAP SEX ORDEAL
A SCHOOLGIRL was subjected to a terrifying three-hour sex ordeal after a being kidnapped in broad daylight at gunpoint, police said yesterday.
The 16 year-old victim was walking in West Thurrock, Essex.
A man is helping police inquiries.
Ban on Olympic coach in sex probe
AN Olympic swimming coach was suspended from his post at a top public school yesterday as police probed allegations of inde-cent assault.
Paul Hickson was arrested on Thursday and quizzed about alleged offences in a previous job at Swansea University.
The chief coach who led the British squad to three swim golds in the 1988 Seoul Games was bailed without charge.
But he was ordered to return for more question-ing in November as a ‘lengthy investigation’ was launched.
Now Mr Hickson, 44, has been suspended from £11,000-a-year Millfield School, Somerset, until police make a decision on the case.
TORY BRIBES THREAT SHOCK
DAVID ALFORD
BANKRUPT antique toys dealer Jeffrey Levitt is threatening to rock the Tory party with a major bribes scandal by naming a Mr Fixit in his £15 million fraud trial.
He claims he paid the top Tory official £40,000 to secure the prestigious Queens Award for Exports which Levitt is now accused of having obtained by deception.
A close friend of the disgraced boss of Mint and Boxed says the bribes were paid in two £20,000 instalments smuggled in boxes containing the toy firm's catalogues.
Receivers Arthur Anderson have been appointed by Natwest Bank to recoup losses from Levitt and his company.
A spokesman said: ‘If there are assets out there, we are prepared to chase them anywhere.’
Levitt was rejected for the Queens Award only 12 months before he secured the top honour.
Then, within two months of receiving it, his £30 million firm went bust in the Spring of 1991.
The collapse surprised the City and Tory Central Office, which had feted Levitt as a leading captain of industry.
When Mint and Boxed collapsed, many of Levitt's rich and powerful contacts deserted him in droves.
‘This has hurt Jeffrey a great deal,’ said the close friend.
‘They have fled like rats from a sinking ship.
‘The Tories, particularly, were keen to take tens of thousands of pounds for party funds.
Now they won't even return his calls.’
Levitt moved in giddy circles.
He wined and dined Princess Diana after supporting her favourite ballet school show.
The Duke and Duchess of York were guests at his table after a premiere of a film in the West End.
Hollywood stars from Brooke Shields to Richard Gere graced his New York offices when he opened up his Transatlantic branch.
Now a broken man, Levitt is on bail until October 14.
DISGRACED: Jeffrey Levitt
MAFIA MURDERS £292m MUGGER
JEFF EDWARDS
A BRITISH villain who got away with a £292 million haul in the world's biggest mugging was murdered by a Mafia hitman.
Detectives say small-time crook Pat Thomas carried out the 1990 raid in London for the Mafia, but the American mob killed him after he ‘grassed.’
South Londoner Thomas, 27, was gunned down on his doorstep just days after the FBI were given information leading to the recovery of £290m worth of bond certificates, snatched from a messenger in the City.
The certificates were found at Heathrow, Cyprus and
Miami airports, apparently just days after the FBI got a tip-off from Thomas.
Detectives believe a New York Mafia family, who planned to ‘launder’ the bonds, sent a hitman to silence Thomas before he could name names.
Thomas died in December, but it is only in the last few days that Scotland Yard has received information from the FBI about why he was killed.
One officer on the case said: ‘Thomas stole the bonds on behalf of some very heavy criminals.
‘Bonds like these are share certificates issued by banks and multi-national companies.
They can be converted into money.
‘Most of the stolen bonds have now been traced.
Someone leaked information to the FBI.
Killer
‘A few weeks later Thomas was shot.
We believe a professional killer was flown in.’
Another Briton, Keith Cheeseman, held in connection with the robbery, is now under armed guard in America on order from the FBI who fear a Mafia death plot against him.
Before being extradited, he said: ‘The Mafia have a contract out on me.
If I am transferred to jail in the US I am a dead man.’
SHOT DOWN: Thomas
‘BAN THESE SEX VIDEOS’
THE Government was urged yesterday to ban ‘pornographic’ videos masquerading as sex education aids.
Shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair made the plea as yet another explicit video, Kama Sutra — The Truth About Love, was released showing couples having sex in more than 30 positions.
Scotland Yard has already said that some videos containing explicit sex scenes would be classed as illegal pornography if they weren't being marketed as ‘educational.’
36 held in the new Battle of Waterloo
GANGS of neo-Nazis fought battles with protesters in London's Waterloo last night, bringing terror and chaos to commuters and theatregoers.
Skinheads and rival groups were involved in savage clashes near Waterloo Bridge and the South Bank arts complex.
Both rail and Tube stations were closed and Waterloo and Hungerford Bridges were shut, causing widespread chaos.
Police said 36 people were arrested, mainly for public order offences, and four casualties were treated in hospital.
Concert
More than 150 right-wing fanatics, many from European countries, including Germany, were on their way to a fascist pop concert.
But as they waited to be escorted by police from Waterloo to the concert, they were confronted by a crowd of anti-Nazi protesters.
People waiting for trains watched in horror as the violence spread towards the Festi-val Hall.
Police, many in riot gear, later separated the gangs.
FLASHPOINT: Police and a dog handler struggle to overpower a man during running battles
Roll up, roll up to see Charles with a roll-up!
America's ‘Royal’ telly show is a real drag!
THE royal bearing is perfect, the pinstripe suit immaculate and the wavy black hair is pure Prince Charles — but hang on, what's that in his hand?
It's a ciggie — not only that, it's a grimy roll-up, the sort of thing one's servants puff.
One would never roll one's own, even if one did smoke.
The offending fag is featured in a publicity shot for a £2 million American TV epic called Ferie and Andrew, Behind Palace Doors.
Actor Adam Bareham got deep into character to play Charles — but forgot that the ciggie is one prop one definitely does not need!
The film, shot in England, follows the Yorks from story-book romance to separation and has had to have a £500,000 re-shoot to catch up on Fergie's topless frolics.
Andy is played by Sam Miller (Sgt Maitland in The Bill) and Fergie by newcomer Pippa Hinchley, who had to dye her blonde hair red.
It's due to be broadcast on
U.S. TV this month before hitting British screens.
CIGGIE STARDUST: Adam Bareham as Prince Charles, holding the offending roll-up, with Edita Brychta as Diana and, right, Sam Miller who stars as Andrew
THIGH OLD TIME: Pippa Hinchley plays Fergie
CROWN TOPPERS: The Queen and Prince Philip
PEOPLE IN POWER
PETER MANDELSON
Beat the bandits
THE shocking growth in youth crime has been targeted by Labour's high-flying Home Affairs spokesman Tony Blair.
While slamming Government policies which have bred crime, he has urged new measures to punish per-sistent lawbreakers.
New secure units to hold hardened young criminals would stop bail bandits in their tracks.
Another proposal I heard last week was that, instead of being fined, parents should be paid £10 each week if their criminal children kept out of trouble.
An interesting idea — until you work out how much it could cost.
BLAIR: High-flyer
Tennis ace has heart attack…
FORMER tennis star Arthur Ashe was last night recovering from a heart attack following his arrest during a demo outside the White House in Washington.
AIDS victim Ashe, 49, was one of 96 people arrested on Wednesday.
They were among 1,000 demonstrators protesting against America's policy of returning refugees flee-ing Haiti's dictatorship.
Ashe revealed earlier this year that he is suffering from AIDS.
He was infected with the HIV virus during a heart-by-pass operation in 1983.
Ashe, married with a five-year-old daughter, became the first black man to win the men's title at Wimbledon in the 1975 final against Jimmy Con-nors.
Only four years later a heart attack forced him into retirement.
ASHE: Demo clash
SPEED THRILL FOR BLIND NICK
BLIND six-year-old Nicholas Kil-len will launch an RNIB charity week tomorrow with a thrilling 100mph dash in a catamaran, followed by a funfair jaunt and a helicopter flight over Blackpool.
Brave cancer victim Nicholas, from Saltaire, W Yorks, lost his one remaining eye in July.
NICK: 100mph
Hangmen in suspense
ROPEMAKERS in Ken-dal, Cumbria, have turned down orders for hangmen's nooses from America and Malawi.
Company chief David Ellwood said yesterday that his firm made nooses for British hangmen until 1964 — but had now dropped the trade.
CROOK STEALS HEART OF ‘SEX PUPPET’ FIONA
[…and she was his probation officer!]
‘Pull the strings and I'll do what you want’
PHIL TAYLOR
ROMEO crook Paul Davies told last night of his passionate affair…with the woman who was his PROBATION officer.
Reformed junkie Davies, who has served two prison sentences, met stunning Fiona Brown, 28, when he was given a two-year probation order for theft.
Fiona, who supervised Davies for ten months, had a torrid affair with the former jailbird and became his self-confessed ‘sex puppet.’
The shapely brunette, whose job was to help Davies kick his heroin and cocaine addiction and keep him on the straight and narrow, was turned on by their wild romps.
She wrote Davies a string of X-rated letters — describing her sexual fantasies and vowing her undying love.
In one of the explicit love notes Fiona wrote: I'm gazing out of the circular window in my office thinking of us.
Weak with desire.
Did you anticipate my potential for perversion.
Sometimes I feel like your sex puppet.
You just pull the strings and I do what ever you want.
There's a certain look you have when you're making love to me that shares my anticipation and surprise.
It drives me crazy.
Madly Davies, 29, told the People: ‘I couldn't believe my luck when I first saw my probation officer.
Madly
‘They are normally fat, bald, boring blokes but she was beautiful, warm and fascinating.
‘We eventually fell madly in love and went away for a string of dirty weekends.’
Davies said he ditched his girlfriend for Fiona and they went on holiday together to Tenerife where Paul took pictures of her topless.
‘She was the most fantastic woman I'd met,’ he said.
‘And she said she wanted to spend her life with me.’
Lovestruck Fiona even took Paul to meet her middle-class parents at their luxury home in Gwent, South Wales.
But she never let on about her boyfriend's criminal past.
After moving from Basingstoke, Hants, to another probation office in Pontypool, South Wales, she continued to bombard Paul with love letters.
She wrote: ‘You've got my total and utter 100-per-cent commitment.
Don't ever underestimate how much I love you.’
Smitten Paul, who now lives in Manchester, said: ‘We planned to set up home together and have kids.’
Then Fiona dumped him — with nearly tragic consequences.
‘I was gutted’ he said.
‘I tried to kill myself with a drugs overdose.
She was the one person I really trusted but I felt she had lied and betrayed me.
‘It was as though I was a cheap thrill to her.
I believe the excitement of being with a criminal turned her on.
And when that faded she just dumped me.’
Fiona's mother was shocked when we informed her of Paul's criminal past.
‘I had no idea,’ said Mrs Brown.
‘I never liked that man.
Now I'd like to shoot him.
And I'm going to give Fiona a clip round the ear.’
Fiona has told her bosses that her relationship with Davies only blossomed after the super-vision of him ended.
When confronted by The People she said: ‘I've been instructed by my employers to refer all matters to them.
‘I really don't have anything to say.’
Interfere
Rhys Morris, senior probation officer at Gwent, said: ‘A probation officer is not allowed to have a sexual relationship with one of their clients.
‘If it happens it would be subject to disciplinary action.’
But in Fiona's case he stressed: ‘Our understanding is that any relationship that might have taken place did not com-mence until he was not a client of the service.
‘On that basis, we have no right to interfere.’
FARAWAY FLING: Convicted thief Paul with Fiona
DINNER DELIGHT: Lovers Fiona and Paul enjoy a romantic night out
MAGGIE'S BARMY SAYS TED
FORMER Prime Minister Ted Heath describes his successor Margaret Thatcher as ‘barmy’ in his latest stinging attack.
‘All her former intimates say openly that she's barmy,’ he says.
And he adds in a magazine interview that appears today: ‘Everyone has deserted her.’
ATTACK: Heath
New clue to Birmingham bombings
POLICE investigating the 1974 Birmingham pub bombings have uncovered sensational new evidence which has been passed to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Using modern forensic science techniques on original evidence, the West Midlands force have been forced to rethink their view of events.
Last night Supt Brian Wall, who leads the investigation into the blast that killed 21 people, confirmed new evidence had been found — but refused to elaborate.
He said: ‘I can confirm we have been carrying out certain inquiries, including the forensic re-examination of material.’
The Birmingham Six — Hugh Callaghan, Patrick Hill, Gerard Hunter, Richard McIlkenny, Billy
Power and John Walker — were released last year after serving 17 years for the IRA massacre.
FREED: Patrick Hill
FIGHTS N' ROSES
DOZENS of rock fans were arrested when fights broke out at a Guns N' Roses US concert.
But police in Foxboro, Massa-chusetts, said there was less trouble than they expected from the 50,000 crowd.
Girl's flight to love foiled
A RUNAWAY schoolgirl was found in the nick-of-time yesterday as she prepared to flee to Portugal to rekindle a holiday romance.
But pretty brunette Katie Mansfield, 13, faced a ticking off at home — for pawning her mum's jewellery to buy the air fare.
She was found in a bed-and-breakfast near her home in Clapham, South London, waiting for the Sunday flight.
A guest became suspicious and tipped off police who contacted her frantic mother, Janice.
Mrs Mansfield, 35, said: ‘I am so relieved.’
Interpol joined the hunt for Katie when fears grew that the youngster had already fled abroad.
Katie went missing on Thursday after taking her mother's prized gems, some cash and her passport.
Her mother suspected she was going back to Portugal after cutting short her daughter's recent holiday there because of the romance.
NOW AIDS COMES TO AID OF ELDORADO
MICHAEL BURKE
SINKING soap Eldorado, desperate to improve its dismal TV ratings, is to launch a fightback with a shock new weapon — AIDS.
Handsome Costa hunk Jesse Birdsall, who has only had eyes for the girls up to now, is about to become a bi-sexual victim of the killer virus.
Eldorado — reported to be for the chop when John Birt takes over as BBC director general in March — is changing tactics in a last ditch bid to win a reprieve.
And actor Jesse's fate in his beefed-up role as two-timing villain Marcus Tandy will be the first of a string of strong new storylines.
The plot has still to be finalised but insiders say Marcus will find out he has AIDS after having a gay affair with Dieter, who is being written out of the show.
Marcus's innocent, 16-year-old Spanish girlfriend Pilar will then be drawn into the tragedy.
One possibility is that the sexy senorita will stumble on his dark secret when she calls at his home as his male lover is leaving.
Eldorado's meaty new approach is based on the proven success of the ‘EastEnders’ factor.
The Cockney soap shot up the ratings after bringing in a series of controversial episodes, including rape, murder, gay love and suicide bids.
One source on the BBC's Spanish set said: ‘It was always envisaged harder stories would be introduced when people got to know the characters well enough.’
Axed
‘The Tandy shock will prove he's prepared to use anyone to his own ends and that he's been leading a double life.’
Dieter — played by Kai Maurer — is one of eight Eldorado stars being axed in the Autumn shake-up.
The others are restaurant owner Bunny, child bride Fizz, Arnaud Leduc, the Hindle brothers, Trine Svendsen and handyman Snowy.
SEX VICTIM: Marcus
Boy No 2 drowned in quarry
POLICE divers recovered the body of a second missing schoolboy in the 70ft waters of a quarry yesterday.
Twelve-year-old Iain Allan was found two days after his friend, Allan McKay, 13, was recovered from the quarry at the St Nicholas golf course at Prestwick, Strathclyde.
The boys had left Allan's home, a mile away, on Saturday evening to play.
They were thought to have gone to the course to search for lost golf balls.
A post-mortem on Allan McKay showed that he probably died only a few hours after leaving home.
Divers found the waters were so murky that they could see nothing and had to make their search by touch.
Police said there were no suspicious circumstances in the boys' deaths.
TRAGIC: Victim Iain
Secret of deaf star
PATCH Connolly has revealed how he had to beat deafness to land his part as Eldorado handyman Snowy.
Patch — one of the stars being axed this autumn — said: ‘I've been a jobbing actor for 21 years now, earning a crust wherever I can.
I'll get over this setback.’
Father-of-two Patch wears his hair long to hide a hearing aid and lip-reads when filming.
AXED: Actor Patch
BLAST HORROR
A MAN who staggered from a wrecked block of flats in blazing clothes was being operated on in hospital last night.
The roof lifted off after Clive Snow, 35, lit a gas fire in his top-floor flat in Bristol.
SINKING soap Eldorado, desperate to improve its dismal TV ratings, is to launch a fightback with a shock new weapon — AIDS.
Handsome Costa hunk Jesse Birdsall, who has only had eyes for the girls up to now, is about to become a bi-sexual victim of the killer virus.
Insiders say he will get AIDS after having a gay affair with toyboy Dieter.
SPIELBERG TRAPPED IN HURRICANE
MOVIE director Steven Spielberg was reported missing last night on a hurricane-lashed Hawaiian island.
Spielberg had been shooting his latest epic, Jurassic Park, with Sir Richard Attenborough, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum when 160mph winds and 20-foot waves hit the tourist paradise of Kauai.
He sought refuge in a hotel ballroom with his cast and crew as roofs were ripped off nearby buildings and power lines blew down.
Earlier he phoned his Los Angeles office to say that the atmosphere on the island was tense — but then phone communications were cut.
Spielberg, maker of such classics as ET, Raiders Of The Lost Ark and Jaws, could not be found after the storm had passed.
But later a film spokesman said Spielberg and the others had survived and were safe.
Disaster
All power was knocked out by Hurricane Iniki and up to a third of the buildings were flattened.
The only confirmed death so far is a 16-year-old boy who burned to death after he knocked over a candle.
Last night President Bush declared Hawaii a disaster area.
Earlier thousands of tourists including Britons were evacuated.
Milk smash
THREE milkmen were taken to hospital with serious injuries after their delivery van overturned in Llanelli, Dyfed.
NO MOSS ON KATE
TEENAGE cover girl Kate Moss is elegantly poised to become the hottest British name in fashion modelling since Twiggy in the Sixties.
An agent spotted the 18-year-old from Croydon in an airport queue — and since then Kate has become a real high-gloss jet-setter.
She has been signed up as front-page girl for Vogue and a host of other glitzy US fashion magazines.
And the Calvin Klein jeans-to-cosmetics company may appoint her as the ‘look’ to lead their worldwide sales drive.
But just like her predecessor, Twiggy, Kate is pretty down-to-earth about her glittering new jet-set life.
‘It's knackering and it has given me spots,’ she sighs.
‘There's something special about Kate,’ a Vogue executive summed up.
Not ‘arf, mate!
Tot charge
ANTHONY Gordon, 34, was charged yesterday with killing a 10-month-old boy.
He was remanded in custody in Nottingham.
£50m CLIFF RICHARD LIVES ON £35 A WEEK
He says: ‘I don't need sex’
RICHARD WALLACE /MYDRIM JONES
SUPER-RICH singer Cliff Richard has revealed that he lives on just £35 A WEEK.
The thrifty Peter Pan of pop, worth an estimated £50 million, puts £15 of his wages towards housekeeping and pockets only £20.
He has never forgotten the poverty of his childhood — when he used to sit on packing cases at home and eat meals of toast and milk.
In one of his frankest interviews, the bachelor boy says he'll never marry.
And he's so scared of ageing that he tries every anti-wrinkle cream available.
The devout Christian, 51, says: ‘I draw £35 a week from my office.
Fifteen goes on milk and butter and stuff like that.
And I put £20 in my wallet.
Sometimes I find I haven't spent it for 10 weeks.
So I go out and treat myself to something nice.’
Cliff — who now lives in a mansion in Surrey — says times were once so hard that his dad made the family furniture from packing cases.
‘We never went hungry but sometimes had to get by on very little,’ he says in an interview with today's Sunday Times magazine.
‘Three main meals every week used to be two pieces of toast each in a bowl, with milk and sugar.’
Romance
Cliff, who scored his first chart hit 34 years ago, says he has no regrets about being single.
Though he nearly did wed three times.
‘I'm glad I didn't because, in the three instances I can think of, I'm not in love with that person any more.
‘I don't believe I'll ever get married,’ he says.
His last romance was with former tennis ace Sue Barker, but it ended in 1988 after three years.
Now he says he doesn't need sex.
One of his biggest worries is old age.
‘I don't see why men as well as women shouldn't do everything they can to fight it off.
‘If ever there's a new anti-wrinkle cream in the shops, I buy it.’
PETER PAN: Aging is a worry
Drug net!
TRAWLER skipper Peter Storey, 44, netted his biggest ever catch off the Sussex coast yesterday — 130lb of can-nabis in a cylinder worth £250,000.
A YOUNG DRIVER sped off after knocking down a 49-year-old mother and her 25-year-old daughter at Arnold, Notts.
Police have appealed to his family and friends to turn him in.
The mother is in hospital with serious head injuries.
Her daughter was treated for shock.
Case of ‘caring’ hit-run hit-run driver
A ‘COMPASSIONATE’ hit-and-run driver took his victim to hospital before vanishing.
He went back for the woman pedestrian he knocked down near a busy roundabout and helped her into his white Sierra car.
But while the woman, 46-year-old Margaret Presley, of Portsmouth, Hants, was rushed inside — drip-ping with blood from serious head injuries and a broken shoulder — the man drove off without giving any details.
Mrs Presley was later reported to be in a ‘comfortable’ condition.
£250,000 GOES MISSING AT BRITISH LEGION CLUB
ANDY BYRNE
FOUR ex-servicemen have been booted out of a British Legion social club after going to war over what they believe are missing funds of up to £250,000.
They claim the expulsions were a cover-up bid after they tried to expose a slush fund run by crooked officials.
Four committee members have been arrested and released on bail following a swoop by detectives on their homes.
VAT inspectors are also investigating the affairs of the 1,000-strong Legion club in Netherley, near Liverpool, which has a turnover of more than £750,000 a year.
The rebel four say: A CLUB SHOP has £60,000 takings a year but is not registered for VAT — and does not appear in the records.
CASH has vanished from gaming machines, bingo nights and raffles.
COMMITTEE members have awarded themselves ‘honorariums’ of up to £1,500.
FEES of around £150 a week are being paid for fictitious entertainment.
One of the rebels, vice-chairman Ronnie Teese, 56, who has been banned for 12 months, said the club was ‘terrified of the can of worms they might find’.
He added: ‘The majority of members have no idea the club is being fleeced.’
Club treasurer Brian Rowlands, 52, one of the four arrested, said: ‘The police will find nothing wrong.
This is all vindictive-ness by a few individuals.’
TRAGIC MUM SUES DOCS
A MOTHER is suing over an alleged medical slip which led to her having a handicapped daughter.
Michelle Collins says she was not warned about the dangers of becoming pregnant while she was taking a drug to treat her epilepsy.
And she claims her GP even told her that any defects the baby might have would be minor and easily put right.
Instead, daughter Amber was born with spina bifida in 1989.
Now Michelle and husband Barry are seeking damages from Dr John Ramsey, consultant Norman McWhinney and the local health authority.
Michelle, who was taking the drug Epilim, said at her home in Whyteleaf, Surrey: ‘None of them told me about the risk of having a handicapped baby.
‘If I'd known, I would have had my pregnancy terminated.’
French research uncovered the danger for Epilim users 15 years ago.
A spokesman for the makers said: ‘Epilim product information supplied to all doctors contains a warning.’
Neither the doctors nor the health authority would comment.
VICTIM: Baby Amber
Tom, 93, quits his meal run
GREAT grand-dad Tommy Kirk is retiring as a meals-on-wheels driver — at the age of NINETY THREE.
The former GP, of Stocksfield, Northumberland, spent 28 years ferrying lunches to the elderly — most of them younger than him.
Tommy is retiring on health grounds but says: ‘I'm not ready for meals-on-wheels myself yet.’
STARMAN MOORE'S EYEFUL!
TV astronomer Patrick Moore saw stars when he came a cropper on the cricket field.
Patrick, 68, was hit in the eye by a fast ball that flew off the wicket-keeper's boot as he fielded in the slips.
He got a bruising whack in his right eye — the one he uses to peer through his telescope at the stars.
But the brave old trouper, who turns out every week for his village team, has refused to let the nasty shiner hold up his one-man touring show.
At his home in Selsey, Sussex, he laughed off his injury yesterday.
‘It was extremely painful for a while but the doctor says there is little risk of permanent damage.’
Dish of the day
DOUBLE helpings served up by Catherine Zeta Jones made mouths water yesterday.
The Darling Buds Of May beauty looked tastier than ever when she made her debut as a waitress.
Catherine's guest appearance, with screen husband Philip Frank, delighted diners at the Cafe Cas-bar in London's Covent Garden restaurant.
They were among a host of stars who donned working aprons to raise cash for the AIDS charity, the Terrence Higgins Trust.
HOT STUFF: TV Catherine's cuppa surprise Picture: JOHN CLEAVE
Feed me more, says Oliver!
A MAN is suing a restaurant for what he claims are his just deserts — 106 free meals.
Oliver Baxter says that's what Stocks Town Club in London's King's Road owes him after he organised a big party there last year.
Mr Baxter says: ‘I brought in custom and my fee was in free meals.’
But Stocks owner Aziz Suleman disputes the claim — and he holds a trump card.
Stocks went bust in July.
BOAT COMES IN!
KIND Eugenie Boucher, 83, who died last May at a Bristol nursing home, left more than £4 million to the Royal National Life-boat Institution.
Bo's rescue act
MOVIE beauty Bo Derek cuddles a baby chimp as she stars in a real-life rescue act.
Sex symbol Bo — who once appeared in a Tarzan film — is seeking help for zoo animals left homeless after the destruction caused by Hurricane Andrew in Miami.
And she is also supporting vets who have set up a MASH-style medical unit for injured horses.
Bo shot to fame in the movie 10 with Dudley Moore — and she clearly scores ten out of ten when it comes to the caring face of Hollywood.
MONKEY BUSINESS: Caring Bo's tender touch is animal magic
Fury at Kama Sutra video
FURIOUS Hindu leaders last night branded a new sex video based on the Kama Sutra outrageous.
They said that the revered ancient literary work was a holy book, not a sex manual.
The hour-long video features two couples performing sexual athletics in more than 30 positions.
Deepak Naik, of the National Council for Hindu Temples, said: ‘This kind of thing can only be harmful to Hindu-ism and is typical of our materialistic world.
‘People always look for short-term enjoyment rather than gaining long-term spirituality.’
The video depicts in graphic detail some of the most difficult sexual positions and even admits that experimenters might need to be double-jointed.
Det Supt Michael Hames, head of Scotland Yard's Obscene Publica-tions branch, said if the film-makers had not called it ‘educational’, then it would have been blatant pornography.
But scriptwriter and narrator Indra Sinha said the video emphasised the meeting of minds as well as bodies.
Enjoy a right royal banquet
A VEGETARIAN restaurant is this weekend presenting more than 100 different South Indian meals as part of a special Hindu festival.
Spices, in London's Hackney, a former winner of The People Asian Restaurant of the Month competition, is celebrating Onam — a commemoration of a king who crossed swords with the gods.
State curfew
INDIA has imposed a curfew on the capitals of states of Meghalaya and Mizoram.
Migrant curb
INDIA, concerned over the continuing influx of refugees from overpo-pulated Bangladesh, deported 132 illegal immigrants from New Delhi this week.
Police believe there are 200,000 illegal Bangla-deshi immigrants in New Delhi alone.
£½m OF AID FOR HOMES
MOTHER Teresa has persuaded bosses of Britain's powerful Housing Corporation to find a possible £500,000 to help those without a roof over their heads.
The chiefs — moved by the former Nobel Peace Prize winner's poignant pleas during her visit to Britain — have pledged the aid to refurbish a former Metropolitan Police property in London's Lambeth.
HOT TIP FOR BOOK PRIZE
AN Asian author is hot favourite for the £20,000 Booker Prize for fiction, the book world's top honour.
Bookies have made Sri Lan-kan-born Michael Ondaatje, 48, who now lives in Canada, 5–2 on favourite for his novel, The English Patient.
It is one of six short-listed.
Previous Asian winners have been Salman Rushdie and Ruth Prawerjhabvala.
HUNDREDS HUNT FOR THE MAN WITH £2m
Fugitive loan shark in fear for his life
ANDREW CHAPMAN
FUGITIVE financier Mohammed Ramzan is in fear of his life after leaving a £2million trail of misery following the collapse of his crooked loan company.
He has received death threats after cheating hundreds of innocent people.
A Fraud Squad detective said: ‘I hope for his sake we find him first.’
One man warned: ‘Investors have put a price on his head.
There are those who would take the law into their own hands and chop off his hands, because under Islamic law that is the punishment for thieves.’
Funds
Hundreds of Asian businessmen, pensioners and small investors are believed to have pinned their faith in his Muslim World Finance firm.
He promised ‘treble your money’ interest-free loans for funds lodged with him in Bradford, West Yorks, for a year.
Receiving interest is against Islamic law.
He took lump sums of up to £35,000 from investors who sold houses, remortgaged homes and put up their businesses as collateral to get the lump sum together.
Now Ramzan has vanished with the cash.
Ramzan is being sued for £30,000 by a building society.
There are also claims of £3,000 for VAT and £2,200 from a firm of solicitors.
Mohammed Rafi and his brothers Mohmammed Shafi and Tariq Mujahid, from Huddersfield, Yorks, invested £35,000.
The brothers were told he was part of an international organisation and Mr Shafi was asked to become a broker.
He invested £10,000 in office accommodation and equipment — but the deal never materialised.
Julekha Hajij and her husband have lost £13,000 after borrowing the money from a bank.
Mother-of-three Julekha, who runs a gro-cery shop in Oswaldtwis-tle, Lancs, said: ‘We wanted to pay off a mortgage on my house in Leicester with an interest-free loan of £39,000.
Angry
‘I just don't know what we'll do.
We are struggling to pay the loan and the mortgage.
I feel angry.’
Blackburn businessman Sardar Khan raised the alarm after his 60-year-old uncle ploughed £7,500 into Muslim World Finance to try to raise a loan for a post office.
Ramzan has telephoned newspapers in Bradford and Blackburn protesting his innocence.
Sex siren flees
CONTROVERSIAL actress Zarina Ramzan (above) has fled Britain to escape her sexy past.
The raven-haired 25-year-old, who starred in a TV thriller alongside ex-EastEnder Leslie Grantham, knew the screening of the film last week would open up old wounds.
For while she was working on the Channel Four movie, Rubber Stamp, it was revealed that her sideline was staging sex shows.
From her West End flat, Zarina offered a sizzling floor show with her teenage pal which included topless dancing, striptease and even a lesbian double act.
Zarina, whose family come from Pakistan, could make £900 a night entertaining groups of rich Asian businessmen.
The revelations sent shock waves through the community.
She was attacked by a group of Asians while out shopping in South London earlier this year.
Now Zarina and her pal, Seema, have fled to the United States.
A former colleague said: ‘Obviously they left because they feared for their lives.
There are a lot of people after them, so I doubt if Zarina or her friend will be returning for some time.’
Monsoon tragedy
MORE than 1,000 people are missing or have died in monsoon rains which have swept northern India and parts of Pakistan.
One of the worst-hit areas was Kashmir.
Army commandoes used rubber boats to rescue people marooned in trees in Punjab.
Betting ‘sting’ inquiry
AN INQUIRY is taking place into a racing sting in which a 33–1 ‘no-hoper’ romped home, bookies watchdogs confirmed yesterday.
Bookmakers in Yorkshire believe the off-course coup produced winnings of nearly £100,000.
And they are refusing to pay out on the late flood of bets until the official inquiry is complete.
Tom Kelly, director general of the Betting Office Licensees Association, confirmed that they were looking into the circumstances of the Lingfield race.
OH LORD, HE'S AT IT AGAIN
MYDRIM JONES
PRAT OF THE WEEK
THE latest ‘do-gooder’ gesture of Lord Longford (below) has outraged pensioners fleeced by Robert Maxwell.
The potty peer, who has campaigned to free child killers Ian Brady and Myra Hindley, has sent a message of sympathy to the crooked tycoon's son, Kevin, the world's biggest bankrupt.
Most of the £406 million cash he owes was swindled from pension funds by his father before his mysterious death last year.
In his letter to Kevin, now expecting his fifth child, Longford, 86, asks if he needs any consol-ing.
But he ignores the plight of pensioners.
He told The People: ‘I dropped a line to Kevin offering him sympathy and encouragement.
‘I felt it was a Christian thing to do.
He must feel the whole world is against him.
I got a nice letter back.
He was obviously grateful.
I hope others are rallying round him, too.’
Lord Longford refused to discuss hardships faced by Maxwell pensioners.
One of them, ex-Mirror Group executive Alan Hobday, said last night: ‘His lordship's a total prat.’
Girl, 18, dies after freak trip in road
A GIRL on an evening out died in a freak accident by just tripping over a kerb.
Gina Coulstock, 18, stumbled, fell heavily and was knocked out when she hit the road.
An ambulance took her to hospital in Abertillery, Gwent, but she was dead on arrival.
Friends and relatives were comforting her stunned family yesterday.
A police spokesman said: ‘Gina had been out with her sister and friends, but had very little to drink.
It's an absolute tragedy.’
‘Midwife dolphins’ project is blasted
A BIZARRE plan for wild dolphins to play midwife to six pregnant British women sparked a safety row last night.
A newspaper flew the women and controversial baby doctor Gowri Motha to Israel's Red Sea last week to conduct experi-mental birth techniques.
She believes the mothers will have a trauma-free delivery by giving birth in a shoreside birthing pool, accompanied by dolphins.
But one of Britain's top consultant obstetricians, Dr Joe Jordan said: ‘These women would be a lot safer in a hospital.
If anything goes wrong, people will ask if Dr Motha should have taken the risk.’
Fears
Professor James Drife, of Leeds General Infirmary, said: ‘I don't see the point of taking heavily pregnant women all that way.’
And the anxious mum of one of the women — travel agent Michelle Hooper — told of her fears.
Carol Hooper of Wan-stead, East London said: ‘Michelle said they have taken all precautions.
But we have doubts.’
The six are the first in the West to try techniques pioneered by Russian doctors who believe that sonar contact by dolphins helps to calm women.
Through thick and thin 
AIDAN McGURRAN
SAD Sandy Millington used to be 19 stone and without a date, but now she's the happiest heavyweight in the world.
For the cuddly 34-year-old has found her Mr Right after setting up her own agency for larger ladies, Plump Partners.
Although she met her fiance Brian Poole through the agency, he's in fact a six-foot tall 28-year-old slimmie.
Sandy, a divorced mother of one, has played Cupid to scores of couples since setting up the business at her home in Rhosesmor, Clwyd, six years ago.
But when she read Brian's application, she decided to nab him for herself.
‘I didn't waste any time getting to grips with him,’ joked Sandy, now slimmed down to a comfortable 14 stone.
‘Although I had seen a few people through Plump Partners — some of whom are still great friends — romance never really blossomed for me.
‘But everything with Brian clicked straight away.We've been seeing each other for two years now and, although we haven't set a date, we are planning to get married.’
THIS ONE'S MINE: Cuddly Sandy with Brian, her six-foot slimmie
JEALOUS YOBS WRECK BULLSEYE JIM'S ROLLER
Jobless lads envy success, says quiz star
MICHAEL BURKE
TV'S BULLSEYE star Jim Bowen was left reeling after mindless vandals wrecked his distinctive Rolls-Royce.
The Roller — with a personalised JB 50 number plate — was in a garage for a service.
But the yobs managed to break in and snap off the ‘flying lady’ emblem.
They also ripped off the hubcaps.
Millionaire Jim, back with his 12th series of the Sunday evening darts quiz on ITV, blames unemployed youngsters who are jealous of his success.
‘Sadly there's always a minority who don't appreciate success and hard work, but luckily it's rare,’ he said.
‘I don't fare as badly as some showbiz celebrities I've talked to.
‘In my day, kids used to knock on front doors and run away.
Today, this is what frustrated youngsters do.
‘But I don't hold any grudges.
If these kids had jobs to do, they wouldn't be free to do this and they'd be gainfully working.’
He added: ‘Showbiz people like me share tea-time with millions of viewers for six months a year.
Second
But there's always going to be someone somewhere who will be fascinated by it and want to do something against you.
‘Some people are very jealous of others having money, but they don't realise how hard you've worked for it.’
It was the second time the teacher-turned-comic had been hit by car vandals.
In the first attack, he'd just popped into a shop in the Lake District — and returned to find the panels of his £52,000 BMW 750i all kicked in.
Jim was so upset that he sold the burgundy car — and transferred the number plate to the Rolls.
Now Jim is hoping to out-manoeuvre the yobs with his latest set of wheels — a special edition Triumph Trident motorbike.
TARGET: Bullseye's Jim Bowen and Roller
Sex attack terror of kidnapped schoolgirl
A MAN was being quizzed by police yesterday after a schoolgirl was kidnapped at gunpoint and subjected to a terrifying three-hour sex ordeal.
The 16-year-old was approached by a motorist and forced into his car at West Thurrock, Essex.
She was later threatened with a shotgun and knife as the fiend repeatedly assaulted her.
The girl was only released after she promised to see the attacker again.
An Essex police spokesman said: ‘The girl is obviously very traumatised by her ordeal.’
Wife is talk of town
DOTING couple Alf and Jean Smith are on speaking terms for the first time in TEN YEARS.
A therapist has cured Jean, 62, of Ware, Herts, of a speech loss she suffered following her father's death.