

CURRENT NEWS
Safety milestones are doubly rewarded
Well done, Charlie!
WOOD GROUP'S MMSC team on Shell's Brent Charlie platform recently reached a fantastic safety milestone.
They have worked over one million manhours without a Lost Time Incident, the last recorded incident being in December 1991.
Wood Group Engineering Contractors' operations manager for the Charlie platform, Mike Scott, is delighted with the achievement.
‘Everyone on the MMSC team has pulled together well and worked conscientiously towards this target,’ Mike said.
‘We are particularly proud to hear that Shell raised the Target Zero flag at Seafield House in honour of the occasion’.
Gerrit Tol, Shell's Brent charlie platform manager, echoed Mike's comments.
‘This is a real achievement,’ he said, ‘and is indicative of the success of our partnership with the Wood Group.’
Golden star
FOR THE FOURTH consecutive year John Wood Group PLC has won a RoSPA award for occupational safety.
This year the Group achieved a gold award for an excellent overall performance.
Two other Group divisions also embarked on the RoSPA trail this year — Engineering Contracting and Oilfield Logistics and Supplies — both of which won a merit award for their individual performances and for their individual performances and for their substantial contribution to the overall Group performance.
‘1992 will not be an easy act to follow and attaining further improvement will be a substantial challenge,’ said Ramsay Spence, director for quality, safety and environment.
‘However, the development of our revised HS&E Policy and Safety Management System [see story on page 6]will provide us with the framework to sustain continuous improvement’.
ESP clinches valuable five-year Saudi deal
IN MARCH, Wood Group ESP was awarded its biggest international contract to date to supply the first large-scale utilisation of electric submersible pump systems to Saudi ARAMCO.
The pumps will be used on the ARAMCO Central Arabia Project, a new field approximately 100 miles south of the capital Riyadh and the first to be discovered and developed by ARAMCO.
The project involves initial drilling and completion of 86 oil and 20 water-injection wells and installing a submersible pump system in each.
Oil production, estimated at an initial rate of 300,000 barrels of oil per day, is scheduled to start in December 1994, after the pipelines are laid to the port facilities.
ESP is represented in Saudi Arabia by A.I. Al-Khorayef and Sons Co. and the Al-Khorayef Commercial Co.
[ACC]division headquartered in Riyadh.
Al-Khorayef is a major licensed manufacturer of water well pumps, pipeline repair services and agricultural products and repair services including the John Deer tractor distributorship.
The company operates a full electric submersible pump repair shop and is currently in the process of installing ESP's state-of-the-art testing equipment in the facility in Riyadh, as well as mobilising a field staging camp and storage yard near the oil field in the desert community of Hawtah.
This is the first time that the two companies will provide a total supply and maintenance contract for ARAMCO, ESP/ACC will install all the pump related equipment and perform routine monthly maintenance of the downhole and surface units for a five-year period.
Any further new wells requiring pumps will be added to the programme.
ESP manufactures its products in Oklahoma City.
First units to Saudi Arabia left the US in May and shipments will continue monthly during the third quarter of 1993.
Installation by ESP's engineers and field service personnel is due to start in July with completion of the initial phase to end in October 1994.
ESP has also sold Al-Khorayef a portable field test unit to run tests in areas where permanent units are being considered to enhance oil production.
Some of the Saudi Arabian fields are nearing the stage where pumps are going to be utilised to maintain oil production at current levels.
This major multi-million dollar project has allowed ESP to establish a foothold in the Middle East.
With the help of Wood Group's existing presence in the region, it is planned to expand their products into this region as rapidly as possible.
Sales have already been made to Abu Dhabi and Egypt and for several other projects in Saudi Arabia, and ESP expects the Middle East to be an increasingly important market for their products and services in the future.
Getting off to a great start with this major sale in the area gives ESP a strategic advantage as the most innovative products and service company in the submersible pump industry.
Annual results
IN MAY the Group released its financial results for the year ending 31 December 1992.
The year had seen a 50 per cent increase in expenditure on acquisitions, in order to strengthen the Group's activity base.
There has also been significant investment in the areas of health, safety, quality, the environment and in personnel development and training.
Coupled with a down-turn in North Sea exploration which affected some areas of our business, this meant profits rose by some 10 per cent, whilst our turnover of £203.6 million increased by 17 per cent .
Newshounds bridge the gap
A ROLLS Wood Group team which is looking into internal communications as part of a Total Quality Management Programme found that an in-house newsletter would be useful in bridging the communications gaps.
To ensure that information would sift through from all corners of the Company, a local spokesperson was elected from each department.
Their responsibility is to ensure that articles are forwarded for consideration by the editorial committee for inclusion in the newsletter.
The editorial committee consists of eight spokespersons, a compositor and a proof reader.
The launch of Rolls Wood Group News on 1 April coincided with the third anniversary of the Company and was well received.
Hugh Gibson, managing director said, ‘This gives every employee an opportunity to speak out when they might normally keep quiet.
I will use the newspaper and hope that all our people will also contribute’.
The newspaper will be distributed every two months and, as well as RWG's business news, will cover sport, social and general news.
First-class second class at the ERC seminar
ERC CONDUCTED the second of two basic wellhead seminars for our customers, Columbia Gas, during March.
The seminar, which is intended to give an understanding of the design, use and installation of surface wellhead components, was hosted by corporate sales representative, and conducted by sales and technical trainer,.
The programme also included information on choke and valve designs for the various types of pressure ranges used on production trees.
Twenty employees from Columbia Gas attended the seminar, and were presented with certificates of completion the following month.
All participants enjoyed the course and ERC plans to conduct more classes for other clients in the near future.
BS 5750 Awards
Control with flexibility
WOOD GROUP Offshore's Hamilton Oil base team in Yarmouth have received BS5750 Part 2 accreditation.
BS5750 ensures that every area of a company's operations is strictly controlled.
Work on procedures for the Hamilton base was started in 1992 by  and finalised by materials handling manager  and materials control manager  both based at Hamilton Oil.
said ‘This award provides a standard by which you can gauge yourself, and gives you a means by which quality can be improved.’
Hamilton Oil are introducing a new computer system called ‘Impala’.
and  anticipate that revisions will have to be made to accommodate the new system but, they said, ‘This shows the flexibility needed to meet our customers’ needs in a changing environment’.
Accreditation milestone
AFTER a full audit in April, Wood-Way Hydraulic Services Limited and Wood-Way Engineering Services Limited have been recommended for accreditation to BS5750 Part 2.
Due to the competitive market in which we operate, this accreditation is very important.
The Company can now demonstrate that it has systems in place that enable us to provide a high quality service.
BS5750 accreditation is not the end of the road with regard to quality assurance, but forms the basis for continual improvement.
The ultimate aim is to become the most competent, competitive and innovative operator in our chosen markets and accreditation is an important milestone in this process.
NDT at OTC
FOR MANY companies involved in the oil industry, the Offshore Technology Conference in Houston each year is one of the world's most important shows.
Marking the silver anniversary of the OTC in 1993, more than 275 technical papers were presented and over 1,250 companies from 20 countries filled the Astohall and ExpoCentre exhibition areas for four days in May.
As participants in the OTC for over 15 years, 1993 was a special year for NDT Systems, Inc.
For the first time NDT shared a joint island booth with two other Wood Group companies: Electric Submersible Pumps and Wood Group Production technology.
It was the first year the Group's three NDT companies were represented together:.
NDT Systems demonstrated the new SpectaSonic TM UTEA-1 Ultrasonic End-Area Inspection Tool.
NPT Eagle demonstrated the new computerised SV-1 Drill Pipe Inspection Desk.
For NDT Systems, the UTEA-1 represents the first in-house designed and manufactured ultrasonic products, which has been met with great enthusiasm.
NDT Eagle's SV-1 desk sparked tremendous interest for customers wanting a more efficient method of storing and displaying their inspection data.
The stand was one of the most active and eye-catching at the exhibition.
In fact, it was sometimes so crowded that customers could not get near!
NDT's presence at OTC ‘93 follows successful exhibitions at three other shows — Singapore in February, Bahrain in March and Moscow in April.
There is no doubt that word is getting round.
WGPTI goes well with Shell
OUR US feature on the centre spread shows how Aberdeen-based Wood Group Production technology has branched out into the United States, with the formation of Wood Group Production technology Inc.
[WGPTI].
Links between the two companies have grown quickly and they recently exhibited together at Houston's Offshore Technology Conference.
WGPT sales manager, announced at the conference that, as a result of co-operation between the two companies, they had been awarded the Shell Offshore Inc.
Deepwater Gulf of Mexico contract.
The contract is for the provision of their Permanent Downhole Readout [PDR]equipment used to monitor downhole pressure and temperature to optimise production from hydrocarbon-bearing reservoirs.
The PDR System, the first of its kind to be used in a subsea completion in the Deepwater gulf of Mexico, is for Shell's Tahoe No. 4 well in a water depth of 1,500 feet.
WGPT's expertise in this area has already been proven: They have sold 43 of these systems for wells in the North Sea, representing 50 per cent of the North Sea subsea PDR market.
is looking forward to expanding in the USA.
‘We are confident that our experience and track record, channelled through WGPTI's infrastructure, will give us an excellent platform for success in the Gulf of Mexico’.
Bahrain takes Eagle by surprise
THE EIGHTH Middle East Oil Show in Bahrain proved to be a great success, at least to one of the 250 companies who came from around the world to exhibit.
NDT Eagle was the first company to make a deal, just an hour after the exhibition was opened, selling £63,000 worth of pipe-testing equipment to Saudi Arabian company Al Mutlaq.
Sales manager  had just finished setting up the portable testing gear when an Al Mutlaq representative wanted to buy it.
said: ‘I was hoping to make at least one sale while I was here, but I didn't expect it to be so soon.’
The equipment consists of a portable computer linked to a sensor which travels along the pipe and examines it for defects.
, Al Mutlaq's divisional manager, saw immediate benefits: ‘We believe we are the first company in the region to get this equipment.
‘We will now be able to offer quicker and more precise drill pipe inspection facilities to our clients, with greater accuracy and clarity of reporting’.
WGOL Yarmouth wins BP contract
IN APRIL Wood Group Offshore, Great Yarmouth announced the award of a multi-million long term contract from BP Exploration.
WGOL will have full responsibility for the provision of all marine support services and supply base activities, such as warehousing, for BP's exploration and production operations in the southern sector of the North Sea.
Wood Group's existing team based at Conoco's Viking House will service the contract with  as contracts manager and  as head of supply base.
WGOL achieved three turn-arounds in April for BP dedicated vessels, the first of which was the MV Rioni on 16 April.
By October, BP will have 12 rigs working in the southern sector which will keep the Yarmouth base busy!
director of WGOL in Yarmouth said, ‘This award recognises Great Yarmouth's position as the leading southern sector support port for North Sea gas and is a clear indication to other oil companies that Yarmouth offers a competitive package.
It also offers unrivalled opportunities for operators to utilise our unique base services.
the announcement that BP will continue their presence here is welcomed by both the Wood Group and the Port Authority.
Milestone of the month
THE EXPORT department of Fireater, Great Yarmouth is celebrating a new milestone in monthly sales.
It achieved overseas sales exceeding £500,000 in April.
Caught in a relaxed moment are .
WGFP helps protect the Princess
WHEN THE Princess Royal opens the new 6,200 capacity Richard Donald football stand at Aberdeen's Pittodrie stadium in August and passes through the new turnstile, she will be safe in the knowledge that Wood Group Fire Protection's alarms division has played its part in providing a state-of-the-art fire detection system.
WGFP were approached by main electrical contractor Hutcheon Electrical to provide a system that would meet very strict criteria.
General Manager  said ‘We are happy to respond to the request and were able to provide a competitive price in a very quick time’.
The selected system, the Autronica BS-100 which is controlled by micro-processor, has many advanced features including a direct link to the Grampian Fire Brigade.
New C0 2 fire systems for Scunthorpe
WOOD GROUP Fire Protection has been awarded a contract to design, engineer and supply two low pressure C02 fire protection systems to protect gas turbine sets provided by John Brown Engineering for the new Keadby power station at Scunthorpe.
The order is likely to be the largest single low pressure C02 contract awarded for a UK site this year.
It is the first of its type from John Brown and it will give WGFP a high profile in the power generation industry, in line with the Company's planned penetration of non-oil related markets.
The contract was secured against keen competition from other UK fire engineering companies due to WGFP's close attention to design detail at the proposal stage and the development of a procurement and assembly plan to meet John Brown's fast track site programme.
NEWS IN BRIEF 
Success near and far
WOOD GROUP Fire Protection's projects department recently won a substantial order from Newfoundland Offshore Contractors in Canada for the design and supply of fire protection and safety equipment for the Hibernia field development.
The department has also won a major order from Phillips Petroleum for fire protection equipment for the North Sea Judy/Joanne fields development project.
Power of Protection
WOOD GROUP Fire Protection's position within the power generation industry has been strengthened by the award of two maintenance contracts.
The first for Hydro Electric is for the renewal of a maintenance contract for fire alarms at their Peterhead power station, while the second is to service the fire alarm equipment at Scottish Power's Longannet power station.
Success from Hess
FOSTER WHEELER Wood Group have won a three-year contract from Amerda Hess to provide engineering services, in conjunction with Foster Wheeler Petroleum Development, London.
Aberdeen operations will provide support for the AH001, currently producing oil from the Ivanhoe, Rob Roy and Hamish fields, and the Scott and Hudson fields which are currently under development.
Reaping the rewards
WOOD GROUP Fire Protection's efforts in pursuing the local marine market were rewarded recently by the award of two contracts to supply fixed C02 protection systems.
One is for the vessel Gallustrum owned by Oil Marine, and the other is for the Grampian Clansman recently acquired by Northstar.
Arrival of the little orange men
GLANCING out of my office window (like you do) I see little orange men.
My God! they've landed from planet X!
Straining to read the side of their van, I see they are actually from Findlay Clark.
Oh, it is the landscape gardeners and a very nice job they're doing of it.
We've got heathers, bushes and trees springing up all over the place.
That is the update on the outside of the Lincoln Turbine Service building, so what has been happening on the inside?
It has been all go.
Nobody could have foreseen such a rapid expansion prior to, and since, moving into the new premises.
To accommodate the overflow, five more offices [including a conference room]have been built out on the workshop above the canteen and locker area.
there's no stopping us now!
New EEC rules change light dues
FOLLOWING the lifting of EEC trade barriers, light dues [a service charge paid by vessels calling at ports in the UK to cover the costs of lighthouses, etc.]previously payable by vessels to Trinity House, will no longer be collected by HM Customs.
Collection will now be undertaken by company members of the Institute of Chartered Shipbrokers.
Wood Group Offshore, Great Yarmouth, has been nominated as one of the collection points in Yarmouth with two sub agents: Aberdeen Cargo Handling Services Ltd and Grampian Shipping in Peterhead.
base manager for WGOL who is also vice-chairman of the East Anglian branch of the Institute, commented: ‘The agreement was reached because Trinity House was looking for a professional body to fill the void and the Institute has a good reputation and a presence in the majority of UK ports’.
ERC branches take the awards
PRESIDENT RICHARD Rau presented two awards to high achieving ERC branches during March.
The awards were based on cashflow as a percentage of sales.
The Small Branch of the Year Award was won for the fourth consecutive year by Williston in North Dakota.
The five employees who make up this branch have a combined total of 61 years of wellhead experience, 51 of which have been spent at the Williston branch.
Branch manager  attributes their success to their vast experience and the fact they have worked together for such a long time.
Over the years they have come to dominate their geographic market.
Richard Rau presented the award to  and his team at a dinner in the Williston Elks Lodge, which was also attended by the employees' wives and vice president of operations, James Adams.
The Large Branch of the Year Award was won by the Mid-Continent region.
This region consists of branches in Oklahoma City in Oklahoma, Pampa in Texas and Van Buren in Arkansas.
Enterprise plugs the leaks
IN RECOGNITION of their expertise in stainless steel welding, Enterprise Engineering Services was recently asked if they could help Woodlands School in Aberdeen.
The school was having trouble with leaks in their stainless steel hydrotherapy pool which resulted in the children being unable to use it for a number of weeks.
The company that had previously tried to fix the pool had finally given up, so Enterprise was called in to the rescue.
who has been with Enterprise Engineering Services since day one, made up a new section and welded it in with great success!
Happy to meet again
AFTER a three-year break, WGOL are pleased to welcome Amerada Hess for a two-exploration well programme being run from Yarmouth.
WGOL will provide office, warehouse and open storage facilities, and logistics support.
Wood-Way double
WOOD-WAY Hydraulic Services Limited have just announced the award of two contracts for hydraulic and pneumatic maintenance services for Amerada Hess and Total Oil Marine.
Both contracts will be effective until December 1995.
sales manager at Wood-Way said: ‘We are extremely pleased to be associated with both these companies on these important contracts.
We look forward to a long a mutually successful relationship’.
HS&E Policy and management system launched
IN RESPONSE to recent rapid developments in Health, Safety and the Environment [HS&E], the Wood Group has introduced a comprehensive HS&E Policy and Management System, applicable to all UK-based companies and endorsed by Ian Wood.
This document sets out for the first time an integrated policy and management system, with the emphasis on continuous improvement.
It articulates the Group's commitment to attaining the highest practical standards of health, safety and environmental protection in the workplace.
The policy is implemented through the Group's existing line management structure, with a strong focus on employee awareness and involvement through training, consultation and communications.
consistently high standards in these areas will make a positive contribution towards long-term business success.
Each company is responsible for applying and adapting the policy to meet its needs.
It defines its own management system to ensure that it complies with the Group policy and is relevant to its business.
This management system is documented in a HS&E manual, linked to each company's annual action plan.
The full version of the new Policy and Management System has been distributed to all UK companies and is available on request.
A summarised version is also available.
During June and early July full day HS&E training programmes have been arranged for senior managers and divisional coordinators which will form the basis for communication within each company.
Four lead companies have been chosen with the aim of completing their company HS&E manuals by the middle of the year, with progressive implementation of the new system.
These companies are:
Wood Group Offshore
Wood Group Engineering Contractors
Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]
Wood Group fire Protection
Other UK companies are expected to complete the introduction of their Policy and Management Systems by October 1993.
WGO team scoops award
THE WOOD Group Offshore team working at the Hamilton Oil base in Great Yarmouth attended a presentation in recognition of successfully completing two years without a lost time incident.
director, and , safety manager, made the presentations to all staff in the office, warehouse and pipeyard.
Understanding LTI statistics
ANALYSING THE trends of incidents and accidents gives us an important measure of performance, allowing us to compare year to year, company to company, site to site, and comparable operations outwith the Wood Group.
At Wood Group we normally log incidents which result in the loss of more than one day or one shift.
These are the statistics normally published in Wood News .
We also measure the index based on incidents causing a loss of more than three days, which is the index used by most operating oil companies as the measure of industrial health and safety performance.
We have now changed our statistics to come into line with industrial practice and the recommendations of the Health and Safety Executive, by measuring incidents per 1,000,000 hours,[rather than per 100,000 hours we used up to 1992].
The graph restates all the historical figures on the new basis.
It shows an improving trend and compares well with benchmark data from outside sources.
The substantial improvement in 1992 was due to an excellent performance at Wood Group Engineering Contractors, backed by improvements at Oilfield Logistics and Supplies, Engineering Services and Gas Turbines.
WOOD GROUP WORLDWIDE
FOCUS ON North America
Rolls Wood Group's American sales and customer liaison office
TO BETTER serve the growing North American market, Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]Ltd opened an American sales and customer liaison office in 1991.  was appointed as sales manager for the Americas.
Located in the West Palm Beach area of Florida, the office has been established to provide efficient communications to the customer base, and to give technical support to Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]business.
It is also concerned with developing sales and service activities.
The level of business exported currently stands at 20 per cent of Rolls Wood Group's annual turnover.
In the first quarter issue of Wood News we featured the Group's activities in the Middle East.
This edition our attention turns to the United States of America.
We firstly report on Turbine Engine Services, the US arm of our Gas Turbine division.
Then we report on the Group's Drilling & Production Services activities in North America, which operate through Wood Group USA under the direction of Group director  in Houston.
That division now has four distinct areas of operation — submersible pumps, downhole data acquisition, wellhead equipment, and tubular inspection — each with as representation in the USA.
TURBINE ENGINE SERVICES
OPERATING FROM a 32,000 square foot facility on five acres adjacent to Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, Turbine Engine Services Corporation [TES]serves both domestic and international turbine markets.
TES specialises in the repair and recalibration of fuel manifolds, nozzles and gas turbine ancillaries.
Another area of expertise is the repair of combustion chambers, used in both aviation and industrial gas turbines.
TES became part of the Wood Group in late 1990.
Completing the Gas turbine division's UK companies, TES also carried out repair and overhaul of Pratt & Whitney GG4 gas generators.
The division as a whole therefore covers the full range of Rolls-Royce Avon, RB211 and Olympus engines through Rolls Wood Group, as well as GEC engines at Lincoln Turbine Service.
TES prides itself on having established a solid reputation as a customer-oriented, quality-conscious, and cost-competitive service organisation.
All work processed at the Company is tracked by computer, and all parts are accompanied by work control documents, in compliance with customers' requirements.
The Company has an experienced field service group which can provide complete maintenance programmes at any location, and can also provide teams of qualified technicians to remove and reinstall engines.
Repairs can therefore be accomplished on site, or at the Windsor Locks facility.
TES' major aviation customers for fuel nozzles in the USA are: Pratt & Whitney, Northwest Airlines, Delta Airlines, Federal Express and the US Air Force.
International customers include; Air Canada, Korean Airlines, China Airlines, Singapore Airlines, Airmotive Ireland and Scandinavian Airline Systems [SAS].
TES now employs some 80 people, and in addition to its Connecticut base, has a small branch at Lucas, near Dallas in Texas.
In the last issue of Wood News, we reported how TES successfully provided a power plant for Malaysia.
TES president  sees this as an important step forward in their drive to expand their overseas market: ‘With the strength and resources of the Wood Group behind us, TES is well positioned to become a dominant player in all the markets we serve’.
Turbine Engine Services has the capability to disassemble, repair and reassemble engines and/or free turbines.
SUBMERSIBLE PUMPS
ELECTRIC Submersible Pumps, Inc.
[ESP]was founded in April 1983 by .
They had seen an opportunity in the submersible pumps market that could bring enormous benefits to the oil industry in terms of cost, time and safety.
Prior to the formation of ESP, submersible pumps were either sent away for repair, or re-run after they were pulled from the well.
Repair was very expensive, nearly as much as purchasing a new unit.
Re-running equipment was clearly taking a safety risk.
ESP felt that a third option should be available — to clean and test the pumps, to see if they needed to be repaired or whether they were still usable.
The cost of this service would be substantially less than repairing a unit.
ESP's business flourished and two years later the Company established a wholly-owned subsidiary, Submersible Oil Services Inc.
[SOS], to provide field service and well production tests using reconditioned pumps.
Prior to this service, pump manufacturers would only provide a test pump for a well if the customer agreed to purchase the unit or pay for repairs at the end of the test period.
Using their own tested equipment, ESP could supply a well production test at a much cheaper fixed cost.
In 1985, ESP also added testing of submersible motors to their list of services — a list that has since grown by the addition of testing protectors, PSIs and cable.
The John Wood Group purchased an equity stake in ESP in 1990, to enable growth rate to be sustained, and renamed the Company Wood Group ESP.
Following this, the major pump companies began offering similar testing services.
To remain competitive the Company decided to enter the manufacturing business.
In July last year it purchased Trico Submersible systems, whose manufacturing facility in Oklahoma has been renamed ESP Products.
All other facilities remain under the name of ESP Services.
Our Wood News Correspondent for ESP, reports that since the acquisition of TSS, they are now doing business internationally: ‘All our products and services are available worldwide and we now have representatives in Canada, Indonesia, India, Japan, the Middle East and South America, in addition to our US workforce which has grown to over 260 employees.’
also told us that their new slogan is ‘One call does it all’.
Sounds like ESP is certainly ambitious enough to be a Wood Group Company!
WELLHEAD EQUIPMENT
TO COMPLEMENT the D&PS division's existing oil field market, a major stake was bought in ERC Industries Inc. at the end of last year.
This Company, which was founded in 1962, originally specialised in low cost repair of all types of wellheads and gate valves.
It is headed by president Richard Rau.
As ERC expanded, its capabilities increased to include repair of valves, BOP equipment, drilling spools and valve manifold systems.
In 1974 the Company began to manufacture wellhead equipment, and is now licensed under both API 6A and 16A licences.
ERC is now one of the largest full service wellhead companies in the industry, with 17 locations in the United States employing approximately 180 people, and with representatives in 10 overseas countries.
Each of ERC's domestic branches consists of a complete machine shop, welding shop and field service department.
This allows the Company to cover the complete range of wellhead needs, either repair or service, 24-hours a day, seven days a week.
ERC has also been in the forefront of developing and implementing industry standards.
It has participated in American Petroleum Institute [API]committees and task groups, in order to develop specifications currently in use today.
Although traditionally a US operation, ERC's Wood News Correspondent, says that their association with the Wood Group will increasingly mean an introduction to the international market.
‘Orders have already been completed for Syria, Pakistan and Turkey and we will soon be shipping an order to Bahrain.
‘We are optimistic that future international orders will be forthcoming, and we are now evaluating several markets for overseas repair shops, possibly in conjunction with other Wood Group companies.’
ERC gate valves are available in a full range of sizes for a variety of applications.
DOWNHOLE DATA ACQUISITION
ALTHOUGH already well established in the area of downhole data acquisition in the UK, the Group has only recently formed a company to penetrate this market directly in the United States.
In March of this year, Wood Group Production Technology Inc.
[WGPTI], a newly formed company acquired certain assets of Resource Technology Corporation [RTC].
WGPTI now operates in Houston and Midland, Texas and Rayne, Louisiana.
Their Z-Pres system provides an effective, portable downhole data acquisition and analysis service.
It offers high resolution data acquisition for well analysis, using both memory and real time data collection.
The Company's service engineers are highly qualified, and trained to specify the best use of the equipment for each individual well.
‘We are extremely enthusiastic about the future that this combination of technology and people represents,’ commented  WGPTI's Western Hemisphere manager.
‘Wood Group's commitment to the global market, will provide the structure for optimum customer alliance and shared success.’
The acquisition represents a significant step forward in WGPT's plans for international expansion, providing an important point of entry into the US market and an avenue into South America.
Indeed, South America has tremendous opportunities for optimising existing oil producing areas.
The fundamental shift towards allowing outside concessions to take new exploration areas, represents good long-term opportunities for the Wood Group.
WGPT general manager, is delighted with developments so far and commented: ‘This move by WGPT has made the competition stand up and take notice, particularly if you consider the combined experience, expertise and technology base of the two companies.
For example, in the area of hostile environment well test operations, we now have two of the biggest players in the global market joined together as one.
In addition, WGPT's Permanent Downhole Readout product line has excellent potential for the Deepwater Gulf of Mexico, as evidenced by how quickly we have been awarded the Tahoe project contract by Shell in New Orleans’.
TUBULAR INSPECTION
WITH THE PURCHASE of NDT Systems, Inc. in February 1991, John Wood Group acquired an engineering and manufacturing company, capable of fulfilling the requirements of tubular inspection companies worldwide.
Over 20 years' experience in the manufacture and supply of non-destructive tubular inspection equipment has established NDT Systems as a leader in this industry, with a client base that spans virtually every oil producing region of the world.
Oil field tubulars [which include drillpipe, tubing and casing]represent one of the single largest investments that an oil company makes in the course of a drilling programme.
To ensure the value of this significant assets, a maintenance programme must be implemented to safeguard the tubulars from wear and tear or loss through careless handling.
The quality of tubulars must always be extremely high, since failure can result in an expensive and time-consuming job to retrieve damaged equipment.
At the very worst, failure can lead to the a loss of well control which can pose grave danger to both drilling personnel and the environment.
To avoid these problems, oil companies and their drilling contractors rely on the services of tubular inspection companies.
In turn, these companies depend on NDT Systems to supply them with the latest technology, spare parts support and repair services.
Midland, Texas is home to NDT's headquarters and main manufacturing facility, and run by president, Being located in the heart of one of the largest oil producing regions in the United States has allowed NDT to develop products specifically designed to function in a reliable and cost-effective manner.
To serve the international market and provide its customers with a broader selection of products and services, two further companies have been integrated into NDT Systems.
NDT Eagle based in Aberdeen, Scotland, which is run by managing director  offers sales and technical support services to customers in Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
NDT Vicorp, located in Midland, Texas, and run by vice president  specialises in the purchase and refurbishment of used NDT units.
Together with these two divisions, NDT Systems can provide its worldwide customers with a full product range, service capability and technical support.
Also part of NDT Systems is the UK arm of Tubular Ultrasound operating out of Aberdeen.
It offers full body ultrasonic inspection for high alloy and heavy wall tubulars used for North Sea drilling operations.
International sales manager  based in Houston, recognises that equipment sales is just the beginning when establishing a relationship with customers.
‘To fulfil our commitment to our clients we must also support them with spare parts and a full technical service.
We therefore maintain a complete stock of equipment parts and spares, as well as technical specialists on 24-hour call at Midland and Houston in Texas and Aberdeen in Scotland.
We are already well located to respond to any urgent needs, but we shall be looking at further locations, possibly in the Far East and China, to address the requirements of this rapid growth area.
‘Now that NDT Systems, Eagle and Vicorp are part of the John Wood Group and employing over 50 people, we are collectively ready to grasp the opportunity to contribute to the Group's goal of becoming a major international energy service company.’
SPONSORSHIP/CHARITIES
Our marathon men
John Hill
AS YOU WERE reading the last issue of Wood News with your feet up and drinking a cup of hot coffee, John Hill, coupling machine operator at Fireater, was running through the cold, wet weather of Great Yarmouth in training for the London marathon.
John runs all year for fun and whilst training for this special event he was running between 5–20 miles a day.
He has now completed the marathon three times and this year achieved his best time of 3 hours 39 minutes, coming 8,348th out of 27,000 runners.
‘It was very hard work and the weather was extremely windy but all the runners keep each other going,’ said John.
John Wood Group and Fireater both sponsored John in his challenge which resulted in £300 for the children's ward at James Paget Hospital in Great Yarmouth.
John tells us that he has ambitions to do even better next year.
Jeff Helmore
JEFF HELMORE, operations coordinator at Wood Group Offshore, Great Yarmouth, has been an active member of the Great Yarmouth Road Runners since 1989.
This year he participated in the London Marathon on 18 April.
Jeff started training for the marathon in October last year, and was running 50 miles a week when he suffered a hip injury.
‘Despite several rests ranging from a few days up to a whole week, I couldn't shake off the injury and it just got worse.
I decided to struggle round the course, though, in my slowest time for a marathon of 3:30; 33’, he said.
Jeff's personal best times are 3:07:18 for a full marathon and 1:20; 55 for a half marathon.
Jeff is now recovering from his injury, and is organising the local Great Yarmouth half marathon which will take place on 25 July.
Wood Group Offshore are one of the sponsors of the event which it is hoped will attract at least 500 runners.
WG helps to keep the kids safe
IAN WOOD, chairman and managing director of John Wood group PLC, receives a certificate of commendation from Grampian's Chief Constable Ian Oliver.
The certificate was awarded for the Wood Group's contribution towards accident prevention by raising school children's awareness of safety through the 1992 D.E.S.K.
Project, which took child safety as its main theme.
Claire's clearly a champion for FWWG
FOR THE SECOND year, Foster Wheeler Wood Group are sponsoring the talented young squash player, Claire Waddell from Newburgh.
Claire, who is 17, started playing squash when she was ten years old at Ellon Squash Club.
Coached by her father, John, she was runner up in her first tournament [the Grampian Closed], and this was the start of her rise to her present position as number one in Scotland.
Claire has been Scottish Open champion three times, National Champion seven times and is the only person to have won the under 16s and under 19s in the same season.
Already the winner of sixty tournaments.
Claire took part in the European Junior Masters in Brussels in May, a tournament held for national champions, where she finished in third place.
On her return, she travelled to Harrogate for special coaching with international player David Pearson, in preparation for the World Junior Championships to be held in Malaysia in July.
Claire's father says that without sponsorship from companies like Foster Wheeler Wood Group, special coaching and participation in Europe would not be possible.
Claire would like to thank all those people who have helped her.
Hosting children's musical party
THE WOOD Group is once again supporting the Aberdeen International Youth Festival which is celebrating its 21st Anniversary.
This year's festival focuses on the Norwegian composer, Edward Grieg, as 1993 also marks the 150th anniversary of his birth.
The festival is therefore welcoming three Norwegian groups to the event, which promises to be more colourful and spectacular than ever.
The Wood Group has chosen to sponsor the Children's Musical Party at the Music Hall on the final afternoon of the festival, Saturday 14 August at 3.00 pm.
is the host of Grampian TV's ‘Bill's Magic Box’.
He will be taking the young audience on an exciting musical safari to meet animals from around the world.
There will be a performance of Prokofiev's ‘Peter and the Wolf’, with lots of audience participation, including magic, and there is even a rumour that a few trolls might make an appearance.
Tickets are priced at £2.50 for children and £3.50 for adults.
Priority booking can be arranged for staff by contacting the public affairs department at John Wood House.
The gift of freedom
A CHEQUE FOR £2,000 was recently handed over to the guide Dog for the Blind Association at the Shell/Esso Gas Plant at St Fergus.
Mrs Anne Scorggie, who has been blind since birth, received the cheque on behalf of the charity.
The money was donated by Shell and contractors companies working at St Fergus in recognition of the site's excellent safety record for 1992, when only one injury was reported.
‘Zero incidents would have been better,’ said Malcolm Hartley, the site safety adviser, ‘and this is our target for 1993, but only one incident throughout the year is extremely good news and could not have been achieved without the strong commitment for safe working shared by the site's work-force’.
The £2,000 will provide sufficient funds to buy and train one guide dog.
Taking the plunge for charity
Leap in the dark
A NUMBER OF Foster Wheeler Wood Group personnel had a different kind of spring in their step on 12 March.
Ten brave folk did a bungee jump to raise funds for Comic Relief.
as if plunging from 160 feet with a bit of elastic tied to an ankle wasn't frightening enough, the jumps took place in the dark [hence no successful photography!].
However, their bravery was handsomely rewarded as they collected more than £1,600.
Out on a limb
JUMPING FROM a height of 3,500 feet, Dave Speed, pipeyard supervisor for WGOL Great Yarmouth, raised £200 for the special babycare unit at the James Paget Hospital in Gorleston near Great Yarmouth.
On Sunday 18 April, Dave was preparing himself for his first ever parachute jump to raise money for charity [and to overcome his own fear of heights and aeroplanes]when he heard that the jump had been cancelled due to bad weather.
Dave breathed a sigh of relief but realised that he would have to prepare himself for another day.
The following Tuesday he was contacted at work to say that the jump was on for that afternoon.
Not having any time to think about it, Dave left work and went straight to the airfield.
WGOL supported Dave by financing the jump and we are pleased to report that he survived without any broken bones!
Most of the money raised came from sponsors and donations from Wood Group staff in Great Yarmouth.
Dave said, ‘The most frightening part of the jump was climbing out of the plane and having to crawl along the wing before jumping, but I look forward to doing it a second time just for fun!’
Old coins buy new kidneys
JUNE SEES the end of the old 10p piece as legal currency as it is replaced by the new smaller version.
But your old coins won't go to waste, because Malcolm Campbell, a service engineer at Wood Group Engineering Services [Peterhead]Ltd has got the perfect solution.
Malcolm is collecting old 10p pieces on behalf of his daughter for the Kidney Transplant Association.
At the moment his daughter has no kidneys; she has had a transplant but unfortunately her body rejected the kidney.
She therefore has to use a dialysis machine approximately three times a week.
Every 10p piece will go towards helping her and many like her.
If anyone has any 10p pieces they would like to donate [or any donations at all], please contact.
TRAINING
White & Mackay, a great blend
ANDREW White and John Mackay, both apprentice pipefitters, will be the first WGEC apprentices to work offshore.
Their offshore work will start during the shutdown period, and both will be based on Brent Charlie.
Until now, Andrew and John have spent two years at the METCOM training centre in Grangemouth, where they were trained to ENTRA standards.
This was combined with SCOTVEC modules at Falkirk college.
At the start of their third year, the technical training department arranged for the youngsters to work alongside Shell trainees at the Altens training centre.
They became involved in dismantling pipework, hydro testing and flange testing on the Eagle platform.
This period was aimed at developing a close working relationship, between the WGEC trainees and the client company, from the start of their careers.
Their transfer from site was carefully managed, and both trainees were expertly mentored by John Corbett, PCE senior site supervisor at Shell's St Fergus Plant.
Under John's direction, the two apprentices were exposed to a full range of site work, largely on live plant.
John gets full marks for providing excellent experience and guidance.
The Brent MMSC focal point, Graham Birnie, has been instrumental in ensuring our two trainees complete their standards based training offshore, in order to finish their apprenticeship.
Andrew and John were recruited with the objective of being prepared for Shell work on the Brent contract, and have systematically followed a route of planned training, to work for Wood Group Engineering Contractors on a Shell site and installation.
The training has proved another success for the partnering concept, principally due to the commitment from the client towards craft trainees working offshore.
Quest for competency
IN RESPONSE to client requirements for competency amongst the offshore workforce [initially for the Shell contract and more recently for Total], WGEC has joined the Marine & Engineering Training Association [M&ETA].
This organisation is an industry lead and awarding body that has developed national standards and assessment material to support vocational qualifications and SCOTVEC awards in engineering at a variety of levels up to technician.
Our initial aim is to prove that our technicians are fully capable of carrying out their duties offshore, which is now a requirement under Safety Case Regulations.
Later we hope to be the first offshore contractor with a competent core crew accredited to national standards.
This should ensure that client companies accept our personnel, and minimise the need for competency audits.
Other companies within the Group are now considering joining M&ETA to ensure the standard of their personnel and gain a commercially competitive edge.
Certified to succeed
STEVE Brackenridge of Wood Group Offshore, Aberdeen operations department, has been awarded the Certificate of Professional Competence in National Road Haulage Operations.
Steve attending a course at Stirling organised by the Freight Transport Association, and passed the examination.
Congratulations!
University alumni association
THE ROBERT Godon University has recently established an alumni office, which is intended to form a permanent and active link, between the university and its former students.
Dr Alix Thom, of Foster Wheeler Wood Group, is currently assisting the university in the initial planning of the Alumni Association, along with Carol Campbell, who has been appointed alumni officer.
Carol will be happy to receive news of former students and provide information such as activities for graduates.
WOOD GROUP PEOPLE
Geoff makes it a first
GEOFF HARRIS, senior project engineer for the Olympus division of Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]Ltd, achieved a unique distinction in April this year.
Geoff has completed 50 years service with Rolls-Royce and associated companies, a record unlikely to be beaten in these modern enlightened times.
Geoff, who is due to retire at Christmas, started work in April 1943 with Armstrong Siddeley Motors in Coventry, as a fourteen-year-old trainee in the works order office.
Working for Mr Looms, his abiding memory is of the desks in the office, which consisted of brick sides with a concrete slab as a working surface.
These apparently doubled as personal air raid shelters.
Geoff progressed to become a bound apprentice at the age of sixteen.
However he broke the rules when he insisted on doing his national service with the RAF, before being allowed to complete his apprenticeship with Armstrong Siddeley.
During his time with the RAF, he worked on Rolls-Royce Merlin engines in support of the Berlin Airlift.
On his return to civvy street he sharpened his skills on aero-engines with Armstrong Siddeley's Cheetah, Adder, Viper, Mamba, Python and Double-Mambas, the full range of Sapphire jet engines, as well as the Rolls-Royce Avon.
When Bristol Motors took over Armstrongs to become Bristol-Siddeley, he moved to industrial and marine engines with the Olympus and Proteus Gas Generators.
He also gained valuable experience with fuel, oil and air systems, and controls.
When Rolls-Royce in turn took over Bristol Siddeley, Geoff was moved from the Parkside factory to the Ansty factory in Coventry, where he became foreman of the Aero/Industrial Rig Shop.
In 1978 he had a complete change, by becoming a contracts engineer with the Rolls-Royce Product Support Division, working primarily with customers of Industrial Olympus.
This culminated with his transfer to the Rolls Wood Group in 1990.
In his career he has visited fourteen overseas countries.
His contribution to the development of the Olympus overhaul facilities at Rolls Wood Group, must be regarded as invaluable.
In his spare time, Geoff is an active life member of the Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust, who dedicate themselves to preserving museum pieces of the rich output of Rolls-Royce and associated companies over the years.
One proud exhibit, for example, is a Blue Streak Missile.
Carrying on with this tradition, Geoff is the proud owner of a 1960 Armstrong Siddeley Star Sapphire saloon car, which he keeps at his home in Brinklow, Warwickshire.
Frequently seen at rallies in the Coventry area, Geoff makes an annual pilgrimage to Holland with the Armstrong Siddeley owners club.
The car has been featured on a number of occasions at Rolls-Royce Ansty, when Geoff has treated retiring colleagues to a very special trip home in a very special car.
Geoff has had to decline an invitation by Rolls Wood Group's managing director, Hugh Gibson, to bring the car to Aberdeen.
As he explained: ‘The car would have to be accompanied by its own fuel tanker for the trip.
‘At speeds up to 75mph, she achieves an average of 19 to 20 miles per gallon.
This deteriorates to 11 miles per gallon at 105 miles an hour.’
So unfortunately Geoff won't be able to repeat the service he has given other friends when he eventually retires.
We wish Geoff and his wife Ivy a long and happy retirement.
Nigel Mansell — watch out!
25-year joint service award
Malcolm Sweet, assistant to chief inspector [RB211], recently reached the 25-year mark on joint service with Rolls-Royce and Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]Ltd.
Malcolm was presented with a watch and certificate to recognise this achievement by Hugh Gibson, managing director of Rolls Wood Group.
John's year of celebration
JOHN McCAFFERTY, services coordinator on Brent Charlie , notched up 15 years service with Wood Group Engineering Contractors on 17 April.
John joined the company in 1978 and has worked on several platforms including [Auk A. Brent A]and [C. Forties A.B C]and D, the [Hutton TLP, Murchison]and [Beatrice A]and B.
This is a big year for John in other respects, too.
Married with three daughters and a son, John celebrated his fiftieth birthday in February.
The family will be celebrating again in June when one of his daughters gets married.
Finally, John is due to finish his HNC course in mechanical engineering later this year.
Our best wishes go to John and his family and we look forward to working with him for another 15 year.
RETIREMENT
IAN DAY, managing director of Wood-Way Engineering, retired in April.
Ian has been with Wood-Way engineering for nine years, and was previously employed by Weir Pumps.
Ian's presentation took place on 29 April.
Gordon Ramsay, general manager of Wood-Way Engineering, made a short speech on behalf of all the staff, and presented Ian with a crystal water jug, six crystal glasses and a tray.
A collection was made for Ian and his wife Jeanette by all the companies in the Engineering Services Division, with which they intend to buy a painting.
Ian is going to use his retirement for gardening, cycling, and taking a course on counselling.
We would like to wish Ian all the best for a long and happy retirement.
OBITUARY
Ken Rowlands
It is with great sadness that we report the death of Ken Rowlands.
the former director and general manager of Wood Group Haven Engineering Limited, passed away on 3 April following a massive stroke.
Ken became ill in November 1991 when he suffered a minor stroke.
He made a good recovery and in February this year was able to undergo an operation to replace both hips.
Again he progressed very well, and it was therefore a terrible shock to all his colleagues when he suffered the fatal stroke.
Following nine years service in the RAF, Ken worked for a number of companies, before joining Haven Automation in 1979 as an instrument engineer.
On the formation of Wood Group Haven engineering, Ken became branch manager and then general manager in 1984, a position he held until his illness.
We would like to pass on our deepest sympathy to Ken's wife Marjorie, and to his son Dr Kevin Rowlands, daughter-in-law Sian, and grand-daughters Victoria and Olivia.
Alyson beats the boy racers
THE GREAT Yarmouth Marketing Initiative's [GYMI], go-Kart Grand Prix, held on 21 April, proved to be an evening of great entertainment for all who took part.
The GYMI organised the event at the Norwich Indoor Kart Centre, for 23 representatives from local companies to get together and enjoy a competitive evening.
WGOL was represented by our own ‘boy racer’ Andy Cann, together with Neil Tucker, Alyson Ritchie and Roy Donald.
A high score in a series of heats had to be accumulated to guarantee a good semi-final position, and qualify for one of the six places in the final.
Neil, Andy and Alyson all made it to the semi-final, but only Alyson made it through to the final, where she came fourth and received a medal for her achievement.
She was also awarded the Marshall's ‘personality of the evening’ award following some excellent driving.
Meanwhile what of the boy racer?
Andy says he was all set to get a place in the final until he was shunted on the second-last lap.
Ah well, better luck next time, Andy.
Andy's right on cue
THE ANNUAL snooker tournament took place recently, for everyone working within operating areas of WGOL, Great Yarmouth.
Over the two evenings, 21 players took part in several heats, with the final being decided between Andy Cann and Kurt Horne both from the Yarmouth Marine Base.
Sony's return challenge
WOOD GROUP Haven Engineering, met Sony [UK]Projects Department, on 29 April to battle it out for the recently-established Wood Group Haven v Sony [UK]Snooker challenge cup, at the Snooker Centre, Bridgend.
The Wood Group Haven team, successfully defeated Sony [UK]by 6 games to 3.
The cup was presented to Wood Group Haven, but retained at Sony for display and safe keeping.
Wood Group Haven took the opportunity to say farewell to one of Sony's employees.
Dean Cook, who is leaving to go back to university.
Dean has worked with the company for many years, and general manager Alun Williams presented him with the gift of his choice — an electric drill.
The evening was enjoyed by all, with Sony requesting a return match, confident that with a few changes they can win the cup back.
Cook-out in Odessa
ERC's ODESSA, Texas branch, and ESP held a joint barbecue in April.
The appetising menu consisting of Texas/Cajun pork chops, sausages, coleslaw and bread, was provided for all their customers with hearty appetites in Artesia, New Mexico.
The afternoon was attended by approximately 150 customers and their partners representing Yates Petroleum, Hayco Petroleum and associated Yates Petroleum companies, Navajo Refinery, Artesia Field Service, Bearing Service & Supply, Meridian, Unocal and Devon Energy.
ERC and ESP were both pleased with the results of this hospitality, and felt that it was a useful exercise in developing good relations with their customers.
Rumour has it that the barbecue team is ready and willing to provide its services to Aberdeen on request.
AHT top of the league
THE ANNUAL Wood Group [Great Yarmouth]inter company five-a-side football tournament has been won by AHT Surveys.
Darin Scales and Alan McCammon sealed the victory for AHT Surveys, by scoring against Conoco [yard], with a final result of 2-O.
Third and fourth place went to Great Yarmouth Cargo Handling Services and Hamilton Oil, respectively.
AHT sailed to victory once again, winning 9-O against Fireater [2]in another five-a-side tournament organised by Coopers & Lybrand [Norwich Office].
Although the tournament was based on a knock-out scenario, the final positions are based on league performances to give a fairer reflection.
Worthy of the quaich
Stuart Caughey of Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]repair division has recently been awarded Junior Chamber Aberdeen's Sillerton Quaich for being its best new member.
The quaich is presented to the most outstanding member of no more than two year's membership.
The judges considered the candidate's participation and level of achievement in the activities of the Chamber, and in Junior Chamber Scotland [such as attending national conferences and national training days], together with the candidate's potential for further advancement within the organisation.
At the presentation dinner, Michael Reid, president of Junior chamber Aberdeen, said: ‘If ever there was a new member who typified my theme of excellence in action, it is this year's winner.
He has attended numerous meetings and social events, and has been involved in many projects.
He was involved in the charities and voluntary organisations PR seminar, and has volunteered to be public relations and marketing director for Junior Chamber Aberdeen next year.
‘I hope that the energy and drive displayed so far by this member, is only a taste of what is to come.
Top Club's bonniest team
IT IS DEAD EASY when you see a quiz on television.
You know most of the answers, yet the competitors keep failing to respond, or get it wrong.
What wallies!
Where do they get these cretins from?
I will let you into a secret, I know where they get them from, or got three of them anyway.
February 14, Grampian Studios, the intrepid and unbeatable trio: Peter Prentice, Chris Reiter and Jim Milne, arrived for the recording of Top Club.
Four programmes were being made that afternoon.
FWWG Sports and Social Club versus an Ellon team were to play, with the winners of this game vying with the Spey Valley Rotary Club, and a Scottish Women's Rural Institute.
The one victorious team would then qualify for the semi-final, to be recorded a fortnight later.
We watched the first recording, the questions were easy.
This was going to be a doddle.
Taking our places under the lights and feeling the first twinges of nervousness, we watched the cameras moving into position.
Frank Gilfeather rehearsed his opening, and tried to find a point of interest with which to introduce us on screen.
There was a great deal of stopping and starting when it all got underway; the scorer made a mistake; the score indicator broke down; we caught Grampian out over an answer they gave as wrong, when it was right.
But the time flew, we won our first round, and very quickly we were recording again.
Spey Valley Rotary Club were a good team and we knew we would have our work cut-out.
Sadly, we fell behind early on and never really threatened them after that, although we chased them all the way.
Of course, our buzzers didn't work as quickly as theirs, and they got all the easy questions.
In fact, morally we wiped the floor with them, or that is what we would like to think anyway.
It was good fun though, and interesting to see how a programme is made.
All that work for 15 30-minute programmes.
Now we wait for the call from the bigger TV companies, who will obviously want a talented team such as us for one, or all, of their quiz shows.
Maybe our own series, but forgetting all that there is one inescapable fact, we were certainly the bonniest team of the tournament!