

Five-year boost from BP
At the end of October, we learned that WGEC had been awarded a major new contract with BP.
The contract, worth an estimated £150 million, will run for five years on the Magnus, Thistle and Miller platforms.
When the contract award was announced, David Capitanchik of NorthSound Radio interviewed WGEC chairman Bill Carr, who outlined the significance of the contract for both the company and our employees.
Carr:This contract maintains the Wood Group's position in the forefront of the next stage in the development of the North Sea.
Capitanchik:Now while this won't necessarily create more jobs, it means better employment for your people, doesn't it?
Carr:Well, there will be some new jobs, David, but the really important issue is that it will mean permanent jobs.
Over the past few years, the industry has tended to lean more and more on contract labour.
Our clear objective is to convert as many of these contract personnel to permanent staff, bringing stability to the industry in the long term.
Capitanchik:Will it also mean that you will have more training programmes for these people now that they are more permanently employed?
Carr:Yes, obviously the long term contract brings stability which will allow us to maximise training to achieve higher levels of flexibility and efficiency in offshore working.
Capitanchik:This particular contract you have signed is with BP.
What advantages will they and the other operators get out of it?
Carr:By working together closely with the contractors as partners, we can both plan ahead, produce innovative ideas and work together on common goals such as continuous improvement in reducing production costs.
That's really what both parties believe they will get out of this contract.
Capitanchik:There are bound to be qualitative gains but also efficiency gains.
Would these be shared between you and the operator, in the sense that they will be paying a keener price — from the operator's point of view — then they would otherwise have for a shorter contract?
Carr:Well, I think a ‘Keener’ price is probably the wrong way to put it.
I think we have gone in at a very sensible price, and I am sure the other contractors did.
The important thing is that this contract is incentive based, and the incentive for us is to achieve the productivity.
Really, it is all about ‘win win’.
If we get this right, we can make the productivity gains and reduce the costs, then there is an opportunity for us to progress through incentives with the oil company itself.
Capitanchik:This is really the trend for the future.
Will you be looking for more of these longer term contracts?
Carr:Absolutely.
There is no doubt that the industry is moving very quickly and positively now in this direction.
The BP contract, which has strategic importance to the Group, is subject to excellent performance, quality of service and continuous improvement across the broad range of services to be provided.
It will run from the end of November 1992 for five years and will cover all our principal disciplines including mechanical, electrical, instrumentation and process control.
The quality of our existing work was a deciding factor and all WGEC employees should be congratulated for the part they have played in helping us to win this contract.
Keeping you in the news
Thanks to everyone who has contributed to this issue of The Gusher — keep it coming in.
Hopefully, early next year we will be setting up a network of reporters from all WGEC locations to make sure that all your news gets reported.
Also we are aiming to get four issues out next year on a regular basis, so your stories will be even more welcome.
Amoco contract secure
Wood Group Engineering Contractors were recently successful in re-tendering their existing contract with Amoco.
The contract, which runs for a five-year period from 1 November 1992, covers the provision of maintenance personnel for the production facilities on Amoco's NW Hutton, Montrose Alpha, Arbroath, Everest and Lomond platforms.
Hamlet and Eloise ‘In the beginning’
‘I love you, Hamlet’.
The words were whispered in a soft western English accent, a gentle hint of Ireland making an enchanting spell for the eager listener.
Her beautiful soft face, illuminated by the intermittent glow of the fog light, was reflecting its own light of love.
Hamlet [his father couldn't afford a large cigar when he was born], steadied himself against a stanchion on the underside of the rig.
‘I love you too, Eloise,’ his voice, hoarse with passion, rose above the deafening crescendo of the cruel sea below.
‘Please, please Hamlet,’ there was love in the plea, but fear also, ‘please don't undo my life jacket.’
She loved the waves in her hair, but hated the untold billions of gallons of water down below.
‘Eloise!’
It was a command, an assurance threaded with a veiled threat.
‘There's a hot work permit hanging above your head ad we aren't going to waste it!’
Was ever a love story born like this?
Months ago they were passing strangers, chucked together at check-in times.
Now their raging passions looked like tearing asunder one of the strongest rigs in the North Sea.
Will the romance be rubbished?
Can an unlicensed OIM make permanent an oily union?
Gusher is proud to announce that they have retained the services of the famous novelist Barbara Heartland so closely chronicle the most searing love story since ‘Welder on a hot tin roof’.
Make sure of your next copy of The Gusher — now!
A Christmas Message
In December of 1973 I had the dubious pleasure of spending Christmas on duty as an Army chaplain in Belfast.
The regiment I served with at the time was normally based at Osnabruck in Germany.
As Christmas approached our thoughts turned frequently and longingly to our wives and children.
Three days before Christmas, I was approached by an RUC inspector — a practising Christian — who felt the pain, the grief and the shame of the callous disregard for life which resulted in murder, maiming, brutality and hatred between the two main sections of the community.
Would I be prepared to participate in an open air service that would bring Protestants and Catholics together on the peace-line?
If I was prepared to do so, the minister in the Shankill and the priest from the Falls Road would come, to join in an act of worship to be held at 5 p.m.
I still remember that Christmas Day — the inspector and I standing there in the drizzle — the city of Belfast enjoying an uneasy period of quietness with the men of violence possibly challenged by their memories of the Christmas Message and declaring a truce [for Christmas only].
At about 4.55 they came quietly and nervously from each community — right up to where the inspector and I stood.
The minister and the priest both said prayers and traditional carols were sung with enthusiasm.
I gave a short address with one foot on each side of the peace-line [a sleeping policeman — concrete]basing my theme on the marvellous passage in the second chapter of the Gospel according to St. Luke — the song of the angels, seen and heard by the shepherds, ‘Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace and goodwill to all people’.
We concluded by singing the carol O Come all ye Faithful and I gave them a blessing.
The miracle then happened.
People who would not in any circumstances pass over the peace-line without being in literal fear of their lives safely crossed over, shook hands, embraced and wept.
they then went away.
The inspector and I were silent and inwardly praised God.
After Boxing Day the truce ended.
The shooting, murders, bombing, explosions and brutality started all over again.
The police inspector sighed and shook his head.
Nothing, however, can detract from the miracle that, on Christmas Day 1973, people who lived in a state of enmity with one another on each side of the peace-line were strangely drawn together, jointly to celebrate the Christmas story and to find in it a message of love and forgiveness and of reconciliation.
Nothing will ever change that.
I pray that this Christmas the message will have the same miracle for you.
For those who will be offshore at Christmas time, a video entitled ‘A carol for christmas’ has been prepared.
Do have it put on in the cinema.
Centre of Learning
Wood Group has recently opened a training centre.
The facility, opposite John Wood House, is available to all group companies for training courses, induction briefings, meetings and presentations.
The centre has three different-sized lecture rooms, with seating capacity ranging from 8–20 people [depending on lay out]and a syndicate room.
The lecture areas, adjacent to the canteen and coffee lounge, are fully equipped with audio visual aids.
A sponsored college first
have been sponsored by WGEC to attend Jewel & Esk Valley College for two years as trainee instrument technicians.
They will study full time for the SCOTVEC National Certificate in Industrial Measurement and Process Control at college in Edinburgh.
the youngsters are partly funded by Grampian Enterprise's Skillseekers at the current maximum level per trainee.
The induction was particularly important as both trainees will be working away from Wood Group premises for the first two years with the Group.
It is anticipated that WGEC will be able to provide vacation work for the trainees to ensure that good links are maintained with the sponsoring company.
This is the first time WGEC has sponsored trainees through two years of full-time education.
On successful completion, and  will ultimately be placed offshore on the Shell MMS contract.
Training strategy to plug the gap
THE TECHNICAL training department has developed a strategy to help alleviate the continual short-fall of instrument personnel available to the offshore industry.
The aim is to recruit HNC trainees and sponsoring apprentices to process control courses in Scotland.
A second route is through conversion training.
This concept will enable electrical technicians to take on instrument duties during periods of peak manning.
Flexible skilling will give more job variety to individuals and increase job security.
It also fulfils our commitment to our clients by introducing flexibly trained core crew personnel.
& name ; has worked in conjunction with Roxby Engineering and BP to devise a series of five one-week modules to cover the academic aspect of the training.
Additionally, 50 hours of practical experience between each module will be necessary, divided between 30 hours offshore and 20 hours onshore.
Offshore time is to be made available on the candidates for non-electrical duties and records will be kept by offshore supervision.
The onshore aspect will consist of three days field break at the nearest ‘live’ training venue [for example a suitably equipped local college], to practice skills.
Several other OCC member companies have followed this training initiative and the modules, which commenced in the BP Training Centre at Dyce in September were heavily subscribed.
The next series will run concurrently with the first set, and will be held in Tees-side.
Dates and locations have been arranged to suit offshore work patterns and the personnel selected to attend.
Grant aid from the ECITB has been secured to cover the teaching blocks.
Finally, SCOTVEC will be approached to award SVQ Validation to the modular conversion course, which should then lead to tax concessions being available to all companies taking part.
Six steps to quality improvement
Over ten months ago, Wood Group Engineering Contractors initiated its Total Quality Management initiative.
As the article in the Summer edition of The gusher explained, six improvement project teams were formed and were hard at work studying systems, identifying the cause of problems and formulating solutions.
The end of the year is an appropriate time to update our readers with progress made by the six teams.
Payroll
THE PROJECT nearest to our hearts is undoubtedly the payroll queries project.
The objective is to reduce the number of payroll queries to a minimum.
Questionnaires were sent out to 300 employees and timekeepers in order to gather data on the problem areas.
One hundred and twenty-nine replies were received — a good response which has proved very useful.
The team decided that improvements were needed in the way the payslip is laid out.
It has now been amended to include new payroll fields which will make it easier to understand.
In addition, the team has created an explanation of the payslip codes, which will be sent to you during December 1992.
‘Standby’ and ‘Holiday Pay’can now be identified much easier, and amendments have also been made to the wage query form.
The incidence of wage queries has certainly reduced since summer, but the first test of the improvements made will be during the next up-man which is due in early 1993.
Interface
THE FIRST project to reach a conclusion was the team looking at the interface between our personnel and wages departments.
It was found that there were problems which were common to both the payroll and the interface projects enabling them to be solved by the same remedy.
A list of deadlines and responsibilities was drawn up and agreed between the two departments and this has led to a better understanding of each others tasks and the benefits of compliance.
Our thanks are due to John and his team for their contribution to the TQM initiative.
Induction
AGAIN, questionnaires were used to obtain the ‘customer's’ view, but there was a poor response.
The team also looked at other companies' inductions, including those of our clients.
It was concluded that there was little improvement to be made to the content of our induction package.
Improvements could be made, however, in the way inductions were presented and in the facilities at John Wood House for carrying them out.
From the recommendations of the team, a very successful two-day course was devised and held in September, to train the five personnel who conduct the inductions.
We have also secured the use of a meeting room in the new Training Centre at John Wood House with all the facilities necessary to present inductions in a comfortable and professional manner.
The final task of the team is to produce revised induction packs which address the differences in client requirements.
Billing
CONSIDERABLE time and effort has gone into gathering information and analysing data with the aim of accelerating delivery of invoices to our clients and to ensure invoices are complete and correct in every detail.
Even one or two days delay is significant, with the potential savings in respect of lost interest and other benefits in the order of £500,000 a year.
Although the emphasis is on liaising between our clients and ourselves, attention has also focused on improvements to our internal records and controls.
A mini project which evolved from the billings project was set up to look at reconciliation of hours paid to employees with hours billed to clients.
This team, led by  and comprising , put together recommendations which have now been implemented.
Safety
AT THE time of the last Gusher, the Safety project team were actively investigating trends in accident type and frequency that applied to the platforms and trades particularly relevant to WGEC.
The investigations revealed that there were, in fact, no clear trends.
Accident types within WGEC reflected industry-wide findings, and frequency was generally better than the ‘norm’.
Investigation on how the situation could be improved provided the same answer — the only long term effective means of reducing the accident rate was to constantly reinforce WGEC's safety culture.
Effecting culture change, however, is not easily achieved by individual pockets of sporadic activity.
since the prime contributor to the ‘shape’ of a safety system was the documentation and narrative, the first step in signalling this culture change was to revise and enhance its content.
As this revision was a technically complex and specialised task, the team passed over agreed elements of this redevelopment work to the safety manager, giving assistance, where appropriate, to completely revising our existing policy documents.
Telephones
THE TASK is to reduce telephone response time for calls coming in to John Wood House.
Having studied data gathered from various sources, the team has assisted staff to programme telephone handsets into ‘hunt groups’, whereby calls can be answered by an alternative to prevent the call reverting to the switchboard unanswered.
It was also decided to segregate the receptionist and the switchboard functions.
The number of visitors passing through the reception at John Wood House has increased from 852 in May of this year to 1,255 people in November.
This extra load would have badly affected telephone response time if the two functions had not been separated.
The team is currently investigating the feasibility of installing direct dial facilities.
Our present system is  analogue and the requirement for computer system links and data transmission may justify changing to a digital system.
This would also simplify communications between on and offshore with regard to, for example , payroll information.
Various other options are being looked at, including use of Mercury lines for cheaper long distance calls.
A call management system has been installed to monitor all calls to enable the team to assess the impact of changes made and to produce hard data for use in any justification or recommendations.
The quality council is monitoring the progress of all the teams and considering the subjects and composition of teams for the next series of projects.
Further training in TQM techniques will take place in early 1993 which will involve more and more of our staff.
For now, our thanks are due to all the members of the quality improvement teams, their leaders and all who assisted them in their goal of improving the quality of the way we conduct our business.
SAFETY NEWS GUSHER
Brae sets new safety record
FOURTEEN WGEC production operators on Marathon's Brae platforms reached a new record of five years without a lost time earlier this year and to mark the occasion each was given a pen set.
As this was such a special event, however, the Company decided to donate £1,000 to the Linn Moor Residential School for mentally handicapped children, located just outside Aberdeen.
The cheque was presented to the school in September by operational services director , accompanied by  and , two of the Brae team, together with  (OIM) and  (safety officer) from Marathon.
Safety manager , presented  and  with their own pen sets as well as those for the other lads on the team.
The WGEC employees who achieved this record were:.
Safety milestone on Brent Charlie
THE FIRST day of December 1992 marked a milestone on Shell's Brent Charlie platform.
The Wood Group MMSC team, including subcontractors, clocked up 12 months without a Lost Time Incident [LTI].
This record becomes even more impressive when compared with the previous year in which the Brent Charlie MMSC team recorded a disappointing 10 LTIs.
In December 1991, an eight point action plan was drawn up to increase awareness of safety and to address specific issues leading to accidents.
In the appointment of subcontractors, safety performance was given a high priority in the selection process and contractors with poor safety records were not invited to bid.
The major subcontractors, Cape and Salamis, have worked well with WGEC to help turn the tide.
Other initiatives included the introduction of housekeeping rules and a formalised audit programme.
Each member of the team will be presented with an engraved Caithness whisky glass to commemorate this achievement.
Brent Charlie MMSC are now on course for the next safety milestone of one million manhours without a LTI.
It will not be easy, but the team has already shown that, with a concerted effort, they can work to a high safety standard and they aim to reach the magic million next summer.
The photo above shows  and some of his team, allegedly at 5.30am enthusiastically waiting for the customary ‘Go!’ from the beach, prior to bursting into life on another action-packed safe day on Brent Charlie.
Suggestions for what is really going on should be forwarded to , who will organise an appropriate prize for the most imaginative guess.
Well done Brent Charlie — Keep it up!