

PFR Resumes Operations
Congratulations to all in Reactor Services as PFR resumed supplying electricity to the National Grid.
The first connection took place at 1127 hours on Friday 22nd January, and output had reached 112 MW on 24th January when due to severe weather conditions the National Grid was disconnected from Dounreay and PFR tripped.
Reconnection was achieved on 31st January.
This is the culmination of a unique 18 months engineering programme which achieved its objective on 23rd December when Consent to Start-up was obtained from the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII).
Reactor low power operations began on 30th December.
PFR will now operate through to early in July when a shutdown is planned for refuelling and essential inspection and maintenance.
Resumption of power operations is scheduled by mid-September and apart from a further short shutdown to refuel early in 1994, PFR will continue to generate electricity up until March 1994.
During 1993/94 the PFR is expected to generate an income in excess of 14M.
PFR Station Manager, Mr Ed Adam said: ‘It has always been AEA's intention to bring PFR back to power as soon as possible.
We have overcome numerous technical problems and it is thanks to the commitment and expertise of all our people and those who have supplied their services to the PFR that this has proved possible’.
T&GWU Vice-Convenor, Mr Jim McColl said: ‘The restart of PFR is a tremendous boost to the workforce.
We have demonstrated once again that technical difficulties can be overcome and we believe that this proves that PFR should have been allowed to continue operations beyond 31st March, 1994’.
PFR will initially resume power at 200MW.
Once the performance of the evaporator units has been confirmed, PFR will be returned to full power at 250 MW.
Colin Gregory was particularly pleased that PFR returned to power shortly before he left Reactor Services to become Divisional Manager, Dounreay Operations, AEA Fuel Services.
Colin Gregory's connections with Fast Reactors go back nearly 30 years.
HE was involved in the design of PFR at Winfrith, moving to Dounreay in 1970 and becoming the Head of PFR in 1985.
Latterly he has been Fast Reactor Director.
PFR restart prompted the visit of Dr Brian Eyre, Deputy Chairman on Friday, 5th February, to meet Reactor Services employees congratulating them on the outstanding job of returning PFR to power.
Ed Adam, Station Manager, PFR
Colin Gregory
SERT UPDATE
Altogether about 260 people have volunteered for early release under AGN 10/92, which followed the announcement of the end of Government funding for Fast Reactor R&D.
Senior managers in Reactor Service and other businesses and Services, aided by Personnel staff, have been kept busy trying to respond to these applications.
For volunteers whose jobs are disappearing the process is fairly straightforward, but it becomes much more complicated to match those who want to be redeployed with those who volunteered to leave but whose jobs will continue.
Earlier this week all 113 volunteers in Reactor Services received a letter.
Twenty-four have been told that their application was approved in principle, 69 applications turned down and will now either stay in their current jobs or be redeployed.
The remaining twenty were advised their applications were still under consideration.
Personnel Manager, Paul Hartley, hopes to be able to write to all the remaining applicants within the next two weeks, and also to give further details to those who need them.
Meanwhile a Dounreay Notice was issued this week inviting early release volunteers for April 1994, when PFR operations cease.
Being presented by Decommissioning and Rad Waste Divisional Manager, Dr John Hudson with his certificate for Module 20, the newly revised radiation protection supervisor training programme (RPS) is Mr Alan Ross.
Participants are now also required to take part in a three part training programme.
This will take the form of Preliminary Training; a core part in the new Module 20 which has been expanded to last one and a half days followed by a written assessment with a pass mark of 75%; and Specialist Training — both on and off the job which has been tailored to be appropriate to the area that the prospective RPS will be working in.
The courses are organised by the Fuel Cycle Area Training Centre.
Demand has been high and two further courses have been scheduled, one in February and one in March, both of which are fully booked.
Further courses will be run in line with our obligations under the Ionising Radiations Regulations.
OLD BOOKS RAISE MONEY FOR CHARITY
Selling old books, which are in many cases out of date, has raised £41.64 for the Cancer Relief MacMillan Fund.
The books have been supplied by the library and are left outside the canteen by members of the library where they can be taken in exchange for a small donation.
This is the first time that books have been disposed of in this way.
The collection started last March when it was agreed that it would be a good idea to see if money could be raised from something which normally would be disposed of, benefiting nobody.
All monies collected for this fund will be re-distributed throughout the Caithness area. 
Safety Snippets
LOST TIME ACCIDENTS DOWN
The number of lost time accidents occurring on site during 1992 was 14 including 6 which were reportable to the HSE.
The comparative figures for 1991 were 25 and 19 respectively.
SAFETY REPORT FOR THE PERIOD 22nd NOVEMBER TO 31st DECEMBER, 1992
A person found his hands to be contaminated on leaving a reprocessing plant, and he had to have the contamination removed.
A check showed that the area where he had been working was contaminated and it was cleaned.
— Category 2.
A monitor detected some low level skin contamination and also some contamination on the person's personal clothing, which were effectively dealt with.
— Category 2.
Some low level air activity was detected in a reprocessing plant which necessitated the temporary wearing of respirators until the ventilation system refreshed the area.
— Category 2.
In another reprocessing plant, an air monitor alarmed, and as a precaution, personnel evacuated the area.
Subsequent checking confirmed that personnel were not affected.
— Category 2.
The results of a dosimetry investigation confirmed that a previously reported intake of plutonium had not in fact occurred.
The report has been deleted from the Site Incident Register.
Ten non-radiological incidents were recorded during the period, one being a lost time accident reportable under RIDDO Regulations.
Dounreay Nurse gains Diploma
Dounreay Occupational Nurse, Mrs Irene Woods has just passed her Nursing diploma in Occupational Health Nursing.
Her qualification comes at the end of a two year distance learning course, during which time Irene had to attend Robert Gordon's University for five days every three months, complete and pass six modules as well as writing a 10,000 word research based dissertation.
Irene said: ‘For my dissertation I wrote a computer fitness assessment based on information gained at Dounreay.
The first year of my research made up my pilot study and from that I decided to carry out a full scale research project.
‘I first investigated the possibility of studying for an occupational health certificate in 1975, but at that time the only way that this could be achieved was by full-time studying and I couldn't do that because of family commitments.
‘It is only recently that Robert Gordon's University has opened up the field for people to do courses like this without having to leave home for long periods.’
She added: ‘You have to make a big commitment to complete distance learning courses, and two years can be a long time when you are faced with constant learning.
I am very grateful to Dounreay for making it all possible, to the Library for their help with my research and to my colleagues for their assistance.’
Occupational Health Physician, Dr Gordon Morris said: ‘This has been a great effort by Irene.
Training is essential for the modern occupational health nurse and requires extra commitment when this distance from universities.
‘The new skills and knowledge will be put to good use in the Occupational Health Department.
Already another member of the nursing staff has enrolled in the 1993/94 course.
This will benefit the health of all employees as new ideas and nursing techniques are introduced.’
Four of the ten Scottish representatives taking part in the 1993 World Kayak Championships work at Dounreay.
This  year's biennial event will be held in Santa Cruz, California between March 17–24, with competitors coming from the States, England, Eire, Wales, Canada, New Zealand and many other European nations.
Representing Dounreay will be: Lindsay Bain, the ladies number 2 in Scotland; Ken Nicol, who was third in the Senior Scottish Championships in 1991; Kevin Mackay, the 1991 Novice Champion and Paul Doherty, the Scottish Kayak Champion.
In canoe-surfing year participants compete in 20 minute heats and ride a maximum of 10 waves.
Each wave scores a maximum of 20 points.
The three best waves are added and the team with the lowest scoring is the winner.
Paul said: ‘We have been training throughout the winter and are hoping to put on a good show for Scotland.
‘We would also like to appeal for funds to help us finance this event.
In total we are hoping to raise approximately £8000 for the team so that we can help cover our accommodation and equipment costs.’
Anyone who is willing to sponsor the team, or who is willing to organise any fund raising events should contact Paul on : any evening.’
POLICE NOTES
In an effort to make all road users aware of their responsibilities to other road users the AEAC at Dounreay, in each newsletter, will be giving advice, recommendations and other useful comments from the new edition of the Highway Code and the Police Road Craft Driving Manual.
Signalling to other road users.
Signals are the means by which drivers warn other road users, including pedestrians and cyclists, of their intentions and presence.
They are the language of the road.
If they are to be understood they must be as shown in the Highway Code.
To be of any use they must be given clearly and in good time.
Pedestrians also have a responsibility to signal their intentions — Do NOT walk off the pavement onto the road — PRACTISE the Green Cross Code and teach it to children — Rule 7.
Zebra Crossing
Give traffic plenty of time to see you and stop before you start to cross.
The traffic does not have to stop until you have a foot on the crossing.
Do NOT cross until the traffic has stopped.
Watch out for a driver or cyclist who has not seen you on the crossing — Rules 10, 11, 12 and 13.
FRIENDS OF PET RESCUE
It was only recently I realised just how many animals have to be taken into care because of their owner's neglect.
The lucky ones are saved by the Pet Rescue Scheme and subsequently found homes where they are loved and looked after by more caring individuals or families.
There is only one Animal Welfare Centre between Shetland and Inverness and it is based in Caithness.
It is not funded by the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SSPCA) Headquarters so all Caithness's expenses have to be met from donations, raffles, sales etc, organised by a committee who are interested in animal welfare.
The main expenses are food and veterinary attention which can reach an annual average of £700 per animal.
It has become a sad fact of life that during the months that follow Christmas even more animals require food and shelter as they have, through no fault of their own, outgrown their novelty attraction.
We will shortly be mounting a campaign and inviting interested parties to pledge a monthly sum, however large or small into a bank account in the name of Friends of Pet Rescue.
Withdrawals will be made when necessary by two signatories from the committee of the SSPCA Pet Rescue Fund — Thurso branch.
Would you please consider donating to this worthy cause.
But for the caring and hard work of the Pet Rescue Fund Committee many animals would not be alive and well today as they deserve to be.
Maggie Mowat, A Friend of Pet Rescue, Finance Department, Dounreay,
Barry Grewcock receives the Director's Prize.
This year's winner of the Director's Prize was Mr Barry Grewcock.
At a recent ceremony, Site Manager, Mr Roger James made the presentation in recognition of the fine work done by Barry Grewcock and his team in setting up the Safety Management System at Dounreay.
Mr James said: ‘There has always been numerous safety management regulations in engineering but until now the administration side of the business has largely been ignored.
‘AEA as an organisation has  benefited tremendously from Mr Grewcock's work.
His Safety Management System is currently being used by other AEA sites as a model.
I feel very proud that Dounreay has had a two year advantage in setting up this system.’
Mr Grewcock said he was: ‘Delighted to accept the award on behalf of the department.
The Safety Management System is a simple to follow 200 page manual, which hopefully will benefit Dounreay for many years to come and contribute to the reduction of accidents on site.’
BLOOD FOR THE GIVING!
The Blood Transfusion Unit will visit the site on Wednesday, 17th February from 10.00 a.m. — 12.00 noon and 1.30 p.m. — 3.45 p.m.
The unit will also be in attendance on Wednesday, 24th March from 9.45 a.m. — 12.30 p.m.
Your support will be much appreciated.
ACCIDENT
I would appreciate it if the two gentlemen who stopped to help me when I had an accident with my car on the road near Dounreay on 1/12/92 would contact me — Ellen Campbell, Reay 345.
THANK YOU
RON THACKER, BEM would like to thank all friends and colleagues who helped make his memorable day such a success.
Special thanks to Bing and Robin for their organisation of the event, Jimmy and Peter for the photos and video, Catering staff and to Transport Section for services over and above the call of duty.
BERTIE CAMERON and JIM DAVIDSON of Transport Section wish to thank all friends and colleagues who contributed to their departure gifts and wish Dounreay all the best for the future.
FOR SALE
MISSING FLOPPY
Personal Computer World (January 1993)— the free disk has been removed and the accompanying pages torn out of the journal.
All these issues are available for loan or circulation.
Articles can be copies on the Library copier.
We would be grateful if the disk and the pages could be returned to the Library.
The disk contains the Global Effect World Simulation strategy game.
FOUND PROPERTY
During 1992, 150 items of found property were handed in to the Police at Dounreay.
The following items have not been claimed: Various pound notes, clock, canvas bag containing a lunch box and chocolate biscuits, two watches, spectacles marked ‘Rob to Rossini’, earrings, silver chain and rings, pen and an umbrella.
If you have lost any of these items please contact: DC Ronnie Gunn  