

Introduction
More than ever before, the process industries are having to demonstrate, often publicly, improved safety and environmental performance, greater technical sophistication, and better quality and resource management, whilst always aiming for higher profits.
The stresses of dealing with these pressures can exact a severe toll on companies and the people who work within them, often resulting in a resistance to change.
For most companies, unwilling to invest heavily in the specialist skills necessary to tackle all of these difficult problems, the solution lies in a partnership with carefully selected external organisations like AEA Technology.
These can provide the necessary support more cost effectively and on a ‘when needed’ basis.
As you will see from this supplement, AEA offers a wide range of consultancy, technical services and specialist products to the process industries and, as Business Development Director for the Process Industries, it is my pleasure to use this opportunity to introduce myself and AEA.
We were founded in 1954 as the Atomic Energy Authority to manage the development of nuclear power in Britain, a role which produced a breadth and depth of technical capability as relevant to the Process industries as to nuclear power generation.
Today we operate as AEA Technology, a fully commercial business with a turnover of £400 million and a staff of 8000.
The scientific and engineering skills which we have developed are at the cutting edge of nuclear technology, and through subsequent diversification, are improving the competitive position of customers in over 70 countries and more than 2000 organisations worldwide.
We now have an impressive track record of working successfully with almost every major company in the Process Industries.
These few pages cannot do justice to the array of benefits which a partnership with AEA could bring.
But we hope that you will, nevertheless, be struck by the range of our products and services and how they can help you, not only in solving today's problems, but also in taking a tried and tested approach to the new problems which are facing our industry.
If you have any problem which requires a multi-disciplinary team of world class scientists and engineers working in close co-ordination with your people to improve your competitive edge, please give me a ring.
We often find that we have already tackled the problem and have a solution ready and waiting.
Who knows?
Think what that could save you!
Environmental services for the process industries
Integrated pollution control
Traditionally, releases of major pollutants to air, land and water have been subject to separate controls.
However, with the implementation of part I of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, a new approach of integrated pollution control (IPC) has been introduced.
Currently under review, the regulations list six categories of industry to be subject to IPC, namely: fuel and power, metal, mineral, chemical, waste disposal and other industries.
IPC adopts a preventative approach to pollution control, and before a scheduled process can be operated, prior authorisation must be obtained from HMIP.
The authorisation will contain specific requirements which must be met in operating the process.
In particular, it must meet with the best available techniques not entailing excessive cost (BATNEEC) and, where a process has emissions to more than one environmental media, the best practicable environmental option (BPEO).
The Consultancy Services of AEA offer comprehensive support to the process industries in the implementation of IPC, help with the application for authorisation, pre-authorisation measurements, computer modelling, waste and pollution management strategies, as well as environmental assessments and audits.
Waste management
AEA's Environmental Safety Centre offers the process industries technical consultancy and information services in waste management.
Its 20-year track record includes many high profile international projects for national governments throughout the world, as well as hundreds of companies in the private sector.
Its range of services includes:
waste management consultancy;
waste research — development and evaluation of procedures and methods for the safe handling, treatment and disposal of hazardous wastes;
energy from waste — research and consultancy covering landfill gas, refuse derived fuels and waste incineration;
contaminated land — site assessment, advice on remediation options, and recommendations for effective reclamation and restoration of all types of contaminated land;
decontamination;
environmental modelling and strategic planning;
environmental assessment and audit;
waste information services — expert advice and information from the Waste Management Information Bureau (the national referral centre for waste management problems) and its extensive database facilities containing information on all aspects of waste management, environmental protection and legislation.
AEA produces an international journal,Waste and Environment Today , which has subscribers in over 40 countries;
chemical hazards — advice and evaluation of risks on storage, handling, transport and disposal of hazardous materials, and access to the Chemdata and Hazdata databases;
emergency services — access to 24-hour emergency response through the Harwell Methane Emergency Service for incidents involving the migration of landfill gas; and, via the National Chemical Emergency Centre, 24-hour advice, information and emergency response for accidents involving chemical spillage.
The interdisciplinary skills of AEA's Consultancy Services, which include one of the world's most advanced risk assessment capabilities, combine to create a comprehensive integrated package of environmental audits and assessments.
By delivering an independent consultancy service, it evaluates the effects of proposed and current measures and ensures demonstrable compliance with legal requirements.
Clean technology — assessing the benefits
Quantitative risk assessment has been employed to aid safety management decisions for many years.
An equivalent process, comprising the same basic elements of impact identification, impact quantification and judgements about the tolerability of the consequences, is offered by AEA through Consultancy Services to assist those involved in environmentally-based decision making.
Over recent years, environmental concerns have been driving genuine environmental improvements across a wide range of processes and products.
However, the issues involved in determining environmental impact are often complex.
A wide range of quite different impacts may be associated with the manufacture and use of a given product.
An improvement in one area might easily be at the expense of another.
For example, when developing ‘Clean Technology’, it is important that the most significant environmental impacts are addressed to achieve a real overall improvement.
When making judgements on such issues, manufacturers and purchasers alike, with a genuine interest in achieving improved environmental performance, must be properly informed.
AEA's experience in quantitative assessment methods, which has been effectively applied to safety management decision making, is now applied where the objective is environmental protection.
HTFS celebrates silver anniversary
The Heat Transfer & Fluid Flow Service (HTFS)— a joint venture between AEA Technology, NEL and Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd — celebrates its silver anniversary this year.
‘Since we began in 1968, we have been a driving force behind the development of more efficient heat transfer worldwide,’ says HTFS Managing Director Dave Butterworth.
‘We are essentially a club where the members help to define the areas of research and development which are undertaken.
The result is that we can provide them with the tools needed to design more efficient heat transfer equipment.’
HTFS began with seven members and, by the end of its first year, membership had increased to 20 including major companies such as Babcock Energy, BOC Process Plants, Foster Wheeler Energy, ICI, John Brown and M W Kellogg, all of which are still members today.
The total number of members and licensees now exceeds 200 in 28 countries, including major international companies like Exxon, BP, Dow Chemical and BASF.
Eight of the world's top ten chemical companies are currently major customers of HTFS, as are the top three oil companies.
‘We have been pioneers in many areas including computational fluid dynamics in furnace design, research into compact heat exchangers, the exploitation of laser techniques in detailed flow measurement, and integrating advanced thermal design software with process simulators,’ continues Dave Butterworth.
‘From small beginnings, HTFS has become the largest heat transfer technical service in the world with a turnover in excess of £3 million, about 50% greater than its nearest rival.
HTFS customers are companies for which heat transfer is an important part of their business in that they design, manufacture or use heat exchangers.
Such is our penetration of the market that someone somewhere in the world uses an HTFS program to design a heat exchanger every minute of the day.’
Looking to the future, HTFS has just opened its new office in Pittsburgh, USA.
New Windows 3 versions of our most popular programs are being developed.
The first of these, M-TASC for Windows, has now been released.
HTFS is also introducing a quality management system based on ISO901 and, for software, ISO9000–3.
PLAC simulates two-phase flow
Two-phase flow — the phenomenon involving the combined flow of gas and liquid through a pipeline at different rates — is becoming an increasing common issue in process plant.
The design and operation of pipelines must overcome a variety of difficult problems.
These include: severe slugging, flow rate transients, thermal transients and pipeline rupture.
A Pipeline Analysis Code (PLAC) developed by AEA offers a radical solution which could revolutionise pipeline design and operation and is already supplied to several major international oil companies.
PLAC is a powerful but user-friendly computer program for the transient simulation of two-phase flows in pipelines and pipework.
Designed for use by engineers on PCs or workstations, its graphical interfaces enable problems to be set up and analysed rapidly.
The program thus fulfils a growing need for dynamic simulation as an essential and cost-effective step towards safe and optimal pipeline design and operation.
Users of PLAC have gained:
substantial cost savings — through tighter definition of facilities requirements, for example, receiving vessels and inhibitor injection systems;
greater confidence — through better verification of system design for start-up/shutdown and other flow transients;
improved safety assessment — through simulation of pipeline ruptures.
This sort of transient simulation, which up to now has been a difficult and expensive exercise, brings an improved understanding of the behaviour of multiphase flow lines.
Problems can thus be avoided and accident scenarios analysed.
PLAC features:
simulation of transient two-phase flow phenomena;
physically-based models applied by AEA;
internal physical properties package which will provide data on hydrocarbons and a wide range of industrial chemicals using a choice of equations of state;
graphical pre- and post-processors to assist in set up, grid generation, and rapid interpretation of results.
AEA has substantial experience in transient simulation applied to pipeline design and provides a high level of support and advice to new users of the program.
PLAC also benefits from a substantial AEA-funded development programme which is continually extending its application.
For example, a major recent technical development was the use of PLAC for simulating depressurisation and rupture, and will allow the Health and Safety Executive to use the code for hazard assessment.
PLAC is available for purchase, lease or consultancy, and AEA staff will be pleased to discuss PLAC's benefits and the best method of availability for your organisation.
Decommissioning in the pharmaceutical industry
The decommissioning and dismantling of contaminated plant is an issue which transcends industrial frontiers.
Whether the contaminant is nuclear, chemical or biological in nature, AEA has the track record to deal with it.
Over 40 years' experience of the nuclear industry has installed AEA at the forefront of decommissioning technology in the UK and worldwide.
Over that time, close links have been made with the HMIP, HSE, MAFF and NII which enable AEA to operate effectively within the relevant regulatory framework.
Skills learned in decommissioning AEA's own facilities, at sites from Winfrith in Dorset to Dounreay in Scotland, have already been used to assist a number of pharmaceutical organisation in planning and implementing their own decommissioning operations.
Activities include:
initial assessment of the magnitude of the contamination, using historical data;
additional survey work, as necessary, using AEA's analytical facilities for both radioactive and non-radioactive contaminants;
determination of contaminants present and quantification of levels;
preparation of decommissioning plan including a safety assessment — describing how all activities will be performed, assessing waste volumes, waste disposal routes, equipment and manpower requirements plus identifying key customer-contractor interfaces;
hands-on decommissioning operations;
liaison with regulatory bodies.
While each of the activities can be supplied on a stand-alone basis, many clients in the pharmaceutical industry prefer to employ one contractor capable of adopting an holistic approach.
Projects already undertaken for pharmaceutical customers have involved removal of plant and equipment contaminated with low-levels of radioactivity and other hazardous materials.
The supporting monitoring services provided by AEA on site ensure that waste volumes are kept to a minimum, which can often represent a major cost saving.
AEA offers an efficient and cost-effective operation which includes expertise in all aspects of decommissioning of contaminated facilities and minimisation of costs to customers, all within the framework of the highest safety standards.
Containment engineering
The pharmaceutical and fine chemicals industries face a complex challenge in the form of tighter controls on manufacturing processes, COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) regulations, and manual handling and personnel equipment directives.
Containment engineering — the use of isolators, glovebox or process enclosures to handle hazardous, sensitive or sterile materials — offers an important tool in dealing with materials handling issues.
With a 38-year track record in nuclear, pharmaceutical, radiopharmaceutical and biotechnology markets, AEA is an established player in the containment market.
When choosing a containment system, AEA has helped companies with design — establishing the containment objective and determining the order of priority when protecting an operator from the product or a product from an operator.
AEA's extensive expertise and experience, and unrivalled access to the range of technology and systems needed, means that services can be tailored to meet precise requirements be it a single isolator or a comprehensive containment or a hazardous materials handling project for the pharmaceutical or process industry.
Among the services AEA offers are:
Containment for operator protection.
AEA provides help in meeting COSHH regulations and providing suitable alternatives to previously acceptable practices.
Work in this area includes design and supply of isolators to companies such as SmithKline Beecham and Glaxochem, handling raw materials, intermediates and final products in both multipurpose and dedicated plant.
Containment of product.
People present the greatest single threat of contamination for high purity and sterile materials.
Manufacturers, therefore, are being urged to design processes to eliminate direct operator contact.
AEA's experience in this area includes the processing of an ophthalmic drug under sterile and laminar flow conditions.
Containment for environmental protection.
Most biotechnology production processes have the potential to generate health hazards (through the creation of small particle aerosols), or gross environmental contamination.
Containment and the use of biosafety cabinets and enclosures are powerful tools in current biohazard management.
The effluent processing club
AEA's four-year-old Effluent Processing Club (EPC), the UK's only independent group solely dedicated to providing industry with advice and information on liquid effluent processing technology, has a membership of 41 industrial organisations.
These include major operating companies, waste contracting, consulting and engineering companies, HMIP, WRc and most of the water plcs.
EPC's expertise brings significant benefits to its members in the water and process industries, and the club's continuing expansion indicates that they find it a cost-effective extension of in-house resources, as well as a focal point for keeping abreast of developments in the field of effluent treatment.
From help in solving effluent problems quickly and cost effectively, to maximising members' own effluent processing business opportunities, EPC is the natural partner for engineers operating in this specialist area.
More specifically, it helps them to:
accelerate up the effluent treatment learning curve, avoiding the need to recruit experts in effluent treatment technology;
make informed judgements regarding the most appropriate approach to a particular liquid effluent treatment problem by helping them to scan through a variety of technical options and to eliminate the less sensible ones;
prepare detailed specifications of plant items and thereby become a discerning and knowledgeable purchaser of equipment and services;
understand the science and technology which underlies a particular process to aid in the day-to-day operation and trouble-shooting of existing effluent treatment plant;
take an informed view of future trends, both technical and legislative, and thereby generate confidence that the proposed solution will not be rendered obsolete in the near future.
EPC achieves these objectives by the creation of a comprehensive knowledge base which is made available to EPC members in several ways:
a manual of Effluent Process Technology;
as the BROWSE software package;
by telephone and fax advice and consultancy from effluent process experts;
by attendance at EPC meetings.
EPC also provides an excellent forum for informal technical interactions between waste producers, contractors, equipment suppliers, consultants, and the regulatory bodies.
Acoustic signature signals improve plant efficiency
Eavesdropping on process plant could alert engineers to developing problems in time to prevent a serious accident, according to the acoustic diagnostics team at AEA Technology.
Like the variation in human voices, every process has its own distinctive acoustic signature which can be recognised by simple and robust microphones.
Any digression from the norm signals potential trouble and allows the engineer to take action to avert it, whether it is a bearing grinding itself into a seizure or a life-threatening gas leak on a vital pipeline.
Even the presence of solid particles in a liquid, and hence the progress of crystallisation or a critical chemical reaction, can be detected.
In physical terms, anything that moves or changes its form causes a disturbance in its surroundings which gives rise to sound waves.
The shape of the sound wave — its acoustic signature — will be characteristic of the original disturbance and the media through which it is moving.
Provided that there is a good acoustic path between the process and the receiving sensors, there is no need to install any components inside the plant.
This means that sensors can often be mounted directly on the walls of metal reaction vessels and pipework.
As in stereophonic sound systems, the use of two or more microphones enables the source of the sound to be located.
This means that leaks can be pin-pointed as well as identified.
AEA offers a professional acoustic diagnostic service including:
initial appraisal of the process involved;
installation of a portable monitor for shot to medium-term assessment and specification;
supply and maintenance of a system optimised for each plant application.
AEA's acoustic diagnosis system will recognise sounds made by specific process in individual plant.
These include boiling, mixing, cavitation and precipitation.
Significant cost savings can be gained as a result.
The replacement of worn-out parts during shut down, for example, is very much cheaper than waiting until failure in the middle of a production run.
Improving process efficiency by modelling
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) software provides the tools to select the best available options before committing to relatively expensive experiments or hardware.
AEA's Computational Fluid Dynamics Services (CFDS) offer CFDS FLOW3D which has been developed using the most advanced numerical and graphical tools available.
Engineers can use it to model a wide range of process industry applications; from complete plant to individual items of equipment.
Through CFD simulations, they gain a more detailed understanding of the heat and mass flows within a process and this helps them to:
improve efficiency of the particular unit process;
improve plant flexibility in terms of range of throughputs or types of material that can be handled;
reduce plant costs.
‘Many of the world's leading industrial companies have already recognised the potential for AEA's Computational Fluid Dynamics Services to help them in lowering their process costs, improving product quality and meeting regulatory, safety and environmental standards,’ says Steve Curl, General Manager of CFDS.
‘Two hundred companies are currently using our software worldwide and annual growth of the service is currently running at 60%.
Some processes studied to date include:
combustion of fuel in boilers or furnaces;
heat transfer devices including high pressure steam generators, high temperature heat exchangers and cooling towers;
gas flows within spray dryers;
demisters;
crystallisers;
gas centrifuges;
absorbers/regenerators;
complex filter units.
Uniquely among code vendors, AEA is able to offer our customers engineering and consultancy support within AEA which spans all aspects of process technology, combustion and heat transfer.
This allows us to built mixed consultancy teams to fit the need and, in many cases, we can provide experimental validation of the software.
Software support, training and good documentation, often regarded as peripheral activities, are central to the AEA service and this is reflected in CFDS's commitment to achieve recognised quality assurance standards in 1993.
The ability to predict the behaviour of fluid flow in process plant empowers the process engineer to ask ‘What if?’
All in a spin
the development of power fluidics
Power fluidics is a revolutionary technology which uses simple hydrodynamic configurations, such as the vortex, to control the flow of liquids and gases around process and chemical plant.
In what represents a text book case of technology transfer, it has been taken up by major operators in the pharmaceutical and general chemical industries such as SmithKline Beecham, Foster Wheeler and Monsanto.
Common to them all is a need for compact plant which allows improved environmental performance and greater process control leading to better quality and more consistent products.
Power Fluidics is different from conventional plant because it avoids the need for contact between moving mechanical parts and the process fluid.
This has been particularly useful in the nuclear industry where highly corrosive toxic and radioactive substances cause severe maintenance problems.
It was to address this problem that AEA first developed a series of power fluidics devices including valves, pumps and diverters which, with no moving parts, were effectively maintenance-free.
AEA has now re-engineered the devices to produce a second generation suitable for wider, non-nuclear application, particularly within pharmaceutical and chemical industries.
Equipment such as the vortex mixer and vortex scrubber have been installed in pharmaceutical plant, offering benefits such as:
improvements in product quality;
improvements in process control;
improvements in environmental impact;
improvements in facilities costs;
waste minimisation;
reduced operating costs;
smaller plant size;
To ensure that they achieve maximum benefit from the technology, SmithKline Beecham have now signed a 10-year agreement with AEA.
At the signing ceremony, David Winterman, Director and Vice President of Process Development for SB enthusiastically endorsed the technology.
‘We believe that Power Fluidics offers us a unique opportunity, and we are delighted to be at the forefront of the application of this technology.
We are committed to building on the lead we have and increasing chemical and process engineering resources to drive the various projects associated with fluidics.’
Monsanto are also very impressed with the technology, particularly on the environmental front.
In 1987, they voluntarily set themselves a worldwide target of reducing air pollution by 90% at the end of 1992.
Part of the programme was the reduction of TCE (Trichlorethylene) emissions at their Ruabon site in North Wales.
A Power Fluidic Vortex Stripper was purchased to recover the TCE, which had previously been lost to the atmosphere.
SOFIE models engineering systems
The development of safe and reliable engineering systems requires knowledge of how they will perform under both normal and failure conditions.
By using SOFIE (Simulation Of Failures and Interpretation of Effects), a workstation-based suite of software developed by AEA in collaboration with British Aerospace and the Turing Institute, engineers can model systems under normal and failure modes.
The model can be built at any stage in the design lifecycle, from conceptual design through to detailed design operations.
It can be used for automatic generation of failure mode effect and criticality analysis, failure diagnosis, recovery procedure design, and the design of failure management systems.
Membrane consultancy service launched
AEA has launched Ultra-Sep, the UK's first independent comprehensive service for membrane consultancy.
Drawing on the organisation's wide range of membrane technology expertise, it offers impartial advice on improving process efficiency.
It uses the latest analytical, process and biotechnology techniques and facilities to help users and suppliers of membrane services select, integrate and optimise their separation/purification/concentration techniques.
Unique spray characterisation service
AEA has launched a new service which offers spray nozzle characterisations by 3-D spatial distributions of droplet size, velocity, and number concentration for manufacturers and users of spray nozzles.
The latest laser techniques provide better matching of nozzles with processes, and better quality through enhanced performance control.
The service helps clients with the design and development of new nozzles, assessment of applications, and also provides a trouble-shooting service for existing designs.
Fuel management through COMBUST
COMBUST is a budget-priced fuel and energy management software program to help designers and operators of furnaces and boilers to optimise the efficiency and economy of their equipment.
It is PC-based, with simple menu-driven operation.
COMBUST gives cost savings, maintains or increases throughput, helps to ensure reliable product quality and reduces environmental impact.
Pyrolysis solves a burning problem
AEA's tyre pyrolyser uses high temperatures and an oxygen-free environment to decompose tyres chemically, giving a cheaper process which has lower emissions of nitrogen-oxide and sulphur-oxide than incineration.
The method also allows valuable materials to be recovered.
Oil and gas, for example, can be used as fuels within the pyrolysis system, or for an adjacent plant such as a combined heat and power system.
Char and steel are also recovered from the process.
The char, which operates in a similar manner to activated carbon, but at a much lower cost per tonne, is an efficient treatment for liquid effluents.
Each unit, although small, is capable of processing 700t of tyres a year, and can be batched into systems of up to 20 units.
Enquiries about the pyrolysis system have been received from around the world.