

DORSET PRODUCTION TOPS 100 MILLION BARRELS
More than 100 million barrels of oil have been produced by BP in Dorset since the first well at Kimmeridge came on stream in 1959.
The milestone — which takes into account output from the Wareham and Kimmeridge oilfields, as well as the three Wytch Farm reservoirs of Bridport, Sherwood and Frome — was passed on August 8.
It was just 12 months ago that the picturesque Kimmeridge site, overlooking the English Channel, yielded its three millionth barrel.
The Wytch Farm oilfield started production from the Bridport reservoir at the rate of 4000 barrels a day in 1978.
In 1987, an interim production scheme brought the first wells from the Sherwood reservoir on line, boosting daily output to 10,000 barrels.
In June 1990, the full Stage 2 development was realised with production increased to 60,000 barrels a day.
And, at the end of July this year, the first extended-reach well in the Stage 3 offshore development came on stream at the rate of 15,500 b/d, bringing the current field output to over 80,000 b/d.
At current production rates, production from the Wytch Farm field was expected to pass the 100 million barrel mark in early October.
BP NORWAY NOW LOOKING FOR A LICENCE TO DRILL
The announcement of Norway's 14th round awards was greeted by a mixture of emotions by the team at the heart of the project.
There was champagne and celebratory cake.
There was also, says exploration manager Neil Ritson, a sense of real achievement.
But the sense of elation was short-lived.
After all, the real test — the discovery of hydrocarbons from the licence areas — is yet to come.
Plans for the work programme are already being discussed.
‘This is a very positive time for all the partners in these licences,’ says Ritson.
‘Technical and management committees are being formed, although it is still too early to talk about the detail of the programmes.’
The award gave BP Norway operatorships and 25 percent interests in two licences and a stake in a third licence.
All are in the North Viking Graben, considered an area of key strategic importance.
BP is regarded by many in the industry as having gained the best award of all the foreign oil companies, confirmed by approaches from competitors who are, says Ritson, ‘offering to collaborate’.
A key characteristic of the work on the 14th round was the emphasis on the interpretation of data, and the ‘de-emphasis’ on the ownership of the data.
Although BP spent nearly $10 million acquiring data and studies most of these were also available to other bidders.
The North Viking Graben is ‘nothing new for BP’ in terms of its geological characteristics, which are similar to play-types on the UKCS.
It is a relatively simple half-graben with the Brent, Statfjord and Gullfaks fields sitting on the west side and one of the new licence areas — block 34/11, in which BP has a 15 per cent stake — in the deep centre of the graben.
The second licence, covering blocks 36/4 and 35/6, sits on the east flank of the graben, where the faults are smaller and the target depths less.
The third licence area, block 35/8, is also in the east.
Three wells were drilled in the area in the 1980's — all of which made small gas discoveries — although two are excluded from this award.
On block 34/11, over which 3D seismic has already been shot, the award specifies the drilling of several exploration wells and it is hoped that the first of these will be started in early 1994.
A 3D seismic programme over blocks 36/4 and 35/6 is now being considered to begin next Spring.
Data collection and interpretation will be completed in about 2 years after which a decision will be made on whether to drill.
On block 35/8 there is a commitment to a 3D seismic survey which will also be acquired in 1994.
‘It is important to remember that Norwegian blocks are two and a half times as big as those on the UKCS,’ notes Ritson.
‘We will be collaborating with BP teams in Aberdeen to benefit from all recent North Sea experience,’ he adds.
‘The award gives BP Norway a strong competitive position.
The rewards for those working in BP come in the quality of the opportunities it gives us for the future.
There are many challenging new assignments and chances for the team to broaden their skills.’
ALASKA CHIEF EARNS CITATION
ANCHORAGE — BPX-A's Norm Ingram was cited last month by the U.S. Coast Guard for his outstanding public service from 1990 to 1993 as manager of Alaska Clean Seas (ACS), a North Slope oil spill response organisation.
A citation presented by Rear Admiral Roger Rufe of the 18th U.S. Coast Guard District says that Ingram's work with Alaska Clean Seas has measurably advanced the Coast Guard's mission of environmental protection in Alaska.
Formerly BPX-A's manager of Production Planning, Endicott, Ingram was placed ‘on-loan’ to ACS in 1990.
He has been with BP for 12 years.
CRANE AND MANLIFTS IMPROVE AERIAL ACCESS
Maintenance staff at Sullom Voe are now getting to parts of the plant other standard lifting equipment cannot reach following the acquisition of a new 90-tonne mobile crane and two articulated telescopic boom working platforms.
The Liebherr LTM 1090 crane replaces a similar capacity vehicle which had been in service at the terminal since May 1982.
The all-terrain model offers steering on all its ten wheels, a facility which enables it to be ‘crabbed’ into position in tight situations.
The crane combines its 90-tonne lifting capacity with a fully-extended reach of 67 metres.
An onboard computer in the driver's cab provides instant on-screen information about various lift/load configurations.
A cut-off device is automatically activated in the event of an overload.
Services engineer Jim Hunter, who is responsible for vehicle and plant maintenance on the terminal, told BPXpress: ‘The remote location of Sullom Voe means that having a reliable crane is essential.
‘The new vehicle will assist in ensuring that a safe and efficient rigging service continues at the terminal to the end of the century and beyond.’
Jim was also actively involved in the purchase of two Snorkelift ATB-60 articulated boom working platforms to replace two of the terminal's four straight boom-type manlifts.
‘The existing manlifts were all equipped with a straight boom which tended to restrict their deployment to peripheral locations,’ he said.
‘The new generation of manlift, with articulated booms, are far more versatile.
‘The two new models of mobile working platforms can be quickly deployed at a work site without the need for scaffolding, ladders or intermediate staging.
This feature is particularly beneficial for plant inspection.
‘With scaffolding, there has to be planning lead times, both for erecting and dismantling it, and subsequent restricted access to an area while it is in place.’
He added: ‘There are numerous applications in which the Snorkelift can be used — the removal and replacement of valves; preparation and painting of tanks, vessels, monitor towers and columns; maintenance of buildings and plant and street lighting, and high-level window cleaning.
AID FOR BOSNIA
Surplus medical supplies donated by BP's North Sea platforms and support vessels — the latest batch coming from the flotel Port Regency — are being sent to Bosnia through the Inverness-based charity, Scottish Bosnia Relief.
Croatia, Romania and Poland are also  benefiting from the surplus stocks, which include bandages and intravenous fluids, said Steve Williams, senior nursing officer at Dyce, who is coordinating the distribution.
And the Exel Ladies Leisure section thank everyone who responded to a Bosnia appeal by helping to fill nine boxes at collection points in Dyce with toiletries, clothing and toys, which were transported to Bosnia by the charity Edinburgh Direct Aid.
Anglers reel in the prizes
The experience of internationalist Dave Paterson tipped the scales for Grangemouth refinery in a BP fly fishing contest at Lake of Menteith, in Perthshire.
The quartet of Paterson, Peter Cowan, Ian Sharp and Donald Munro, landed the team prize with 12 trout totalling 16lbs 15oz.
But Paterson, who has fished for Scotland, also had the best individual bag of six fish weighing 8lbs 7oz and the heaviest fish — 2lbs 4oz.
The teams netted a total of 34 fish weighing 46lbs 15 oz.
Brian Watt, from Sullom Voe, had the most unwanted catch — a 23lb pike.
The other teams competing were Thistle/Magnus, Aberdeen, Llandarcy, Sullom Voe, ex-Glasgow (twice previous winners) and a composite team.
Apart from the competition, the teams raised some £2500 for the Committee for the Promotion of Disabled Anglers.
A GLITTERING CATCH: The winning anglers with their bag of trophies — Peter Cowan, Ian Sharp, Dave Paterson and Donald Munro.
APPRENTICES COMPLETE TRAINING
The 30 apprentices in BP Exploration's 1989 intake have received their indentures on completion of their training.
Top apprentice Donny MacLean is pictured being congratulated by general manager Dennis DeWilde, who made the presentations, watched by the other successful apprentices.
Sharing the occasion are former training officer Mike Jones (left), John Broomfield (right), training manager of Roxby Engineering, who administer the scheme on BP's behalf, and (second right) Keith Ellice, training manager, BP Exploration.
Most of the apprentices are now working on BP installations in the North Sea.
ASSET SWAPS BOOST FORTIES
BP has increased its stake in the area immediately south of the Forties field as a result of asset swaps with Conoco and Amerada Hess.
BP is to obtain Conoco's 20 per cent interest in the BP-operated block 21/15a and 30.1076 per cent in the 21/15a sub area.
In return, Conoco will take over BP's 20 per cent stake in block 9/12b, 25 per cent in block 16/6a and 50 per cent in block 48/20b.
Conoco is operator in all three blocks.
The agreement is subject to Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) approval.
The deal with Amerada Hess involves BP acquiring an interest in block 21/15b in exchange for interests in blocks 15/26a and 15/26b, and also requires DTI consent.
The swaps are in line with BP's ongoing policy of growing activity around core producing assets.
BP will now have a material equity in two blocks with Forties satellite prospects and the potential to add value to the Forties asset.
FAMILY'S FURZEY TRIP
A Dorset family was taken on a VIP trip to Wytch Farm's production sites on Furzey Island after the father had bid for the BP-donated prize in a charity auction.
The ferry journey from Poole and tour of the island was among over 100 ‘promises and gifts’ from local businesses which were auctioned in aid of the Joseph Weld House hospice in Dorchester.
Land agent Robin Barbour, of Bridport, had been told by his family — wife Lavinia, son Henry and daughter Alexandra — not to return from the auction without the trip!
His bid of £130 secured the prize.
The auction raised £17,000 for the hospice.
OILFIELD SURPRISE FOR STEWPOT
Millions of BBC Radio 2 listeners heard disc jockey Ed ‘Stewpot’ Stewart express surprise at being told he was standing on top of the largest onshore oilfield in western Europe.
‘Now everybody, look down at your feet, underneath there is an awful lot of oil — so don't stamp too hard,’ he told visitors to the Studland Peninsula in Dorset during a ‘live’Roadshow interview with Wytch Farm public affairs manager Jon Pack.
The broadcast took place at the beginning of September from the site of a National Beach Clean Day, sponsored by the National Trust and Radio 2.
Jon Pack took advantage of the five-minute interview to explain how BP had conducted a widespread consultation exercise before developing the oilfield and how it now operated the field to the highest environmental and safety standards.
The National Trust is responsible for protecting one in every six miles of coastline in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Radio 2 Roadshow focused attention on the challenges the organisation faces in maintaining a beautiful coastline for the public to enjoy and highlighted such important environmental issues as coastal and cliff erosion, nature conservation, water pollution, disabled access and dogs on beaches.
Studland, a major tourist attraction, is situated in a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
BP has funded a permanent exhibition at the National Trust visitor centre on the peninsula.
‘We welcome around one million people to Studland each year,’ explained Geoff Hann, local National Trust head warden.
‘It is one of the most unspoiled beaches on the south coast and, as an SSSI and a national nature reserve, the area is of international environmental importance.
‘We hope this new exhibition will help all our visitors to understand and appreciate this beautiful area and to recognise the huge challenges we all face in caring for it.’
POLAR BEARS CALL IN AT PRUDHOE
ANCHORAGE — During September an unusually high number of polar bears were sighted in Alaska's North Slope oil fields.
Polar bears generally spend most of their lives offshore, on the Arctic ice pack, but occasionally wander as far south as the Arctic coast.
At least five polar bears were spotted last month in the Prudhoe Bay and Endicott oil fields.
One polar bear spent about five days on Endicott's Main Production Island (MPI) before it was captured by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) crews and removed.
On the same day another polar bear was captured and removed from the Prudhoe Bay field.
Both bears were transported west of the Colville River.
The USFWS has predicted more encounters with polar bears in the NorthSlope oil fields due to an increase in the mid-Beaufort Sea population.
The area is thought to be inhabited by about 2,500 polar bears.
BPX-A and the Prudhoe Bay field's other operator, ARCO, are working closely with both the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G) to monitor movements of bears in and around the oil fields.
All sightings are reported to Security and the agencies.
The operators work with agency personnel to determine an appropriate response that protects both bears and people, particularly as polar bears are known to stalk and kill humans.
An average polar bear stands almost four feet tall at the shoulder, weighs 1,500 lbs and can run as fast as 25 miles an hour.
BPX-A has initiated worker training programs to increase awareness of the safety issues associated with polar bears and grizzly bears.
In addition, BPX-A and ARCO are working with agencies to reduce potential attractants, such as food in dumpsters.
BIRD'S EYE VIEW FOR VIPs
The Mayor and Mayoress of Eastleigh, councillors Martin and Margaret Kyrle, circumnavigated the rim of one of BP's 60ft high crude oil storage tanks with terminal manager Martin Heathcote when a party of 40 civic heads from local authorities in the area visited the Hamble-le-Rice oil terminal on the occasion of the Mayor's annual civic day.
Mayors and councillors from Poole, Bournemouth and Christchurch joined the party to see the Hamble crude oil loading end of the 56-mile long pipeline from the Wytch Farm oilfield.
Later, the party visited a restored windmill at Bursledon.
BP GOLFERS SQUARE SERIES
In a re-run of their 1992 inaugural golf match XEU Control/Commercial had a narrow victory over Andersen Consulting to square the series.
Four fourball matches were played over a gusty, grey Royal Aberdeen course on a day when the greens were like glass and the rough was long.
The 72-hole tussle ended square at two games each but the countback, including a recount, concluded that XEU had won by one hole.
There was a suspicion, however, that the real winner on the day was the course, which consumed 57 balls!
Results (Andersen first): Ian Strachan and Peter Newman beat Pete White and John Johnston, 3 holes; John Gillespie and Mike Anderson lost to Brian Miller and David Hunter, 4 holes; Norman Smith and Alan Peterson lost to Ken Page and John Swan, 1 hole; Robert Burnett and Gary Brown beat Alistair Graham and Roger Davis, 1 hole.
NO HIDING PLACE AS BP OIL FACES TOUGH ISSUES
The shock of BP Oil's poor performance in 1992, which came after four good years, prompted BP Oil's top management to ask some uncomfortable questions.
Was it, they wanted to know, a one-off bad result, or was it an indication of what was likely to happen in future?
They concluded that BP Oil could no longer rely on the business environment to improve the company's results.
It had to help itself.
Radical moves followed.
In the past strategy was dictated by head office while divisions and international businesses were left to implement actions in which they had played little or no part in developing.
BP Oil senior managers now recognised that those involved in implementing the strategy had to be involved in creating it.
A team of middle — not top — managers was assembled.
Their brief was to look at what BP Oil had been doing and recommend ways of doing it better.
These were people who knew how the business worked, understood local markets — and were prepared to stand up for what they knew and believed.
As Jim Kantelis, an OUS representative on the team, says: ‘Members of the group were extremely strong willed and independent types and that made for some very healthy debate.’
A series of what came to be called ‘prejudice sessions’, encouraged people across the business to say what they really thought about BP Oil — or thought they thought.
The team discovered some common misconceptions.
‘Transport led’ in some cases had been interpreted as ‘invest in retail’and some unwise investments had been made.
‘The quality oil brand’ was understood as meaning providing higher quality goods and services than the competition, even if it was unclear whether the customer was willing to pay for these ‘extras’.
Yet fuel is a commodity, not a luxury.
Customers don't pay more than normal market prices.
What the team decided not to change is as interesting as what it decided needed fixing.
Some senior managers had thought that a major change in BP Oil's portfolio might solve some of the problems.
But the team concluded that it was wiser to keep most of the assets in the portfolio — but make them work better.
All assets or groups of assets will be judged according to two new financial tests, based on return on average capital employed (ROACE) and capital expenditure cover — that is, the ability to pay a dividend to the shareholder as well as to make enough to re-invest in the business.
The assets may be self-sufficient as individual assets — such as Alliance refinery in New Orleans — or as groups of assets — such as the whole of BP Oil Australia.
Underlying all this is a fundamental shift in the way BP Oil intends to run its business.
In the past BP Oil had what top managers called an ‘investment culture’.
Now it is changing to a ‘performance culture’.
What's the difference?
Every part of the business is expected to perform henceforward — no longer will the investment of more money be relied upon as making it work better in the future.
The key to this is ‘total cost leadership’.
In retail, for example, the aim is to provide the motorist with a gallon of gasoline for less than it costs the competition, while charging the market price for it.
That means BP Oil's assets need to be improved so that they are better than those of competitors.
They might have this competitive advantage because they are favourably positioned, particularly well run, or have a low cost structure.
Those that cannot be improved will go.
One of BP Oil's favourite retail sites is a good example of a geographically advantaged asset.
It is on a Luxembourg motorway, and pumps 70 million litres of gasoline a year.
An issue for retail is the erosion of profits by off-site overheads.
Why for example is the profit on running a service station whittled away so much that by the time off-site costs are taken into account, the final profit is just one quarter of what it was?
If there's one symbol of how the whole of BP Oil should one day operate it's OUS's star refinery, Alliance.
The refinery, operating in one of the world's most competitive markets, in the most difficult year for a decade, gave BP Oil a reasonable profit last year.
The messages from the strategy review team, endorsed by the BP Oil management conference, and now being implemented in the detail of the business plans, are tough messages.
There is no hiding place for assets which don't perform.
Total cost leadership is what this business is all about.
NEW LEARNING PROGRAMME FOR GRADUATE RECRUITS
BP Exploration is launching the Challenge Early Development Programme (Challenge EDP) for graduate recruits on October 10.
It is the first time there has been integrated graduate recruitment and induction events leading into a cross-ROC, cross-functional development programme.
Nineteen graduates from six BPX sites — Aberdeen, Anchorage, Bogota, Houston and London — will take part in the three-week induction event based at Wytch Farm.
The aims of Challenge EDP are to match BPX business objectives with the needs of the graduate recruits for development and training.
Individuals will be responsible for their own personal development plans which will be measured against agreed standards of business performance.
After the initial three-week programme, line managers will ensure that the graduates’ jobs offer real opportunities for learning while adding value to the business.
Support will also be available through a mentoring system.
Exploration's managing director John Browne is ‘fully supportive of the programme and very keen for it to succeed’.
Challenge EDP was designed by a cross-functional, cross-ROC team led by chief drilling engineer Neil Booth.
Booth says there is ‘real interest’ in the team's work from established staff and it's expected that the programme will prove useful to many people within the business.
XTC Resource Development manager and leader of a Challenge steering group, Bryan Lovell, comments: ‘Challenge EDP is concerned with raising the performance of the company by broadening and raising the standard of our skills.
What better way to achieve this than starting with our new recruits.’
Lovell is emphatic that it is not a fast-track management programme but a way of offering highly motivated individuals the chance to fully develop themselves in technical, business and behavioural areas.
‘Who knows what 2010 will bring?
These graduates joined BP to do real jobs and because of the learning opportunities this programme offers them.
In time leaders may emerge but our aim is to beat competitors to the cream of the graduate field, young people who will really enjoy our industry.
We are confident that Challenge EDP will make this happen.’
TRAINING CENTRE TAKES ON A MORE COMPETITIVE EDGE
A training centre which specialises in courses on drilling and production technology for the oil industry has itself been learning a few lessons over the past 12 months.
The Drilling and Production Training Centre, which has facilities in Aberdeen and Montrose, has undergone a major rationalisation programme to become a more customer-focused organisation.
The review of how the DPTC does business was prompted by the arrival of Robert Mitchell, a senior internal auditor at Dyce, in August 1992, on secondment from BP Exploration.
The DPTC is operated on behalf of the offshore petroleum industry by the Drilling and Production Training Association Limited, a charitable-status organisation which is funded by income derived from its activities.
BP is among the 40 or so member companies which subscribed to the formation of the training body.
Its current chairman is Steve Nuttall, BP's Forties asset team leader.
Mitchell, a qualified chartered accountant, explained that his appointment as a business manager at the DPTC came about after Nuttall had asked for a volunteer to assist in the centre's transition to a more commercially-orientated organisation.
‘It presented itself as an interesting challenge with a variety of roles in accountancy and administration, sales and pricing,’ he told BPXpress.
Drawing on his experience of the BP culture changes, Mitchell concentrated on introducing a slicker, more financially-accountable way of working.
‘The centre's original cost base was far too high,’ he said.
‘Even though the business has charitable status, it still needs to be operated on a commercial basis.’
After initial funding from the member companies, the DPTC has had to become self-financing.
‘A significant area of income for the centre was in direct grant aid from the European Community,’ Mitchell continued.
‘While EC and central government grant assistance still plays a part in the DPTC's training income, it is now channelled through the user organisations to offset the full commercial rates we are charging for courses.
‘In this way, the centre is not treating the grant funding as a crutch, but is concentrating on making its training programmes more commercially attractive to customers.’
A major part of the DPTC's controllable costs — staff salaries — have been cut by 40 per cent over the past 12 months, through natural wastage and a small number of redundancies.
‘While the business needs staff to manage its affairs, administer the bookings system and sell courses, the actual delivery of training can be contracted out to specialists,’ Mitchell pointed out.
‘In this way, by cutting our fixed costs, we can concentrate on controlling our variable costs.’
The general manager of the DPTC is Luis Caycedo, a highly experienced drilling engineer who used to work for ARCO.
The centre's operations manager is Mike Jones, who retired from BP's training centre in Dyce earlier this year.
The arrival of Mitchell added a financial focus to the centre's management skills.
‘The centre is now better positioned to take advantage of the increasing demand for training and it will be able to compete more effectively with similar commercial organisations,’ he said.
‘Having tackled the cost base, we can look at developing our product range — offering competence training and getting SCOTVEC, HND or BTec validation for more of our post-graduate courses.
‘We can also widen the scope of our existing training activities by acting as brokers for other courses.’
At its training centre in Blackness Avenue, Altens, Aberdeen, the DPTC has classrooms, laboratories and a fully-equipped computer studio, as well as an advanced drilling simulator with full subsea and directional simulation.
The offshore training centre in Forties Road, Montrose, offers four test wells, three drilling rigs and a range of oilfield equipment, in addition to classrooms and a mud laboratory.
A library of engineering software and simulations is also available.
MUD VOLCANOES BUBBLE WITH HYDROCARBON CLUES
BPX geoscientists have a better understanding of three Caspian oil fields following a major study of mud volcanoes found in onshore Azerbaijan.
Now a new study has begun to understand the potential threat of volcano-related earth tremors to future offshore platforms.
The studies are evidence of the growing cooperation between BP and the Geological Institute of the Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences (GIA).
BP geoscientists and their colleagues from Statoil wanted to establish whether the mud volcano region might offer clues to the hydrocarbon source rocks and fluid flow patterns.
Azerbaijan has about a third of the world population of mud volcanoes, which range in size from a few metres to several kilometres across the base.
Their ‘roots’ go deep.
The volcanoes erupt from depths of around ten kilometres —much deeper than levels reached by drilling — and bring oil, gas, water and rocks to the surface.
‘Think of them as ‘cost-free wells’,’ said Ray Archer, senior BP-Alliance geochemist.
‘They are bringing material up all the time.
You can find material at the surface which are samples from the deeper stratigraphy.
‘Azerbaijan is the Texas of mud volcanoes: they are bigger, more active and there are more of them than anywhere else in the world — and they are clearly associated with oil and gas generation.’
Ray, and an Alliance team which included geologist Dave Casey, joined forces with a GIA team on a field trip which took samples from 18 volcanoes.
The samples were subjected to sophisticated analytical techniques at the Research and Engineering Centre, Sunbury — probably the first time that rock from the region has been analysed in the West, said Dave.
Two GIA scientists, Dr Elchin Bagirov and Dr Mushvig Tagiyev, spent two weeks at Sunbury studying analytical techniques such as gas chromatography and mass spectrometry.
Dave said: ‘Before the field trip, we were basing our knowledge on a lot of speculation: we had little direct access to data and there was little consensus among academics and the oil industry as to what the source rocks are.’
Now, said Ray, the work has ‘helped us narrow down the source rock to one or two possibilities, and it has indicated to us that the source rock does not vary across the region.’
Study results are being incorporated in geochemical models, and will help predict how oil is both generated and flows through the basin.
The GIA is now working on a study to evaluate the potential threat to platforms from future mud volcano eruptions.
As recently as 1977, an offshore eruption sent a 1,000-metre column of burning methane gas into the air.
BUOY-ED UP FOR ROLE DOWN UNDER
The calm buoy loading system used on BP's Buchan field in the North Sea has started a new lease of life off western Australia.
Following refurbishment, the 300-tonne system was transported by heavy lift vessel and installed in the Wandoo field for a production test.
The system was previously used for offshore loading of tankers in the Buchan field from 1981 to 1986 when because of downtime, due mainly to weather, it was replaced by a pipeline tied-in to the Forties pipeline system.
COMMONWEALTH COMEBACK BECKONS FOR DAVE
Former hammer champion Dave Smith again has his sights on Commonwealth gold.
Dave, an electrical technician at Dimlington, was Commonwealth champion at Edinburgh in 1986, and came out of semi-retirement to capture a bronze medal at the recent AAA's championships.
After suffering a serious head injury in a close season training accident, he has been gradually returning to peak fitness.
While his throw of 68.06m at the AAA's meeting was well below his best, he was satisfied.
‘I was suffering from a virus and wasn't really fit, so all things considered I had to be happy with my performance,’ he said.
‘The main thing is that I'm enjoying my throwing again.’
The Commonwealth Games qualifying distance is 72m, well within Dave's reach.
Should he achieve it, he wouldn't mind being in the British team at Victoria, in Canada, next year.
Dave won a silver medal when he defended his Commonwealth title in Auckland, New Zealand, in 1990, and has been AAA's champion five times.
COMMERCIAL SUCCESS FOR NEW COREBYTE SYSTEM
Corebyte, the on-site core analysis system, has been successfully used to log conventional core — its first commercial contract.
The system — developed jointly by BP, Statoil and Baker Hughes Inteq (formerly Exlog)— was used to log core from the Statoil-operated Norne Field discovery well in block 6608/10–3.
This field is potentially the biggest discovery in Norway since 1986.
Corebyte — first used in BP's four-well slimhole drilling programme in the Congo — provided near real-time data from Norne to optimise logging and testing operations and significantly reduce rig time.
‘The availability of Core-byte data allowed for the early input of important parameters such as core permeability into the test programme and increased the percentage of successful repeat formation testings,’ said Tim Dodson, manager, Exploration Operations, Statoil.
‘The ability to derive quantative data from the core within hours of coring played a significant role in selection of drill stem test intervals and enabled Statoil to maximise the effectiveness of expensive and time-consuming critical processes.
‘Timely answers contributed to better rig-time management and cost savings.’
Sunbury-based Ron Jantzen, project manager for Corebyte development within BPX's Technology Provision team, said he was delighted at the success of the first commercial outing of the system.
‘It is a spin-off from the Congo slimhole project and is all about re-engineering the way we do things in order to become more efficient.’
TAURAMENA TALKS EASE CIVILIAN CONCERNS
Work at BPX Colombia's central processing facilities (CPF) has been completely resumed after civilians from the Tauramena community, a municipality of 2500 inhabitants, partially blocked its access road to protest against the company and its contractors' hiring and procurement policies.
The early September one-day civil stoppage was followed by four days of talks between the company and Tauramena representatives.
At the meetings, BPXC clarified its policies and answered community questions.
The talks were held at the CPF site and included issues which were set forth in four documents, all of them unanimously approved by community representatives and by BPXC.
Those taking part expressed their satisfaction with the outcome of the talks, and with the agreements.
‘This session,’ commented one of the community participants, ‘demonstrates that a dialogue is the best path to overcoming differences.
They (the BPX representatives) confirm the company's willingness to listen to the community.’
BPXC also ratified its recommendation that workers native to Tauramena have a priority in the hiring process when applying for posts offered by contractors working in that municipality, provided the candidates have the required experience and fill the legal and contractual requirements.
BPXC and its contractors will look into ways of informing the community in a speedy and efficient manner about the company's employment and supply needs.
Other aspects of the agreements include the opening of an account at local Tauramena banks for making payments to the suppliers and to the employees.
The agreements address the priority hiring of local vehicles; a cooperation on the maintenance of roads, and the opening of a dialogue with organisations that work on fostering development and progress in Tauramena.
A meeting will be held between the company, the contractors, local businessmen and small entrepreneurs, to negotiate mechanisms for the supply and demand of goods and services.
The participants will meet again in mid-October, when BPXC will present its salary and benefit policies.
WYTCH FARM STUMPS SAVILLS
Wytch Farm proved more than a match for Savills, the property services and estate management consultants to BPX, during a friendly game of cricket in August.
‘We are hoping the cricket match will become an annual event,’ commented Wytch Farm team captain Andy Leadbetter.
‘If this is the case, there's no doubt Savills will be fielding a stronger side next year.’
Savills scored 79 runs for five wickets off 14 overs.
Wytch Farm hit 80 runs in 13 overs for the loss of no wickets.
THE ANGOLAN ASSIGNMENT: A TOUGH TASK FOR OUR MAN FIELD
TAKING a Boston Whaler out for a spot of sport fishing in the warm waters of the South Atlantic and picnicking on the beach sounds wonderful.
But things are not always so idyllic — because this is Angola, and one of the toughest assignments in XFI's portfolio.
General Manager Dick Field has been based in Luanda for the past three-and-a-half years.
During that time BP has held a small interest in offshore block 8 and has been designated operator for onshore Cabinda Central block, where operations have been suspended for security reasons.
More recently the Alliance has been awarded a 40 per cent interest in a deepwater block — 15 — for which Exxon is to be operator.
Final signature is expected soon.
‘This is our business core,’ say Field.
‘There is great potential for us to build on this foundation, a process we are just beginning.’
Field, who has doctorate in micropalaeontology, arrived in Angola from Milan where he was manager for BP Italy.
Before that he had worked as GM in Brazil, exploring a portfolio of acreage which included the great tracts of land in which BP was an interest holder in the middle Amazon basin as well as onshore blocks in the Parana Basin and offshore in the Sergipe Alagoas Basin.
‘We drilled two wells whilst I was in Brazil but failed to find commercial hydrocarbons and the office was closed when the work programme was completed,’ he explained.
However it was in Brazil that he had learned Portuguese — hence his posting to the former Portuguese colony in Africa.
The well-travelled Field — he has also worked in Melbourne on Papua New Guinea exploration, San Francisco where he headed geological services for BP-Alaska, Sunbury, London and Aberdeen — says that life in Luanda can be ‘difficult’.
‘We sometimes have to face power cuts which can be uncomfortable in the summer when the generators cannot drive the air conditioning,’ he explains.
‘But losing our water supply, as sometimes happens, can be worse.
Sometimes water can be unavailable for two weeks — then life is not so easy.’
But usually Luanda is relatively quiet, despite the security problems that exist elsewhere in the country and one can lead a normal life.
Furthermore, the Angolan people are well known for their friendliness to foreigners and for their placid and kind nature.
For much of time he been joined by his wife Joanne, who has worked tirelessly with the country's zoo to help care for captive chimpanzees and a small collection of other African animals.
The BP office is staffed by Field, a secretary, a receptionist, administrative manager plus two Angolan consultants providing advice on various matters on doing business there.
One of them, Mario Pizarro, joined Field in London in September for a two-day work-shop on XFI's total risk management programme.
An accountant by training, Pizarro too recognised that the security situation was a problem in persuading foreign companies to invest.
‘But Angola could be a very rich country,’ he says.
‘We have 2000 kilometres of coast-line, we are rich in minerals and have great agricultural potential.
Of all the countries in southern Africa, Angola is one with the greatest potential.’
He acknowledges that in many sectors the legal framework, which is based on the Portuguese legal system, needs tightening.
‘But in the oil and diamond sectors the situation is relatively sound.’
Pizarro is in a good position to judge.
He has worked for pharmaceutical company Pfizer, National Bank of Angola and on collaborative projects for the World Bank and is now representing Banco Espirito Santo in Luanda.
He is convinced of the value that foreign companies — such as BP — add to Angola's development.
‘They bring management capabilities, investment, as well as allowing Angolans access to new technology.’
DON WELL FLOWS
A development well drilled in the Don South West field is flowing at 7000 barrels a day after being sidetracked.
Drilled from the subsea manifold of Don North East by the drilling rig Sedco 700, the original well passed through two faulted zones before reaching total depth of 18,155ft.
A small section of hydrocarbon bearing sand was found.
A sidetrack well encountered an oil column of 132ft measured depth (md) in the Brent formation.
The well was completed and tested from the Sedco 700 and is now tied back to the Thistle platform.
Production began on September 4.
A downhole flowmeter for measuring the flow rates and water cut was run in the well, the first time it has been used in the North Sea, although a prototype has been used at Wytch Farm.
Thistle Well Engineering and Operations team leader, Andy Hine, said the well was performing to expectations.
Well data is currently being reviewed by the asset to determine the reservoir potential and to establish water injection and production options.
Don South West holds an estimated 117 million barrels of oil in place but the reservoir is highly faulted and compartmentalised, making recovery difficult.
Any further development of the field will have a bearing on the field life of Thistle.
DRAUGEN READY FOR START-UP
Production from the Draugen field in Mid-Norway, in which BP has a 14 per cent stake, is due to begin in mid-October.
Offshore commissioning and hook-up is progressing and production and injection wells are being drilled on the Shell-operated project.
Around 900 people are working in the area at present.
Production should reach 20,000 b/d by the end of 1993 with full production anticipated to plateau at 100,000 b/d says Haltenbanken asset manager Per Otto Selnes.
Estimates put recoverable reserves at around 605 million barrels.
First production from Draugen — BPNorway's most valuable asset — comes just one month after the announcement of Norway's 14th licensing round, in which BPExploration was awarded operatorship of two licences and a stake in a third.
All are in the North Viking Graben, considered an area of strategic importance.
The award gives BP a 25 per cent stake in blocks 35/8 and 35/6–36/4 and a 15 per cent stake in block 34/11 — the so-called ‘golden block’— which will be operated by Norwegian state oil company Statoil.
ABERDEEN SPECIALIST HELPS COLOMBIA CHOOSE BEST DRILL BIT
Because drill bit performance is highly influential in overall well cost, BPX Colombia's well operations team is engaged in the study of various bits, their durability, and the particular drilling challenges in the formations of the Llanos foothills.
According to Martyn Fear, drill bit specialist from the Drilling Technology group in Aberdeen, the duration of the rotating time required to drill the well, the extremely rough drilling conditions, the time spent tripping and replacing worn bits, and the costs of bit purchase are all highly dependent upon drill bit efficiency.
It has been estimated that these three cost categories can impact about 10 to 40 per cent of the well's dryhole cost.
To determine how to improve drill bit efficiency for the 12 ¼″ well section, Fear recently spent two months gathering data and processing it at BPXC.
His research focused on poly-crystalline diamond compact (PDC) drill bits, which have proved to be the most cost effective for the deep, interbedded Colombian wells.
Although costly to buy, PDC drill bits have higher penetration rates, and can drill further than tricone bits.
The aim of the study was to determine how to ‘drill fast, improve bit life and eliminate the drillstring vibrations,’ Fear says.
His study recommended simple procedures for drilling staff to use to avoid four main types of vibration that limit the bit's drilling capacity: slip stick, whirl, bouncing and whipping.
Fear trained on-site Colombian drillers, mud loggers and well superintendents and their assistants as to which PDC drill bits are the most efficient for various different formations, and how they can be made to drill faster.
His recommendations — which are contained in two handy posters exhibited at every rig site — are slightly different from conventional drilling practices.
Vibration problems at BPXC's wells are more dramatic and commonplace than elsewhere because the formations are hard and the holes tend to be extremely enlarged due to wellbore ‘breakout’ phenomena, so that the drillstring easily loses stability.
The study's results and recommendations have also been communicated to all service companies as input for their own studies.
‘They have a crucial role to play,’ he points out.
The application of the recommendations is already showing drilling improvements at the Cupiagua-2 and Cupiagua-3 wells, Fear says, adding that these results also need to be transferred to people who will drill wells yet to be started.
‘The potential returns of this study are enormous,’ comments Brian Burrell, from BPXC's Drilling operations team.
‘Through proper application of existing technology, we are already seeing much higher rates of penetration.’
AMBERJACK JACKPOT — NEW DRILLING RECORD
HOUSTON —BPX set another new Gulf of Mexico record for a horizontal well on the Amberjack Project.
Its Mississippi Canyon 109 A-26 well, completed on August 30, has a horizontal section of 2,800 feet.
It surpasses BPX's old record, set in July for the A-24 well, which extended 2,500 feet.
‘The angle and the stepout of the well was not unusual,’ says Wes Black, completions engineer.
‘What becomes more difficult, and what the geoscientists, drillers and completions people all work to ensure, is that the well is drilled in such a way as to make the completion process as routine as possible.’
The A-26 well encountered 1,100 feet of pay in three zones and is producing 1,500 barrels of oil per day.
Black notes that while drillers can quickly change the angle of a well to better penetrate a reservoir, a steep angle or a kink in the horizontal bore hole can make completion more difficult and expensive — or even impossible.
A well completion allows the oil to flow from the reservoir and into the well bore while holding the reservoir sand in place.
Drilling Engineer Perry Hill notes that BPX has drilled more than 10,500 feet of pay in horizontal wells within the last year.
Three of the six horizontal wells drilled in that time have set Gulf of Mexico records for overall horizontal length.
Rick Lott and Charlie Powell, the Drilling Supervisors on Amberjack, play a key role in the success of the team.
‘We're continuously learning what it takes to drill and complete successful horizontal wells in the Gulf,’ Hill says.
‘Rick and Charlie's input into the program, coupled with their leadership offshore, have turned plans into reality.
‘We've proven that horizontal wells can have a major impact in the economics of Gulf of Mexico field developments.’
RECORD APPLICATIONS FOR TRUST FUND AWARDS
A record number of applications were received from Shetland students for financial awards in this year's Sullom Voe Participants' Tenth Anniversary Education Trust scheme.
Applications totalled 96 — 35 more than last year and 22 up on the previous highest total two years ago.
From this large number of candidates, the trustees had the difficult task of selecting just eight people who would receive grants.
The annual award scheme, now in its fifth year, is operated through a £250,000 trust fund which is subscribed to by all 33 participant companies in the terminal.
The awards are made to promote and encourage the education of local young people in a discipline which will contribute to the long-term social and economic development of Shetland.
This year's recipients of the £1000 per year grants are:
Gregor Gilfillan, of Levenwick, who is entering his third year of a BSc (Hons) biochemistry course at the University of Aberdeen;
Martin Henderson, of Baltasound, Unst, who is starting third year studies for a BEng (Hons) degree in electronics and electrical engineering at the University of Edinburgh;
Morvern MacKinnon, of Lerwick, who is commencing her fourth year for a BSc (Hons) in mathematics at the University of Edinburgh;
Wendy Georgeson, of Lerwick, who is entering the first year of an LLB law degree course at the University of Edinburgh;
Debra Priest, of Haroldswick, Unst, who is starting a first year HNC course in business administration at the Shetland College of Further Education;
Fiona Mair, of Lerwick, who is commencing her second year of MB ChB studies in medicine and surgery at the University of Aberdeen;
Bernadette Johnson, of Brae, who is entering her second year studies for a PhD degree in chemistry at the University of Glasgow; and
Joe Robertson, of Lochend, who is starting the first year of Bachelor of Education (Technology) course at the Moray House College of Education.
ENVIRONMENT NORTHERN SEAS
BP Norway was one of the major participants in this year's Environment Northern Seas exhibition in Stavanger.
It was an event that was attended by 12,000 people — three times more than last year.
The theme of the BP stand, complete with a globe and candles, was ‘It is the global environment which matters’.
An address by Colin Jones, BPX general manager for health, safety and environmental matters, on the need for close cooperation between industry and society in achieving specific environmental objectives, attracted an audience of 1200 listeners.
EXPLORATION WELL ENDS 20-YEAR BREAK
An exploration well to be spudded in the Viking area (Conoco operator) next month marks the start of a robust exploration and appraisal programme in SNS operations.
BP and Conoco each have a 50 per cent share in Viking which has been in production since 1972 and all the gas was sold to British Gas for a fairly low price in present terms.
‘BP has deferred activity in this area over the past few years,’ said Neil Butler, Business manager, SSH.
‘However, termination of the BG sales agreement in May 1993, coupled with the removal of gas levy in the Budget, has transformed the potential of the Viking area.’
An exploration and appraisal programme prepared for 1993/94 involves spudding a well in the JX satellite in November — the first exploration well in the area for some 20 years — and drilling two appraisal wells in the FS and WX satellites early next year.
A 3D seismic survey is being acquired over the Viking satellites in the first half of 1994 with further 3D over JX if the well is successful.
BP's share of existing gas in Viking is some 40 to 50 billion cubic feet (bcf) which is sold to Alliance Gas.
It is exported to the Theddlethorpe terminal in Lincolnshire, which is 50 per cent owned by BP.
The satellite prospects are expected to yield between 150 and 600 bcf (BP share).
Several options for exporting the ‘new’ gas are under consideration, said Butler, including via the Viking A platform which was shutdown in 1991.
The main Viking field is earmarked for abandonment between 1997 and 2000 but major investment is necessary if the transportation system is to be maintained beyond that time frame, said Butler.
EXTENDED WELL BOOSTS HAMBLE EXPORTS
The success of the extended reach drilling programme at Wytch Farm has been reflected in crude oil exports from the Hamble oil terminal.
Since the first extended reach well, export shipments which averaged some 60,000 barrels a day (b/d), are peaking at 83,000 b/d.
The increased flow of oil has also meant a marginal reduction in the time span of crude oil carriers visiting the terminal from seven to 6.5 days.
One of the first customers to receive a shipment containing the new ‘extended reach’ oil will be America after a 78,000 tonne cargo sailed for a New York refinery.
The vessel left the terminal with a tug escort — a new safety measure introduced by the terminal.
The tug is on hand to assist in the unlikely event of an outward-bound crude oil carrier sustaining an engine or steering failure in the difficult approach channel to Southampton Water.
GYDA IS HALON-FREE
The Gyda platform should be Halon-free by the end of this month on completion of the installation of the BP fine water spray fire suppression system in the gas turbines, the emergency generator rooms and the fire pump system.
The effectiveness of the new system was proved on 11 September when a small fire in the turbine hood at Gyda was extinguished immediately.
Nobody was injured and production was not affected by the incident.
CPF'S FIRST STONE GIVEN OFFICIAL BLESSING
Following a very Colombian tradition, the central processing facilities' first stone was recently blessed at a simple ceremony of special meaning to Casanare and to the Santiago de las Atalayas and Tauramena licenses partners: BPXC, Ecopetrol, Total and Triton.
About 200 guests, including representatives from the contractor firms, took part in the outdoor Mass and barbecue — called ‘mamona’ in Casanare — held near the construction site on the Alto del Aceite Mesa.
Following the religious ceremony, Monsignor Olavio Lpez Duque blessed a memorial plaque symbolising the first stone of the central processing facilities (CPF).
The facilities will comprise four early production units (EPS).
Each unit will have its own separators, gas re-injectors, and storage tanks to provide an individual production capacity of 40,000 b/d.
It is hoped that the first unit will start production in one year, and that by the end of 1995 the facilities will reach a production rate of 150,000 b/d.
Speaking on behalf of the partners, BPXC's Operations manager, Phil Mead, said that the CPF will allow Casanare to ‘witness the growth of a solid enterprise which will bring innumerable opportunities to the nation, but which mainly will contribute to the growth of the region and to the development of its people.’
Casanare's Governor Oscar Wilches, speaking on behalf of his region, extended his congratulations, gratitude, and appreciation to the partners for the inauguration of the works at the facilities.
‘We acknowledge that the great achievements BP has brought about in our territory are the result of the enthusiasm and technical and professional rigor of its personnel,’ Wilches told the audience.
FORTIES ‘COPTER IN RESCUE DRAMA
A Dauphin in-field helicopter from the Forties field helped pinpoint three crewmen who took to a life raft after their yacht Ambrosia ran into trouble in a North Sea storm.
The helicopter and a standby vessel spotted a flare set off by the crew and stayed in the vicinity until the men were winched to safety by an RAF helicopter.
They were flown to hospital in Aberdeen but released after a check-up.
Battered by 50 knot winds and seven-metre seas, the Ambrosia was later washed ashore in Aberdeenshire.
FILE UNDER ‘CASE SOLVED’
HOUSTON — It was a sleuthing job that would have made Agatha Christie proud.
Solving the mystery involved a breakthrough hypothesis, followed by dogged detective work by a team of completions experts from BP Exploration Offshore Division.
The result is that the Amberjack (Mississippi Canyon 109-A) Production platform has the most efficient wells in the Gulf of Mexico.
‘Most wells in the Gulf produce at about a 35 percent completion efficiency,’ says Ed Park, senior completions engineer.
‘The Gulf of Mexico has soft, unconsolidated reservoir sands which need to be gravel packed.
Otherwise, the well will eventually be clogged with sand.
A gravel pack completion solves the sand problem, but invariably damages the area surrounding the well bore.’
Enter Bob Hannah with a breakthrough hypothesis.
‘I felt that by fracturing the well in conjunction with a gravel pack we could produce a ‘highway’ into the reservoir that would allow it to produce at peak efficiency,’says Hannah, a consulting production engineer.
Detective work in the laboratory and use of the well's detailed results helped the team fine tune the process during field development.
‘Over a period of one year we were continually evaluating our frac pack job performance, changing one component at a time until we achieved well performance that has virtually eliminated problems caused by damage near the well bore,’ Park says.
‘Current frac pack completions are flowing at or slightly better than 100 percent efficiency.
This level of performance is roughly three to four times greater than early gravel packed well completions at Amberjack,’ he said.
GARDENERS' PRIZE CROP FLOURISHES
BP's gardeners are bloomin' great!
as if to prove it, our green-fingered experts have again picked up the top prizes in Aberdeen district council's gardening competition.
Flower power at Greenridge helped Albert Barron to his sixth consecutive win in the category for gardens not seen from the road.
And Tony Ross and Adam Shand, who ensure the flower beds and grass around Dyce office are at their best, completed a hat-trick of wins in the industrial section.
Greenridge is a category B listed house, built in 1840 by the famous architect, Archibald Simpson.
The house stands in 3.6 acres and is used primarily as a residence by the XEU chief executive, other company executives and VIP guests.
Self taught, Albert, who is a relative of George Barron, of BBC TV's Beechgrove Garden fame, has been tending the gardens for 16 years and has been a consistent winner in the gardens competition over the years.
It's a full time job, looking after a walled garden, three plots of vegetables and cut flowers, lawns, a rock garden and three greenhouses where he rears thousands of plants.
‘There is no magic formula,’ he says.
‘I like to see everything neat and tidy.’
GEARING UP ON SAFETY
Pupils at primary schools in Grampian Region have been gearing up on road safety.
The BP Road Safety team of Elaine Craig and Kerry Livingstone visited 50 schools to highlight the dangers on roads.
To help get the message across, pupils took part in a simulated accident, acting out the roles of those involved, including the ‘casualty’ and the police.
PAINTINGS UNDER THE HAMMER
BP is selling part of a collection of paintings used in a BP-Shell Mex advertising campaign which ran in the 1930s.
The sale, by auction, will take place at the New Bond Street salerooms on October 19.
Among the 200 paintings coming under the auctioneer's hammer is an original by the late Graham Sutherland —‘The Great Globe at Swanage’— which is expected to fetch up to £15,000.
Sutherland was an unknown artist when he was asked to paint posters for petrol tankers and hoardings as part of the highly successful advertising campaign —‘Everywhere You Go’.
GREAT SCOTT!
NEW FIELD HEADS FLOW OF PIPELINE CUSTOMERS
The Scott field, operated by Amerada Hess, is the latest third party customer of the Forties Pipeline System, coming on stream on September 10.
The field will eventually plateau at around 200,000 barrels a day (b/d).
Agip's Tiffany field (70,000 b/d) is due into the system in mid-November followed by Toni in December.
Marathon's East Brae field will also come on stream in December, initially at 30,000 b/d but eventually reaching a plateau of 120,000b/d.
In March, Enterprise's Nelson field will add a further 135,000 plus b/d.
The pipeline system will be able to handle 1 million b/d once upgrading of the system and Kinneil expansion works are completed.
HIDES GAS PLANT UNSCATHED AFTER EARTHQUAKE
A large earthquake hit the Southern Highlands province of Papua New Guinea shortly after three pm on Friday 20 August, forcing the closure of the Hides gas plant in which BP has a 95 per cent stake.
The earthquake, measuring 6.2 on the Richter scale — about the same intensity as the 1990 San Francisco ‘quake — was centred around 30 kilometres south-west of the town of Tari, and ten kilometres from the Hides plant at Nogoli.
Several buildings in the town of Tari were destroyed and some minor injuries were reported.
There were also a number of landslides in the area.
Operations at Hides were shut down immediately the earthquake struck.
Apart from a couple of minor cuts and bruises, there were no injuries.
The BPDAL Emergency Response plans were activated in Melbourne and a small group within BP Exploration, headed by general manager Greg Bourne, was formed to monitor the situation and offer advice.
Communication channels were immediately set up between the site, Melbourne, Port Moresby and London.
Initial reports from the site indicated that there had been some damage to buildings at the camp site, some distance from the gas plant, but that the plant itself remained unscathed.
Chris Girton, health safety and security coordinator and Andy Grainge, senior geologist, who were members of the response team in Melbourne, explain that the plant was built to survive shocks such as this.
‘We were conscious of the need to build in safeguards against possible earthquakes during the development of the Hides field and the construction of the gas plant,’ say Grainge.
‘Tremors of this magnitude, although rare, have been recorded in the region and we had to be comfortable that the plant could withstand the worst-case scenario.
‘The Geophysical Observatory in Port Moresby have over the years provided us with very useful earthquake data and are helping us monitor the after shocks which are sill being felt in the Tari area.’
‘The plant and wells automatically shut off the supply of gas as soon as the earthquake hit,’ adds Girton.
‘With the exception of a few broken computers sliding off desks, and other such minor damage, the plant came through the quake in good condition.
This incident also tested our response capability in such an emergency and we feel that the management of the incident went extremely well.’
Operations at Hides were suspended until a full inspection of the site had been completed and permission granted by the department of Mining and Petroleum to re-commence operations.
This took most of the weekend and the site was fully operational again by the following Monday.
Hides supplies gas for the generation of power to the nearby Porgera gold mine.
Power supply was interrupted during this period, but production at the mine was not affected.
LAWRENCE'S HOLE-IN-WAN!
Process engineer Lawrence Wan lived up to his name when he achieved a hole-in-one on the Shetland Golf Club course.
It was on the par 3 sixth hole where Lawrence scored his memorable feat after a 142-yard drive from the tee with a six iron.
‘It is an elevated green, so I didn't actually see the ball go down the hole,’ he told BPXpress.
‘I was playing a round with Mike Keddy, head of planning, and cost/estimating engineer Tom McKeown and they missed the green with their tee shots.
‘When we got to the green, there was no ball to be seen.
I thought I'd either holed my shot or that I had missed the green as well.’
Lawrence, who has been playing golf for almost three years, has a handicap of 20.
It was his first hole-in-one.
To celebrate, he treated his playing partners to a round of a different kind in the Mid Brae Inn afterwards.
Lawrence came to Sullom Voe from Manchester in April.
Horizontal wells key to Hydes' success
In 1989, the Hyde gas project was going nowhere fast.
Disappointing results from six vertical appraisal wells saw sanction refused and the project looked doomed.
The following year, a multi-skilled, integrated team headed by Garrick Mound, of Subsurface, challenged all aspects of the reservoir understanding and mode of access in order to achieve the desired level of increased performance and productivity.All subsurface disciplines revisited the reservoir model to establish a realistic and robust understanding of the reservoir quality distribution and its uncertainties.
The original concept for reservoir access was replaced by designing three horizontal wells to target the thin but high permeability layers.
The first well, with a 700-metre horizontal wellbore, was successfully geosteered through the predicted 8–10m layers, guided by a detailed sedimentological model framed by 3D seismic and proved a technical success.
The well tested at 69 million standard cubic feet a day — double the previous best from a fracced vertical well in the field and 10 times that achieved by a non-fracced vertical well.
This was the key for Statoil's joining the partnership and sanction for the project.
The team was then challenged to achieve the productivity and drainage objectives of the two remaining horizontal wells with a single well.
The well had to access two potential reservoir compartments and a 600m ‘barrier’ in the central horizontal section and still produce at more than 55mscfd.
The well was completed flowing at 63mscfd and with a 2169m horizontal section — the longest horizontal section in the UKCS and the third longest in the world.
It includes a 1162m productive zone.
The drilling team was headed by BPX senior drilling engineer Tony Emmerson, who designed the well, with input from directional drilling specialists, Sperry Sun.
Global Marine were enrolled as part of the subsurface team and managed drilling operations under a novel performance-related contract.
The two-well success resulted in a £4.5 million saving in development drilling costs, said Emmerson.
The revised plan resulted in a total saving of $2 b.o.e. of which 50 cents can be attributed to the horizontal wells.
Said Mound: ‘Without doubt, the success can be attributed to the integration of the subsurface team who moulded the comprehensive database bequeathed by a laboured appraisal programme into a highly tuned reservoir management tool.’
EGGAR INAUGURATES HYDE
UK Minister for energy Tim Eggar inaugurated the Hyde gas field at a ceremony in London on 27 September.
First commercial gas sales were made to Alliance Gas on September 1.
Representatives from project partners BPX and Statoil, plus sole gas purchasers Alliance Gas, were present.
In his address, Eggar said there were three reasons to celebrate: ‘the remarkable development of the Hyde field, the success of Alliance Gas and the wider international cooperation between governments and companies’.
Musical entertainment was provided by one of Norway's most talented soprano singers Bodil Arnesen.
HYDE'S MEDIEVAL FUN DAY IS A GAS
After recent problems with pigs — the kind that can become trapped in pipelines — it was ironic that Hyde project celebrated first gas from the field with a great pig roast.
Three pigs, in fact, crackled over a specially-made spit as the celebration brought a touch of medieval England to Easington, on Humberside.
The setting was one of England's few remaining tithe barns at the Rectory Farm restaurant, in the village of Easington, the location of BP's Easington and Dimlington terminals.
And 80 year-old retired engineer, Louis Dosogne, showed he had lost none of his skills by designing and building the roast spit.
Hyde Project staff and guests entered into the spirit by dressing in period costume or in the project colours of red and white.
An evening of revelry included maypole and Morris dancing, archery, jousting, a demonstration by the English Civil War Re-enactment Society, and ended with a 20th century disco.
Against a backdrop symbolising the theme of the Great Pig Roast, Project manager Dave Finch, suitably attired in period dress, prepares to cut the celebratory cake.
IT'S GEORGE IN FIVE
George Bartlett, storeman/mechanical technician on Forties Delta, was in great form at the platform's golf outing at Bathgate, collecting five prizes.
The 15-handicapper won the Stableford with 37pts, his better inward half edging out Doug Spiers and Ken Green, who matched his points total.
George also won the two longest drive competitions, was nearest the pin in the afternoon and runner-up in the Delta Shield with a net 70.
The shield winner was Bill Wright (65) with Peter Boyd (74) third.
Nearest the pin in the morning was George Patterson.
MORGAN TO BECOME PRESIDENT OF BPX ALASKA
Three years ago, John Morgan was in charge of the sale and shipping of BP's Alaskan crude oil.
In January, he takes over as president of BPX Alaska, responsible for maintaining production, after spending the interim in Aberdeen as deputy chief executive and general manager of XEU's operations in the North Sea And Norway.
It's been ‘an incredibly challenging, exciting and demanding time,’ he says of his spell in Scotland.
When he arrived in Aberdeen, Morgan took over an organisation facing fundamental change to tackle the challenge of offshore safety post Piper Alpha and improve the profitability of a business based on maturing assets.
But a combination of tough decisions and innovative business methods has turned the organisation round.
Morgan sees similarities between the North Sea and his new charge, and not just as providers of the bulk of the lifeblood for BP investment in new exploration opportunities worldwide.
‘Alaska has a lot fewer, but larger, assets than XEU but there has been a major reorganisation there,’ he says.
‘The change has been pretty much the same as in the North Sea particularly, for example, in relationships with contractors and contracting policy.
It will be interesting for me to compare the processes and to see if the two can benefit from each other 's experience.’
The feedback from Alaska is positive and he feels he is taking over a successful concern with a good track record being put in place.
‘The Prudhoe production objectives would have been unimaginable previously.
An exploration programme is being rebuilt and that must be tremendously motivating within the organisation,’ he adds.
‘As in XEU, Alaska is building a good track record and the challenge is to enhance and maintain it.Within BPX, however, the scale of the challenge continues to be very large for everyone in the business.
‘To achieve the objectives we have, everyone has to be very clear about the nature of the business and the nature of the challenge we are facing and what their role is in responding to it.
I think that is true of every part of BPX.’
Morgan sees the key issues centring around production, with costs, safety, the environment and reputation as core elements.
A firm believer in developing a strong teamwork concept, he works best in a team structure and sees this as the best way to tackle key issues.
‘There are a lot of similarities between the two provinces, but I have to learn the unique aspects of the Alaska operation and give effective support to the objectives.’
Having now worked in both sides of the oil business, Morgan says that he has come to appreciate the importance of high quality cooperation, whether it's at Grangemouth Refinery or in transporting and marketing oil in the US.
* Morgan's move is one of several changes to the senior management team in Aberdeen effective from January 1994.
Dr David Allen becomes a general manager while Alan Eilles leaves to join the XWH(N) executive office team as chief of staff.
John Hollis, general manager BPNorway, will assume the role of general management steward for HSE following Morgan's departure.
Hollis will head an initiative —‘Safety: the next level’— designed to further increase the XEU focus on HSE matters.
SECTOR ONE FOCUS FOR BPX
HOUSTON — BPX appears to have been the most successful bidder in Western Gulf of Mexico Outer Continental Shelf Lease Sale 143.
The sale was held on September 15 in New Orleans.
BPX bid $6.1 million on the 23 blocks in which it was the apparent high bidder.
The company's focus in OCS Sale 143 was on acquiring acreage in ‘Sector One,’ or high-potential, high-risk, deep-water exploration plays.
Water depths of tracts in which BPX had high bids ranged from 2,300 feet to 4,700 feet.
‘We gained access to a key Sector One play in which we were under-represented,’ says Offshore Exploration Vice President Ralph Alexander.
‘We were able to gain a strong position in this area for less than $300,000 per lease and no drilling commitment.’
LOGO PAIR TOAST SUCCESS
Draughtsman Stephen Cox and engineer Jack Duncan sipped the sweet taste of success after designing a logo for the XEU Engineering Group (XEG) at Dyce.
A year after the group's formation, manager Engineering, Roger Walls, sponsored the logo competition to reinforce the group's identity.
Over 20 entries were received and the joint entry by Cox and Duncan caught the eye of the judging panel, Don Maxwell, Hamid Khatib, Jim Caven-Atack, Joe Leghorn and Roger Walls.
It shows an offshore installation inset in a gearwheel and will now be used on departmental letterheads and stickers to promote teamwork and a sense of identity in engineering.
Cox and Duncan each received a bottle of champagne.
LONGER LIFE TARGET FOR DOWNHOLE PUMPS
New enhanced quality assurance (QA) procedures for electric submersible pumps (ESPs) used on Forties Echo are being implemented in a bid to extend pump run life.
Over the past five years, the run life of ESPs supplied by Reda for Forties Echo has gradually increased to an average of 250 days.
But under a new team approach with pump agents Lasalle, BP hopes to increase this to two years within the next five years.
Reda have introduced a new QA process at their Singapore manufacturing base for BP whereby every component is individually checked and numbered during assembly of the ESPs which are now well and vibration tested before shipment to the UK.
Electrical engineer Bob Usher and well engineer Alison Seward are responsible for the daily operation of the 10 ESPs on Forties Echo and recently visited the Singapore facility to check the new procedures.
Said Usher: ‘I am particularly interested in the motors, which have been a problem in the past, and how abrasive fluids affect the metallurgy of the pumps.
This has been improved by team design changes and more stringent QA procedures.’
As the Forties reservoir declines, the Forties Echo experience could play a part in maintaining field production by introducing the technology throughout the Forties field.
MAGNUS SECOND TIME AROUND FOR PINCHBECK
Rob Pinchbeck expects his new spell as manager of Magnus to last longer than his previous stint in the job.
On that occasion, in 1988, he had barely warmed the chair when reorganisation following the Britoil acquisition saw him move to Buchan.
Within a year, Pinchbeck was on his travels again, this time taking on the role of manager Exploitation with the Gulf of Mexico business unit in Houston, planning new deep water developments and reservoir management.
Since joining BP as a petroleum engineer in 1974, his career has kept him on the move.
His first posting was to Abu Dhabi, where he recalls routinely testing wells with 20,000 barrels a day production capacity — by burning the production!
‘I still find it hard to believe,’ he says.
His first association with the North Sea came next, working in Drilling and Forties, before moving on to Corporate Planning, in London.
Spells in San Francisco as Kuparuk development manager, then in Australia on the NW Shelf and PNG interface followed before he headed back to Aberdeen and Magnus in August after completing the Sloan programme at Stanford University.
Pinchbeck's return coincided with the 10th anniversary of Magnus production and he welcomed the opportunity to take the asset through a critical phase of its field life second time around.
Although only 10 years into production, Magnus is regarded as having reached middle age and approaching the point where production should begin to decline.
However, Pinchbeck is confident of extending the plateau by attacking opportunities in the main field through infill drilling and also developing a promising discovery to the north-west of the field.
An ambitious timetable exists for what he describes as ‘a very profitable phase’.
Together with various de-bottlenecking activities to maximise facilities and well potential which will extend production significantly, the overall investment is being treated as an integrated opportunity.
The focus will continue to be on lifting costs.
‘Magnus is among the top assets in the XEU portfolio and my job is to keep it in the premier league,’ he says.
‘It is, without doubt, my biggest challenge to date.’
Pinchbeck acknowledges that in the five years since he left, Magnus has undergone interesting change.
‘We are more acutely business focussed than ever before, though the issues haven't changed,’ he added.
‘BPX led the change in the North Sea and we continue to benchmark against the competition which is now hard on our heels.
Continuous performance improvement is the name of the game in staying ahead.’
Magnus, said Pinchbeck, had made great strides under his predecessor, Rick Haythornthwaite, developing the asset management system which has resulted in greater teamwork and enhanced empowerment of the individual.
He is committed to maintaining that momentum.
Pinchbeck considers a visible presence important and has already made several trips to the platform, something he intends to do on a regular basis.
‘I sense a great team spirit, onshore and offshore,’ he added.
‘A very challenging and exciting time lies ahead for Magnus and I am confident of maintaining its position as the ‘investors’ choice.
Although we have seen benefits in recent years, there is lots of mileage left in Magnus.
The best is yet to come.’
SWALLOW'S SUMMER ARRIVAL
Dave Swallow is Sullom Voe's new head of field maintenance.
He succeeds former assistant superintendent (field maintenance) Stuart Piper who left the terminal in June to join Shell in Gabon.
Swallow comes to Shetland after a year's short-term assignment at Wytch Farm where he provided the engineering input into the onshore field's scheduled maintenance shutdown in April.
A 30-year BP man, he joined the company's tanker organisation in 1963 as an engineering cadet.
On transferring to BP Chemicals' Carshalton factory in 1975, he had reached the rank of chief engineer.
After a spell as site mechanical services engineer, he moved, in 1978, to Belgrave House where he managed a number of BP Chemicals capital projects.
He joined BP Exploration at Dyce four years later as a senior mechanical engineer in the Magnus field group, subsequently becoming senior commissioning engineer.
A period in the engineering department saw him promoted from senior mechanical engineer to head of mechanical engineering before he was appointed head of facilities for BP's northern district which included the Buchan, Beatrice, SWOPS, Clyde, Thistle and Magnus upstream activities.
He was engineering superintendent for Magnus and Clyde and then lead mechanical engineer for Miller commissioning prior to his Wytch Farm assignment.
Born in Croydon, Surrey, he is married to Susan and has two sons.
Paul has just graduated in computing science from Glasgow University and Anthony (17) is completing his school studies in Aberdeen.
Swallow's interests away from work lie in such outdoor activities as skiing and hillwalking, as well as playing squash.
MANAGEMENT CHANGES
John Morgan, deputy chief executive and general manager XEU, has been appointed president, BP Exploration Alaska, one of several changes in the senior management team in Aberdeen effective from January 1994.
Dr David Allen becomes a general manager and Alan Eilles joins the XWH (N) executive office team as chief of staff.
John Hollis, general manager BP Norway, will assume the role of general management steward for HSE following John Morgan's departure.
Hollis will head an initiative —‘Safety: the next level’— designed to further increase the XEU focus on HSE matters.
DEFINITE SIGNS OF LIFE ON MARS
BP is to spend $340 million in developing its share of the first phase of the Mars oil and gas field in the Gulf of Mexico.
The field, which is operated by Shell, was discovered in 1989 and holds more than 700 million barrels of oil and gas equivalent.
The first phase of production is due to begin in late 1996 and will reach peak production of 100,000 barrels of oil and 110 million cubic feet of gas a day.
BP holds a 28.5 per cent stake in the field
Phase one will be developed using a tension-leg platform (TLP) installed in 2933 feet of water with 24 integral well slots and two subsea satellite wells.
It will set new water-depth records in the Gulf of Mexico.
The TLP was the most economical of more than a dozen development schemes under consideration.
The decision see a reduction in development costs to $1.2 billion from the original estimate of $2 billion.
The second stage of development will be considered after the first stage has been operating for two to three years.
This will include smaller adjacent discoveries in the same basin.
‘The Mars development is a major example of how the oil industry is applying innovative engineering and technology to develop oil and gas reserves cost-effectively in areas and water-depths hitherto unthinkable,’ said BPX chief executive John Browne.
‘We believe this marks the beginning of a new phase in the history of the Gulf of Mexico,’ he added.
‘Given the right conditions for investment the area carries great potential for further exploration and development.’
MEMORIAL SERVICE
A Service of Remembrance is to be held in Aberdeen for all those who have lost their lives while working offshore in the North Sea.
The service will be held in the Oil Industry Chapel, in the Kirk of St Nicholas, on Friday, 29 October at 11 am.
Seats will also be set out in the Drum Aisle, behind the Oil Chapel.
The Rev Angus Smith, chaplain to the oil industry, said the service would not focus on any single tragedy, but would be an appropriate act of remembrance for all.
The Rev Smith will conduct the service along with Bishop Mario Conti, the RC Bishop of Aberdeen, and the Rev Ross McLaren, of the Congregational Church in Aberdeen.
TANKER LOADING METERS UPGRADED
The terminal's crude oil loading meters (COLMS)— which measure the amount of oil discharged from the storage tanks via the jetty loading arms onto tankers — are being renewed.
The two-month changeout programme to replace the old Spectra-Tek meters with a new Daniels 2508 flow measurement system started last month.
A new Daniels COLMS control panel has already been installed in the offsites control room, adjacent to the terminal control centre.
Through an interface with a Hewlett-Packard supervisory computer, the measurement system will be connected to the Honeywell TDC3000 distributed control system with additional communications links to the terminal's computerised hydrocarbon accounting and tanker management systems.
Metering engineer Andy Davis is the project manager of the Daniels installation programme.
He explained to BPXpress: ‘There are 16 COLMS meters, laid out in four separate banks.
‘Any of these banks are interchangeable and can be used to load oil via any of the jetties and from any of the storage tanks.
The changeover to the Daniels meters will be carried out on a bank by bank basis.’
The control panel was build and factory tested at Daniels' Larbert premises in Stirlingshire.
The company is responsible not only for the meters' manufacture, but also their installation and commissioning — and the decommissioning of the old Spectra-Tek equipment.
‘During the changeover, the old and new systems will be running in parallel, but there should be little difference to the current operating methods,’ said Andy.
‘The Spectra-Tek system was designed and built to standards of 20 years ago.
Consequently the meters are now obsolete and maintaining them was becoming increasingly difficult, particularly in sourcing spare parts.
‘The Daniels meters are, in my opinion, the best flow measurement equipment available for this specific application.
They will perform a ‘live’ density measurement of the oil as it is being loaded onto tankers — instead of having the laboratory do a sample test after loading is completed — and temperature measurement will carried out in the oil stream, a more accurate method than the current measurement at the loading headers.’
He added: ‘The meters are automatically proven to within a calibration tolerance of 0.02 per cent each time they are operated.
Taking into account the volume, density, pressure and temperature measurements they undertake, the meters are operationally accurate to 0.1 per cent.’
Andy is already familiar with Daniels equipment.
He was a commissioning engineer at Wytch Farm when the company's meters were installed at the oilfield's gathering station and at the oil export terminal at Hamble, Southampton, in 1989.
Earlier this year, Sullom Voe's pipeline integrity meters (PIMS) were replaced with a Daniels system.
The four Brent and two Ninian meters measure the incoming oil from offshore.
The terminal's other metering system — stabilised crude oil meters (SCOMS), which measured the amount of stabilised oil being sent to storage from the separate Brent and Ninian processing trains — became redundant after PIMS commingling last year.
MILLER TRIES NEW WAYS OF TACKLING OLD PROBLEM
Miller asset is to look at new ways of tackling formation damage problems in wells — thanks to BP Exploration's first Well Productivity Awareness School.
The two-day school was held in Aberdeen.
‘We were about to conduct a study into the skin damage problem on Miller wells,’ said Paul Adair, team leader on Miller well operations.
‘The school raised additional areas that we might find worthwhile exploring.’
The school was the first in a series which will take it around the world to BPX locations — part of a global well productivity campaign.
BP drilling superintendent Dave Nims listed some of the changes planned at Miller.
They include restructuring drift angles of injector wells through the reservoir so as to increase their verticality to enhance thermal fracturing.
Miller also plan to make a detailed record of mud losses in the reservoir to evaluate the effects on formation productivity.
Drillstring trip damage to mud cake in the reservoir section will also be examined to identify the relationship between mud cake damage and productivity impairment.
Said Nims: ‘It was an excellent awareness campaign and if any engineer is planning or carrying out any work in the reservoir section of a well, they should attend this course.’
MILLER MILESTONE
Oil production from BP's Miller field reached 50 million barrels on September 8, exactly 15 months after coming on stream.
In addition, some 69 billion standard cubic feet of gas was delivered to Hydro Electric, at Peterhead, in the same period through an exclusive sales contract.
Excellent topsides and downhole performance, coupled with good teamwork onshore and offshore, were major contributors to the achievement, said Asset manager Lawrie Smyth.
The water injection system is operating at peak, and over 62 million barrels of water have been injected into the reservoir to sustain pressure support and aid oil recovery.
At present, the field has six production wells and four injectors but will eventually have 18 producers and nine injectors by 1998.
Drilling performance to date has also been best-in-class for a reservoir of this type and complexity.
Miller has recoverable reserves of 240 million barrels of oil and 490 billion cubic feet of sales gas.
NORWAY WILL BE BP'S CENTRE OF DRILLING EXPERTISE
BP Norway is poised to be the group's centre of expertise for high-temperature, high-pressuring drilling over the next six months, commented BPX chief drilling engineer Neil Booth.
Booth made his remarks during a ‘networking’ visit to Norway with BPX colleagues, chief petroleum engineer Michael Knowles and chief reservoir engineer Andrew Mackenzie.
The successful completion of the planned Gyda extended-reach well would be a major achievement for BP Norway and every effort was being made to tap into whatever experience was available, inside and outside the company, on a global basis, he added.
Michael Knowles saw BPN's greatest challenge as one of maintaining production and increasing reserves volumes, while bringing down development costs.
He added that as much as a third of BP's oil production was expected to continue to come from the North Sea until the turn of the century.
Andrew Mackenzie considered Norway was unique in that the Ula and Gyda fields had reservoirs which were not only deep and warm, but also with low permeability.
The prime objective was to keep plateau production going for as long as possible through increased recovery and satellites.
One thing they all agreed on, however, was that Norway was an attractive posting because of its quality of life and the technical challenges it offered.
NEW BP CHAIR FOR DUNDEE UNIVERSITY
Britain's first Professor of Petroleum Policy and Economics has been appointed to a new BP Chair at Dundee University.
Professor Paul Stevens, who joins the university's Centre for Petroleum and Mineral Law and Policy, is an energy economist, formerly at Surrey University.
He is also a Middle East specialist and in 1989–90 worked in BP's corporate planning unit in London.
In his new post, he will initiate a graduate course on petroleum policy and economics to complement the Centre's legal courses, and also set up a new MBA (oil and gas) programme, the first of its kind in Scotland.
BP was a founding member of the Petroleum/Mineral Law Trust set up in 1977 to establish the Centre which has maintained close links with the company.
Prof. Stevens sees the creation of the BP Chair as an important step in the Centre's progress and believes there is a need for stronger links between universities and industry.
‘The universities have a lot to offer industry, and industry has a lot to offer universities, and I don't just mean money,’ he said.
‘There are plenty of opportunities for a greater exchange of expertise which could be of tremendous benefit to both sides.
‘It is extremely important that my research is relevant to the sort of things which affect the oil industry and its operating context.
This includes not only the companies, but also consumers, suppliers, governments and other players.’
Many of the Centre's graduate students and professional trainees are early or mid-career executives from oil companies and government energy agencies in producing countries.
BPXC APPOINTS NEW HR MANAGER
Sonia de Ramrez, HSEQ manager at BPXC, has been appointed new Human Resources manager.
The move is effective from December 1.
Art Balfe will transfer to XWH(N), where he will work as HR superintendent for the North Slope in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.
The name of the new HSEQ manager will be announced shortly.
NEW OPERATIONS BOSS MOVES CLOSER TO HOME
Peter Robinson took over as Operations manager SNH on October 1, succeeding Dave Bell, who has been appointed manager Safety in Aberdeen.
Peter has been with BP for over 20 years, the last 5½ at Sullom Voe, latterly as production superintendent at the terminal.
A chemical engineer, his career with BP started in 1969 at Kent refinery where he held numerous technical and operational posts before its closure in 1982.
A period in Business Technical Support, in London, followed including secondment to the National Coal Board, in Grimethorpe, in south Yorkshire, as an operations engineer on a large experimental pilot plant project utilising fluidised bed technology for the efficient combustion of coal.
The project was run under the auspices of the International Energy Agency and sponsored by American, West German and British energy corporations and governmental bodies.
The miners' strike put paid to that stage of the project and Peter returned to the Operations Support Group in London to prepare operating procedures and training manuals for the Ula platform.
From there, he transferred to the SE Forties commissioning team, preparing operating procedures and manuals, then on to Egypt as senior commissioning engineer for an LPG and gas re-injection plant, before moving to Sullom Voe terminal in 1988.
Rationalisation of operations, developing people and their contribution to the business, had been a rewarding challenge during his years there, he said.
SNH presents a different sort of technical challenge, but similar in the aim of extending the roles and responsibilities of the teams, and he is looking forward to it.
‘It is a different type of business and there are many exciting developments ahead.
I have already gauged the high quality and commitment of the staff in SNH,’ added Peter.
The move to SNH has also taken him closer to his roots in Yorkshire and one of the big loves of his life — cricket.
He is still a member of the village team in Kent he joined almost 25 years ago.
And while in Shetland, the county cricket team, of which he was a member, was unbeaten in its annual match with Orkney!
‘I may even recover my northern accent lost over the years spent away,’ he said.
Peter's wife, Meg, runs her own physiotherapy practice.
His family are grown up, Nik is in the Kent police, and Tim is currently working at the BP Research Centre, Sunbury, as part of his physics degree course at Loughborough University.
The revised structure brings shift controllers out of operations support branch and gives them a reporting route directly to terminal operations manager Roy Beardall.
The heightened profile of the shift controllers gives recognition to the key role they and their shift teams will play in the future operational performance of the terminal.
Operations support superintendent Barry Edwards takes on the added responsibility for those functions which were previously carried out by production branch.
Process engineering superintendent Peter Watson will continue to be responsible for long-term terminal development, hydrocarbon accounting, loss control, laboratory services and for technical support to plant operations.
‘The new organisation is aligned with the change process which is currently ongoing and will enable shift teams to work more effectively right across the terminal,’ commented Roy Beardall.
‘The simplified, streamlined structure provides more clarity to the role of each branch and will facilitate the changes in working practices which will be implemented over the coming months.’
TRAINEES TAKEN ON
Eighteen trainees have been taken on by BP Norway to gain practical experience on the Ula and Gyda fields.
The training period is between 16 and 18 months.
When BP publicised the training places during the summer, it was overwhelmed by 600 applications from young hopefuls.
The successful candidates will fill the ten process, six industrial mechanic and two automation technician trainee positions that were made available.
SECOND VIETNAM SURVEY FINISHED
A SECOND 3D seismic survey covering offshore Vietnam has been completed by XFI.
The survey, over a prospect in block 5–2, began on August 29 and ended on September 26.
Keith Nunn, manager, Seismic Quality, XFI, describes it as ‘similar in many respects’ to XFI's first 3D survey in block 6 which was completed in record-breaking time in May (see Technology centre spread).
EXPLORATION WELL
The jackup rig Maersk Guardian last month spudded exploration well 2/7–29 for BP Norway in the southern part of the Norwegian sector of the North Sea.
The high-pressure, high-temperature well is a potential Ekofisk satellite prospect and has a planned total depth of 4950 metres.
A pilot hole will be drilled down to 1155 metres as a precautionary measure against shallow gas.
The drilling operation — in a water depth of 72 metres — is scheduled to take just over 100 days.
In 1990, BP drilled well 2/7–22 which tested condensate.
The current well is some four kilometres to the north-west of this discovery.
NEW WELL COULD ADD MEAT TO SANDWICH
BP is to drill an exploration well next month in an area ‘sandwiched’ between two existing SNS gas discoveries.
The well is in block 47/3e, a 12th round licence awarded to BP (100 per cent).
The block is south-west of BP's Villages gas fields, about mid-way between the offshore gathering point at Cleeton and the Dimlington onshore terminal.
The block lies between two of the biggest discoveries in the Villages area — the British Gas-operated Frobisher field (to the east) and York, the recently announced Amerada Hess find (to the west).
Villages Business manager, Alan Moult, said: ‘Funding of the 47/3e exploration well allows us the potential to become an active player in the western Villages area, where a number of significant discoveries have already been made.’
A 3D survey over Frobisher, York and 47/3e — jointly funded by BP, British Gas and Amerada Hess — was acquired during September and is being used to finalise the well location.
‘A successful well on 47/3e would open up a range of interesting options regarding development schemes and export routes for gas in the area using existing infrastructure,’ added Moult.
THREE-MONTH SURVEY OF NIGER DELTA UNDER WAY THE FIRST operational activity for the BP-Statoil Alliance office in Lagos will be a 2D seismic survey covering deepwater blocks 213, 217 and 218 in the Niger Delta.
Project operators Statoil will take three months to complete the 8500 kilometre survey which began on September 26 using the seismic vessel Geco Searcher.
Operations geophysicist Erik Havarstein has been responsible for mobilising the seismic vessel for the survey and has spent time in Lagos ensuring the technical specification and safety standards are in place for the survey.
In Nigeria, the rainy season takes place between May and August, leaving the rest of the calendar as the best time for seismic surveys to be carried out.
It also ties in well with the availability of seismic vessels which are normally based in the North Sea — because of bad weather there during winter the boats are more likely to be available for other assignments.
Members of an operational group at Statoil's office in Forushagen have been working on a tender exercise with Lagos site office.
The tendering process has involved approval of bid-lists and recommendations by the Nigerian National Petroleum Company (NNPC).
The group also covers the issuing and evaluating of tenders before the final contract can be signed.
The operations group was established to provide a focus for information and discussion.
Interested groups are informed on a weekly basis which allows for feedback from areas like Lagos site, potential fields expertise, the Vietnam group and line management.
Senior geophysicist John Perry says: ‘Lessons learned from other groups including the Vietnam team have been invaluable in deciding the right solution for the Nigeria operation.
Being able to bring expertise from both companies to a common forum has enabled line-management to make rational and informed decisions.
‘For this first operation, the seismic data will be processed outside Nigeria with a pre-qualified company with whom we have an established relationship.
We are also planning trials with Nigerian processing companies with the possibility they can be added to our bid-list.’
A further 550 square kilometre 3D seismic survey will start on alliance block 213 in early November.
CRUISERS CALL AT TERMINAL
A party of environmental students — on a North Sea cruise from Norway to the UK — took time out during a stopover in Lerwick to visit Sullom Voe.
The cruise, on the full-rigged sailing ship Statsraad Lehmkuhl, was organised by a Norwegian environmental school with the support of the country's Ministry of Education.
With 125 people on board— students, teachers, education officials — the vessel left Norway for Aberdeen and called at Lerwick before returning to Bergen during the ten-day itinerary.
During the cruise, participants learned about environmental aspects of the sea, energy and coastal culture.
As part of the working crew, they also gained first-hand knowledge about operating a ship.
The environmentalists' visit to Sullom Voe was hosted by external affairs superintendent Peter Guy, assistant superintendent (pollution response) Terry Mayes and environmental officer Ronnie Gallagher.
The 80-strong party were given a briefing on Sullom Voe's environmental care programme at the Fraser Peterson Centre before being taken on a tour of the terminal site.
OIL SHOW SINGS THE PRAISES OF PARTNERSHIPS
Standfirst: With 20 years' experience covering major oil shows for The Scotsman, FRANK FRAZER reflects on highlights of last month's Offshore Europe event in Aberdeen.
LOOKING back, Offshore Europe 93 may be remembered as the event at which the oil industry and its contractors started playing the same tune.
They weren't just humming a chorus of ‘North Sea Sunrise’, the jazz tribute to the industry which the Norwegian contractor Kvaerner commissioned for its reception at Aberdeen's Beach Ballroom.
There were harmonic overtones also at the conference sessions where a number of the technical papers were presented jointly by representatives of oil companies and their contractors.
Many of the presentations were variations on the theme of ‘partnership to give competitive edge’ set out by BPX chief executive John Browne in his keynote speech reported last month.
Conoco's president and chief executive officer Constantine Nicandros looked forward to new gains from the major changes taking place in inter-company relationships.
‘While partnerships are part of our industry's culture, we were not even scratching the surface of the benefits that could come from taking traditional relationships many steps further,’ he said.
The gathering also provided a forum for industry leaders to emphasis the importance of the other partnerships they have with host governments setting the terms and conditions for oil and gas activity.
The point appeared to be taken on board by UK energy minister Tim Eggar who acknowledged that there were other areas competing for shares of hard-pressed oil company budgets as the world oil prices fell back in real terms to pre-1974 levels.
Some of the consequences were outlined in a study released on the eve of the conference by Arthur Andersen Petroleum Services which claimed that 20 per cent of future UK projects had been delayed for more than a year by the cash flow situation and other uncertainties.
It said the rescheduling was part of a management process ‘to assess which development scenarios realise the best value.’
But it pointed out that the delays would have only a marginal impact on the total UK production profile and would help to sustain the mid-1990s production plateau beyond the turn of the century.
But while some operators may be taking longer to firm up their plans, oil supply companies did not leave Offshore Europe empty-handed.
Apart from Browne's announcement that BP was increasing its North Sea investment by almost 10 per cent over the next three years, Shell outlined a scheme to spend £100 million refurbishing the Dunlin platform which will extend its economic life well into the next century.
In the new spirit of partnership, there were also benefits on offer from contractors.
Schlumberger's executive vice-president Ian Strecker said its seismic company Geco-Prakla has organised a new type of 3D survey which combined proprietary work for a specific client with surveys of surrounding open acreage for a range of clients.
‘It is a case of killing two birds with one stone, with the added advantage of the contractor providing unified management for the entire chain of planning, acquisition and processing,’ he said.
Among attractions of a combined survey is the economy of mobilising for a larger survey with fewer turns for the ship.
For some operators, there is the added benefit of a deal put together and managed by a service company which cuts down the workload for in-house geophysicists.
‘You can make a case that the North Sea heralds the future for our industry.
It's tough, it's prolific — Norway and the UK are the leading and third largest offshore oil producers in the world respectively — and it's where most new technology is tried and tested,’ he said.
But despite its name, Offshore Europe is about even broader horizons, providing a showcase for suppliers from the UK and other countries to offer equipment and services to the world market.
The promotional side of the event this year was given edge by a visiting delegation of senior decision-makers, including energy ministers and heads of state oil companies, from nine countries where oil and gas activity is expanding, including Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Colombia where BPX has interests.
The trip was organised by the Offshore Supplies Office with support from 48 companies wanting to ensure that UK capability was fully appreciated by countries which could become leading export markets for technology developed in the North Sea.
And there was also an opportunity for Aberdeen and the surrounding region to look to its future as it prepared to host the next Offshore Europe in 1995.
At an official dinner Grampian Region convener Bob Middleton spoke about new links established when he led a recent trade mission to Tyumen in Siberia.
Outlining prospects for extending Aberdeen's role as an oil support centre to cover areas beyond the North Sea, he predicted: ‘We are heading towards being the lead city in the northern arc.’
BP FUNDING PUTS YOUTH ORCHESTRA ON TOUR
Disappointment and despair turned to delight when BP Exploration stepped in with financial support for a Dorset Youth Orchestra concert tour to Ireland after a proposed trip to Spain fell through.
BP teamed up with TNT Express to put together the funding package which enabled the talented youngsters to stage a series of concerts in Dublin and Killarney.
The 106-strong youth orchestra is made up of players from across Dorset, with ages ranging from 14 to 18.
The tour followed a summer residential course at which the young musicians received tuition from Bournemouth Orchestras players as part of a BP-sponsored music workshops programme.
The Dorset Youth Orchestra's coaching sessions culminated in a joint Prom with the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra last month.
The concert at the Poole Arts Centre included a performance of Elgar's cello concerto by 16 years old Natalie Clein, winner of the 1993 Bournemouth music centre concerto competition.
SCAFFOLDER UP FOR THE HIGH JUMP — IN AID OF CHARITY
In his job as Forties Delta scaffolding foreman, Reg Sowerby has a head for heights.
And it's a quality he put to good use when he performed a parachute jump to raise money for a girl who suffers from a rare heart condition.
Reg, who works for SSL, the platform's services contractor, realised almost £1 a foot when he leapt out of a Cessna plane from 2500 feet above the ground at Navenby airfield, Lincolnshire.
The £1033 he received in sponsorship for the jump was supplemented by a further £1000 from the Forties field charity committee.
The money has been used to provide an adapted electric trike for 12-year-old Claire Coultard, who lives in Reg's home town of Scunthorpe.
The trike, nicknamed the ‘Forties Flyer’, has been designed to improve the youngster's mobility.
Reg is keen to organise other fund-raising events for the Handicapped Children's Mobility Trust.
Anyone with suitable suggestions can contact him on Forties Delta.
PAUL MAKES HIS POINT
Twenty golfers teed off in the Rex Newsam Memorial Trophy golf outing at Ganstead Park—and when the scores were counted, Paul Robinson was the winner.
Playing off 18 in the Stableford competition, he had 42pts and collected the shield from Mrs Margaret Newsam.
Paul Shadbolt received the Knock-Out shield and also the trophy for the best aggregate Stableford scores for the season.
PHOTOGRAPHIC CONTEST
Javier Lòpez left everyone in the shade with this snap — the winning entry in BPXColombia's photography contest.
Javier, from the Systems department, took his picture, titled ‘Our Shadow’, some four years ago on a field trip to Sochagota lake in the province of Boyac.
In all, the contest attracted 72 entries.
MODEL WAY TO KEEP DRILLING ON TARGET
BP's extended-reach drilling programme at Wytch Farm in Dorset is proceeding with improved accuracy thanks to a new kind of technique that predicts reservoir quality as the well is being drilled.
The system uses well and log data to provide on-the-spot reservoir analysis, enabling drilling to be adjusted to maximise well productivity.
It has been used successfully in the drilling of the first extended-reach well to the offshore extension of the Sherwood reservoir lying under Poole Bay and is now being used for the second well being drilled.
Alan Mitchell, senior geologist at Wytch Farm, is in no doubt about the model's contribution to the project.
‘It helped us make some critical decisions about the drilling and completion of the well,’ he says.
‘Normally, the well would be drilled through the reservoir, and then tested to determine its flow rate — you take what you get.
This way we can steer the well through the reservoir to achieve a predetermined flow-rate.’
Tools of this kind have long been available in the industry.
But their limitation has been that they can only be used when all the well data is available — after it has been drilled.
The Wytch Farm model takes advantage of improved logging-while-drilling (LWD) tools which provide information about the reservoir during drilling.
The system was developed by the Reservoir Quality Prediction team at XTP Sunbury in response to the tough target, set by Breakthrough Management, for the first extended-reach well of the programme: it had to produce at 15,000 barrels-a-day.
Uncertainties about the depth of the top of the Sherwood reservoir and its quality at the target location meant that the task was not an easy one.
‘We decided that the best approach was to minimise the risk and come up with a way of assessing the quality of the reservoir as we drilled’ says Mitchell.
With this in mind he approached the Reservoir Quality Prediction team in March and geologist Andrew Hogg and petrophysicist Susan Young set to work.
Their objective was to develop a model which quantified the permeability of rock as drilling proceeded.
The permeability of the rocks in the reservoir is mainly determined by the porosity and grain size of sands present.
The team modelled the relationship for the Sherwood reservoir so data collected during drilling could be used to automatically generate estimates of permeability.
The porosity data is provided by LWD tools attached to the drill string and grain size information from drill cuttings.
Determining the specific relationship for the reservoir was problematic as Young explains: ‘We had to take a lot of data from nearby cored wells and simplify it right down before we could build an accurately predictive model.’
The model was incorporated into an Excel spreadsheet which was installed at the drill site in June.
‘Once it arrived the geologists on site really ran with it,’ says Hogg, now based at Wytch Farm.
‘They hired a sieve analysis company to take the cuttings and analyse the different grain sizes — giving us a much more accurate description of the reservoir than normal at an early stage’.
The model is now being further refined using data from the first well and will be used for the rest of the development programme.
PRESIDENT'S AWARD FOR HOUSTON DIVISION
HOUSTON —The Offshore Division has been named as the recipient of the 1992 BP America President's Safety Award.
The award recognises the Offshore Division's overall safety program and outstanding performance during 1992.
During the year, Offshore had a total recordable accident rate of .32 per 200,000 manhours versus an American Petroleum Institute Industry Average of 1.76.
The division had only one Lost Time Accident.
Contractor recordable and lost time accident rates were also a fraction of the industry average.
RACING FAN ROBIN GETS ACTION CLOSE UP
Robin Coverdale is the man beside the fast lane and as a race marshal, he gets closer to the action than most.
A control room operator at Dimlington, he has followed motor racing for years.
But it was while at Silverstone to watch Nigel Mansell that he became interested in the role of the marshal.
Robin studied what they did and replied to an article in the race programme which invited applications for marshals.
Two months later found him near the edge of the track at Cadwell Park, in Lincolnshire, as racing cars flashed past at over 100mph.
Most of his meetings have been at Cadwell, a 150 mile round trip from his home.
Robin has learned the rules and regulations and flag signals and during races is in constant radio touch with the control tower.
‘Another requirement is firefighting and first aid so my BP training has come in handy,’ added Robin, whose wife, Denise, now joins him at the track — as a flag marshal.
NATIONAL INITIATIVE TO ENHANCE OIL AND GAS RECOVERY
BP Norway is participating in an ambitious national research initiative which aims at increasing Norwegian oil and gas reserves in producing and approved North Sea fields by 2500 billion barrels by the year 2000.
BPN reservoir engineers Astrid Sørensen and Thomas Johansen have been working alongside counterparts from a dozen other oil companies and the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) on the development project for the past 18 months.
Astrid told BPXpress: ‘The target increase in recoverable oil and gas reserves is equivalent to four new Ula and Gyda fields!
Through increased understanding of the reservoirs and the application of new, advanced technology, we shall be able to enhance production and the recovery factor.’
Two R&D programmes have been devised in the search for improved recoverability.
They are called PROFIT — Programme for Research On Field-oriented Improved recovery Technology — and RUTH — Reservoir Utilisation though advanced Technological Help.
‘Today's technology allows us to produce an average of only 34 per cent of the oil in the North Sea reservoirs,’ Astrid commented.
‘The NPD hopes to increase the average percentage to 44 per cent by means of advanced oil recovery techniques.
‘BP expects the recovery factors for Gyda and Ula to be 42 and 50 per cent respectively, but hopes to achieve even better results by using the technology developed through the PROFIT and RUTH programmes.’
A total of 70 million Norwegian kroner (approximately £6.5 million) will have been invested in PROFIT between 1990 and 1994, and NOK110 million (approx. £10 million) in RUTH between 1992 and 1995.
BP's involvement in the projects is being funded by XTC.
‘A reservoir is a lot more complicated that a sponge filled with oil,’ Astrid explained.
‘In order to find out where the oil is, a complete description of the reservoir is extremely important.
‘Better ways of doing this are among the main objectives of PROFIT.
The studies implemented include more accurate mapping of discontinuities and faults.
‘PROFIT, moreover, seeks to find better ways of dealing with the existing uncertainty, as well as ways of obtaining ultimate knowledge from seismic and well data.’
Thomas Johansen continued: ‘Enhanced oil recovery is also obtainable by improving the wells and by exploiting the area around and between the wells.
‘This forms the basis of the RUTH programme, where research is being undertaken into surfactants, gel, microbiological methods, combined water/gas injection and foam injection.
‘BP supports, among other things, the research on gel injection into the reservoir as the substance forms artificial barriers so that we can guide the flow of oil and water more easily.
Our intention is to carry out a field test with gel in 1994–95, with Gyda being one of the candidates.
It's an exciting prospect!
‘BP possesses first-class expertise in the subject and plays a significant role in the management of the project.
This summer we conducted major field trials in Alaska.’
Both Astrid and Thomas agree that the collaborative nature of the joint venture can only be of benefit to all the participants.
‘The fact that Norwegian companies are able to join forces on major, common research projects is a positive development,’ added Thomas.
‘It leads to more ideas being put forward and the benefits to each company will be greater.’
RESOURCE BOX FOR SCOTTISH SCHOOLS
Scottish primary schools have a new educational aid — the BP Contexts Box.
Developed by BP and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum, boxes have been distributed to every primary school in the country — over 4000 schools.
Each box comprises a diverse range of topics, written by teams of primary education specialists, to help promote awareness of science, design, technology and industry.
Teachers' notes illustrate where the resource fits within the new national guidelines for environmental studies for pupils aged 5–14.
Topics include Scotland's past, tropical rain forests, offshore, paper and the airport.
Development of the Contexts Box began in 1990 and a large number of schools assisted in its evaluation.
RICK TAKES ON NEW ROLE IN VENEZUELA
Former Magnus manager Rick Haythornthwaite has taken up a new role in Venezuela, and is set on moving BP centre stage.
The keen thespian likens the challenge of reactivating the Pedernales oilfield to mounting a theatrical production — it should impress the audience enough to leave them yearning for more.
Recently appointed to the twin posts of general manager BPX, Venezuela, and associate president, BPVenezuela, Haythornthwaite is aware of the challenge facing BP.
‘The state oil company, PDVSA, has done a tremendous job since nationalisation and is now ranked among the largest and best in the world,’ he says.
‘An opportunity exists to form a strategic alliance with them through partnership and, hopefully, find new resources to assist the country's economy.’
A technical services agreement has, over the past decade, provided a vehicle for BP to develop close relationships with PDVSA and demonstrate its capabilities while, under the direction of Haythornthwaite's predecessor, Peter Hill, moving to a position of trusted friend.
Pedernales is seen as a key stepping stone towards more extensive exploration and production involvement.
‘This is not, however, a typical BP operation,’ says Haythornthwaite.
‘We have considerable respect for the abilities of PDVSA and its affiliates — we shall have to be extremely flexible and creative in finding ways to assist.
Our aim is to build substantial new business.
This will take a very special relationship.’
He adds: ‘We must be aware of the competition.
The last round of bidding for field reactivation aroused considerable interest, while a number of major gas and heavy oil projects are gathering pace.
It is important that we retain our leading position in the country.’
Haythornthwaite will be based in Caracas where he will be joined by his wife Janeen and daughter, Sophie, but son Alistair is remaining at boarding school in the UK.
‘We are really looking forward to the challenge — Venezuela is a beautiful and exciting country.
At present the toughest part is convincing Latin Americans that anyone could have a surname like ‘Haythornthwaite’!’
NEW STRIP FOR NEW SEASON
Lerwick Rugby Club players now sport a new strip, thanks to sponsorship from Honeywell, manufacturers of the TDC3000 distributed control system at Sullom Voe.
Club captain Dave Dickson, SVT mechanical engineer, was presented with the stylish kit by Dave Stephenson, Honeywell engineer at the terminal, who also plays for the Lerwick side.
The strip made its debut appearance at the Shetland v. Orkney rugby match at the Clickimin Centre, Lerwick, on September 3.
The club's entry in the tenth annual Lerwick Rugby Club Sevens at the end of August was made up exclusively of Sullom Voe staff — Dave Dickson, Mal Smith, Dave Stephenson, Tony Rigby, Nick Cope, Andy Bazeley and Jeff Wood.
The event, which spanned two days at the Gilbertson Park ground in Lerwick, received financial support from Sullom Voe.
The terminal sponsored the printing of the match programme.
Unfortunately, the Lerwick side didn't make it past the second round.
TEN CHARITIES SHARE IN £5000 SAFETY PAYOUT
Ten charities have benefited from Sullom Voe's safety record.
When the terminal achieved 120 days of working without a lost-time injury (LTI), £3000 was automatically clocked up.
But when the milestone passed 123 days, breaking a long-standing record, terminal management boosted the amount to £5000.
This brings the cumulative total donated to charity since the scheme began in 1990 to £25,500.
In the end 128 days without an LTI were achieved before the time-clock was returned to zero at the end of August.
Nominations for worthy causes were discussed by the charitable appeals committee and last month the following organisations were presented with their cheques:
Aberdeen Children's Hospital — Ward 8 — £250 (nominated by operations support operator Jim Hendren);
Aberdeen Children's Hospital — Ward 6 — £250 (resources coordinator Morag Maver);
Grampian Research into Intestinal Disorders — £500 (Garriock Brothers' secretary Ann Arthur);
Cleft Lip and Palate Association — £500 (operations support operator Brian Anderson);
Gilbert Bain Hospital League of Friends — £1000 (instrument technician Arthur Constable);
North Haven Care Centre, Brae — £500 (management secretary Dianne Nicholson and Darchem Contracting site manager Alex Robb);
Research Trust for Metabolic Diseases in Children — £500 (fireman/security guard David Manson);
British Heart Foundation (Shetland branch)— £500 (control room operator John Watt);
Laburnum Group Home, Lerwick — £500 (operations support control room operator Keith Alcock);
Riding for the Disabled (Shetland branch)— £500 (invoice assistant Julie Swanson).
SAINTS ALIVE!
ABERDEEN GOLFERS TO THE FORE AGAIN
The Saintly Salver golf trophy remains at Dyce for another year after XEU convincingly beat a combined XTC/XTP team in testing conditions at Cruden Bay, in Aberdeenshire.
With the best nine scores counting, Aberdeen amassed 272pts to the visitors' 238pts.
Roger Walls (XEU) won the individual Stableford competition with 35pts, with Alan Clarke (XTC/XTP) runner-up on 33pts, and Jim Emslie (XEU) third with 32pts.
The Greensome, with pairings comprising an XEU and XTC/XTP player, was won by Alan Nelson and David Elcome with 69, their better inward half pipping Dave Jarman and David Walker, who returned the same score.
Ian Anderson and Michael Knowles were third on 74.
Nearest the pin prizewinners were Alan Nelson (3rd), Peter Fisher (11th) and Peter Briggs (16th).
Sealift barges remove Slope scrap metal
PRUDHOE BAY — More than 7,000 tons of recyclable scrap metal from oil service companies at Prudhoe Bay were sent last month to a scrap metal dealership on the West Cost via three 1993 sealift barges.
The backhaul cargo was comprised of junked vehicles, buildings, pipe, tanks and drilling rig components from Deadhorse, an oil field service area in the Prudhoe Bay field.
The scrap metal was collected during a community cleanup effort — the third since 1989.
Previous efforts resulted in removal of more than 17,000 tons of scrap from the North Slope, while earning more than $300,000 for the Prudhoe Bay Environmental Alliance, composed of BP, ARCO, Exxon and other oil field producers, as well as their contractors.
The Alliance uses the money to fund ongoing health, safety and environmental education programs for the oil field service industry.
Another scrap lift is planned following the 1994 sealift.
SERIOUS SIDE TO A ‘FONNY’ INCIDENT
There was nothing funny about the train of incidents following the berth of the oil tanker Fonny at Hamble oil terminal — she spilt 80 tonnes of Wytch Farm crude into Southampton Water.
‘Whisky Foxtrot’— the terminal's first major oil spill exercise involving outside organisations — was underway.
As soon as the spill occurred — caused by a fractured ballast pipe passing through the Fonny's product tanks — emergency shutdown valves on the jetty were activated — and essential staff were alerted.
Marine supervisor, Capt Kent Stevens, took command of the Emergency Control Centre and directed operations for the following seven hours.
The terminal's anti-pollution catamaran, Good Wytch, and the boom carrier, Hamble Guardian, were involved in boom laying and mop-up operations.
Personnel from the Oil Spill Service Centre at Northam were called in and laid the terminal's boom across the mouth of the river Hamble, sealing off the river and its four marinas from the threat of pollution.
Two truck loads of clean-up equipment were sent from the Wytch Farm oil spill base at Poole and Wytch Farm later sent a helicopter which acted as a general observation platform.
The Press, local residents and MPs, all specially briefed for the occasion, were also involved in the exercise.
KJELL IS A TOP GUN
BPN production supervisor Kjell Rons is a top gun when it comes to practical shooting.
‘Concentration, speed and accuracy are the combined skills which make an accomplished marksman with a hand-held automatic pistol or revolver,’ he explained.
‘Practical shooting competitions are open to all reputable people.
We use life size targets in a variety of scenarios in which small firearms are most likely to be used.
‘An example of this would be where a number of armed terrorists have taken hostages.
Such a situation would be recreated on the target range using stationary and moving targets, some of which — the hostages — you are not allowed to hit.
‘The highest score is awarded to the person who shoots the best in the shortest time.’
Kjell, one of 1300 registered practical shooting enthusiasts in Norway, visited the UK last month to participate in the sport's world championships.
There are stringent safety rules governing practical shooting and, as far as Kjell is aware, the sport has an accident-free record.
He was introduced to his local club in nearby Haugensund by his Gyda workmate Karl Hansen.
‘There's a good atmosphere in the Haugensund club,’ added Kjell, who took up shooting as a hobby six years ago.
‘It's a very exciting and challenging sport.
‘It is a police requirement that you have to be an active member of a club before you can be recommended to apply to purchase a firearm.’
SNH COST IMPROVEMENT CONTINUES
With production costs of £1.55p per barrel of oil equivalent, SNH has consolidated its position as a leading gas producer in the Southern Basin, according to the latest McKinsey report.
This represents an improvement of over 50 per cent on unit costs since 1989.
Commenting on the report, asset manager Keith Gordon said that while this was a major breakthrough in the production cost base, others in the industry had also improved their performance.
‘It means we have to do more in managing costs and continually improving our business performance, and new ways must be sought to achieve this,’ said Gordon.
‘To put this in context, it would mean a further 30 per cent reduction in costs is required to be best in class.
‘Our aim of being recognised as best operator in the province still holds true and new and existing opportunities can help us reach that target.’
TECHNICIANS LOSE OUT IN SOCCER FINAL
BP Technicians were runners-up for the second year running in the Wytch Farm annual five-a-side soccer tournament.
The side was beaten 2–1 by the Ship Inn, of Swanage, in the final at the Purbeck sports centre.
Last year's winners, BP Apprentices, came third after beating the Wytch Ones 3–1 in the play-off.
Other teams taking part were BP teams from Easington and Avonmouth, Moores Engineering, of Bournemouth, and Wincanton Tankers, of Southampton.
Wytch Farm electrical technician Mick Duhaney was chosen as player of the tournament.
He has since left BP to sign up for an American company in Oklahoma.
The competition, in its eighth year, was organised by Wytch Farm control room operator Dave Handley.
On the trail of OFOs — Under-threat Feathered Objects
PRUDHOE BAY — Satellites are helping scientists track objects flying over Alaska's Arctic coast, but they aren't Russian aircraft or UFOs; they're sea ducks called Spectacled Eiders.
BP Exploration and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (U.S.F.W.S.) teamed up earlier this summer to study these birds, which were recently classified as ‘threatened’ under the U.S. Endangered Species Act.
In recent years population declines have been observed in the Yukon and Kuskokwim River deltas and on the North Slope.
Spectacled Eiders are found only in Alaska and Russia.
Wintering areas of this species are unknown, but some believe the birds winter in polynyas (open areas in sea ice) or on the ice edge of the Bering or Chukchi Seas.
Some scientists believe the Spectacled Eider population declines are associated with the ducks' wintering grounds and not Alaskan breeding areas.
Scientists are using transmitters to track the movements and migrations of eiders that nest near Prudhoe Bay.
Both small satellite transmitters and regular VHF (radio) transmitters were used on four birds, while just one of each type was attached to two additional birds.
The VHF transmitters allow scientists to track local movements of the broods within the oil field.
This information on routes from breeding grounds and nesting areas across roads, pipelines and other facilities will help biologists see what habitats are used.
According to Declan Troy, of TERA, an environmental consulting firm on contract to BPX-A, one bird was documented as far away as Smith Bay, near Pt.
Barrow, about 250 kilometres west of Prudhoe Bay.
The satellite transmitters have an effective life of 10 months, while the smaller radio transmitters are expected to last about 15 weeks.
Both are harmless to the birds and fall off with weathering and as the ducks moult their feathers.
‘This research program will help both BPX and FWS better understand one of the remaining mysteries of bird migration in Alaska,’ said Troy.
SULLOM VOE MONITORING SUCCESS PRAISED
The waters around the Sullom Voe oil terminal are cleaner than the Forth and many other British estuaries, a conference on environmental monitoring was told last month.
Levels of hydrocarbons in the environment of Sullom Voe and Yell Sound are in the range of 15 and 600 parts per million, compared with as much as 3000ppm in the Firth of Forth and up to 5000ppm around a North Sea oil platform.
Water discharges from the terminal normally operate at about 5ppm of hydrocarbons.
The two-day conference in Edinburgh was organised by the Shetland Oil Terminal Environmental Advisory Group (SOTEAG), and the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Peter Watson, BP Process Engineering superintendent at the BP-operated terminal, and Jim Dickson, of Shetland Islands Council marine operations, presented a joint paper.
Scottish Office environment minister, Sir Hector Munro, said the conference papers were ‘impressive witness’ to the scope and depth of the monitoring programme funded by the oil companies involved with Sullom Voe.
It demonstrated the concern of the oil industry to be good neighbours and to take care in its actions to minimise its disruption to the natural environment, he said.
SOTEAG chairman, Professor George Dunnet, said the success of Sullom Voe could provide lessons for other areas seeking to protect sensitive environments.
SUNSET SONG SHINES
A theatre group is taking its acclaimed adaptation of a classic Scots trilogy to Scottish schools.
The Tag Theatre Company's production of ‘Sunset Song,’ which together with ‘Cloud Howe’and ‘Grey Granite’forms the Lewis Grassic Gibbon trilogy, is enacted in drama, dance and music at in-school workshops sponsored by BP.
TAG creates a specific workshop programme for each production which offers pupils a platform for creative expression while investigating one man's account of Scottish rural and town life and some of the issues that affected Scotland in the early part of the century.
The workshops are considered helpful to pupils preparing for higher grade English exams and study notes on ‘Sunset Song’ have been devised for teaching in the classroom or for students studying on their own.
SURVEY SUCCESS HELPS FRONTIER PROGRESS
An exploration well is being drilled West of Shetland following the outstanding success of the recent 3D seismic survey over the area.
Onboard seismic and navigation data processing enabled early interpretation of data and selection of the well location within weeks of the data being acquired.
Well 204/20–1 was spudded by the drilling rig Ocean Valiant on September 14 and is expected to take 35 days.
The location is 35km north east of the 1990 discovery well, 204/24–1.
Block 204/20 was a 9th round licence awarded jointly to BP and Shell (50 per cent each) with BP operator.
The 3D survey was the largest ever carried out by BP and covered an area of 2040 sq km— equivalent to 10 North Sea licence blocks.
‘It exceeded all of our most optimistic expectations,’ said Tim Jackson, head of Survey and Seismic Quality.
‘It was a first class performance by everyone involved.’
A combination of a well planned and executed programme, better than expected weather and operational benefits derived from onboard data processing meant that a planned two-summer programme was completed in just 4½ months.
The acquisition contractor was Geoteam Exploration, using the vessel Nordic Explorer to deploy four 3000 metre streamers — the first time this had been done in the North Sea.
‘The combination of survey area shape and four streamer/dual source acquisition resulted in very cost effective data acquisition,’ said Jackson.
Line lengths averaged 51 kms, compared to the North Sea norm of 15kms and the Nordic Explorer averaged a production rate of 70 sail line kms per day over the period.
On board seismic data processing using two Promax workstations involved a full 2D processing sequence being applied to one subsurface line per 3D swathe resulting in 9000 kms of processed 2D data.
‘The best turn around we achieved was 5 days between data acquisition and the processed data being loaded onto a S11S workstation,’ he added.
The technical benefits of 2D processing in real time include early prospect delineation and basic exploration interpretation, 3D data acquisition quality assurance and the development of a knowledge base to assure the quality and accelerate the delivery of the fully processed 3D data set.
‘This application of emerging technology has allowed us to locate the 1993 exploration well with greater confidence and to facilitate early 1994 well location planning.’
said Jackson.
It was Geoteam Exploration's first 3D seismic survey for BP and he paid tribute to the first class performance of the Nordic Explorer and staff.
‘The close cooperation between BP, Geoteam, client representatives and Racal, the navigation contractor was a key factor in the success of this survey,’ he said.
3D processing of the 75,000 CDP kms of data is being carried out by Halliburton Geophysical Services in Bedford.
A priority swathe (350 sq km) will be delivered in December 1993 and the full 3D data set at end of March 1994.
Chris Bird, exploration team leader of the Atlantic Frontier Programme said: ‘The success of the survey has accelerated the whole ‘204’ exploration and appraisal programme and at the same time enabled us to obtain additional data on the area.’
A JOB WELL DONE — Tim Jackson (right) presents a plaque to Bjorn Ursin Holm, marketing manager of Geoteam, and onboard party chief Simon Frobisher, in recognition of the successful survey
PINPOINTING THE ‘SWEET SPOTS’ IN MEXICO'S OLDEST BASIN
THE Tampico project is one of BPX Mexico's two exploration studies currently underway with Pemex, the Mexican State oil company.
Charged with evaluating the remaining exploration potential in the country's oldest basin, the task has exposed the project team to a rich history of geology, politics and social issues.
At the turn of the century, the Tampico area attracted prospectors to large surface seeps following the early big oil successes north of the U.S. border.
In the 1920s the area was producing two per cent of the world's oil.
Today, production is down to 50,000 barrels a day, but the infrastructure and workers' expectations of former days remain, says Andy Hopwood, Tampico Project manager.
The geology of the basin is varied and it is dominated by the massive Golden Lane carbonate platform.
Off the shoreward side of the platform debris fell which was to form the two billion barrel Pozo Rica field.
Further onshore and in the foreland basin created by the Sierra Madre Oriental mountains lies Mexico's largest unsolved mystery: the Chicontepec oil field, which contains an estimated 100 billion barrels of oil.
It represents 25 per cent of Mexico's current reserve base.
The Chicontepec oil is onshore and close to infrastructure, but it is dogged with very low productivity sands, and covers such a large area that accurate prediction of the sweet spots is the only way to reduce an onerous number of wells.
The gauntlet is being thrown down by Pemex to the international community.
The joint BPXM-Pemex team has set about the task ahead of them by cataloguing a mass of seismic, well and production data, much of it dating back to the 1930s.
The team is now breaking the basin apart, attempting to apply modern techniques, and posing new questions.
‘We have less then six months to answer these and other questions which comes to the biggest and potentially most rewarding challenge of all the process of technology transfer to Pemex,’ says Hopwood.
‘When we finish the projects the Pemex members of the team must be equipped ready and focused to continue posing and answering the questions which will secure the future for the Tampico region.’
TANKS A LOT Sullom Voe's major tank maintenance programme was completed at the beginning of last month.
It was the first time that four large tanks — two crude storage, a ballast water and the Brent surge — had been taken out of service for planned maintenance in one year.
The programme, which started in February, was handled by a taskforce of experienced operators, referred to on-site as ‘Dad's Army’.
Many of the 16-strong team have now — or will have by the end of this month — taken early retirement.
Mechanical contractors for the crude tanks 2045 and 2055 and the ballast water tank 3015 were Motherwell Bridge, the company which originally constructed the storage tanks.
Motherwell Bridge's site manager Jim Anderson explained that his workforce of welders, platers and fitters peaked at 31, with subcontract work undertaken by tank cleaning contractor Caltech and painting contractor Wilkie Hooke.
‘The job required 51,000 man-hours over a 28-week period,’ he said.
Shetland Engineers Limited were involved with the Brent surge tank refurbishment.
The crude tanks were brought back into service early last month.
Two metres of water was pumped into the vessels to float the roofs and check for leaks, before a similar amount of oil was introduced to the tanks.
As oil floats on water, this allowed the water to be drained off while keeping the roofs afloat on the crude.
The levels were then topped up to around 20 metres and final tests were carried out before being handed back to operations.
Production supervisor Eddie Hotchkiss, who led Dad's Army, has now returned to operations following the disbanding of his tank taskforce.
It is proposed to overhaul two more crude tanks next year.
EWING BANK STARTS PRODUCTION FROM SUBSEA WELL
HOUSTON — On August 20, the Ewing Bank 826-A (EW 826-A) production platform began processing natural gas and condensate from a subsea well owned by Tatham Offshore, Inc., which is located in Ewing Bank Block 914.
It marked the first time that an Offshore Division production platform has been used to process oil or natural gas from a third party well.
EW 826-A is owned 40 percent by BPX (operator), 40 percent by Mobil, and 20 percent by Kerr-McGee.
‘It's a win-win situation for BPX and for Tatham,’ says Ray Broussard, Offshore Division Program manager.
‘It allowed Tatham to develop reserves that probably would not have been economic if they had to build their own stand-alone facility.
‘It allows BPX and the other owners of EW 826-A to defray a major portion of the operating costs of Ewing Bank while using existing production facilities.’
BPX was originally contacted by Tatham in mid-1990, with the final agreement signed in mid-1992.
Negotiations for EW 826-A's partners were led by Ed Erwin, BPX Joint Interest Manager.
Tatham's subsea satellite gas well is producing about 12.5 million cubic feet of natural gas and about 2,300 barrels of condensate per day.
It is located in more than 900 feet of water.
Ewing Bank 826-A is located in 480 feet of water, more than six miles from Tatham's subsea well.
The agreement calls for BPX to operate and maintain facilities to process production from the well and for BPX to operate the well via hydraulic controls which run from the platform to the subsea well.
And while it is BPX-GOM's first third-party agreement to remotely operate and produce from a subsea gas well, the Offshore Division has been operating its own satellite gas well, High Island A-587, since 1991.
‘The experience we gained through High Island gave us the confidence to know we could successfully work with Tatham,’ Broussard says.
Although Tatham utilises BPX facilities and processing equipment, it also had to install some of its own facilities.
Main equipment included a process line heater, equalisation pump, chemical injection pump and a hydraulic power unit.
Tatham paid an up front cost for access to deck space on EW 826-A in order to install equipment unique to its well.
Troy Smith, facilities engineer, provided BPX oversight during equipment selection and installation.
‘We worked with Tatham to ensure that the equipment satisfied the need to provide safe, efficient operation of their well,’ Smith notes.
‘The installation of platform equipment and the startup of the well went smoothly.’
Broussard says other opportunities to tie-in deep water production to BPX ‘host facilities’ could occur.
‘The Tatham tie-in shows the advantages of production structures in deep water.
Because of the huge up-front investment in production platforms, modestly-sized hydrocarbon discoveries in deep water are not economic.
Tying in those fields to existing platforms is a smart way of doing business.’
TEAMBUILDING ON TURBULENT WATERS
Teambuilding isn't all plain sailing — as two dozen staff at Wytch Farm's gathering station have discovered.
The staff spent three days on a teambuilding course, organised by the Bristol-based West of England Management Centre, crewing yachts in The Solent in teams of six.
But from flat calm conditions on the first day, the novice sailors had to contend with Force 7 gales as the course progressed.
One of the course participants, production administrator Alison Bonham, commented: ‘Each crew member was allocated a specific role on board the yacht after being assessed through answers given in a questionnaire.
‘The boats provided an excellent medium for teambuilding activities as, once you are on board, there is no escape.
It is crucial that you plan, implement and analyse your tasks together.
‘The sailing proved to be an extremely enjoyable way of learning teamwork skills, especially when we were charting rough waters.’
Wytch Farm managers have also been on a teambuilding exercise — but instead of sailing on water, however, they went to ground!
The senior management team spent one and a half days in Cheddar, Somerset, on a variety of teamworking tasks, one of which included mapping an underground cavern.
The second half of the course was held on home territory — in the Kemps Hotel, close to the oilfield.
The aim of the course, which was staged by the Bristol Consulting Group, was to improve communications, team effectiveness and coaching skills.
We are sailing…process engineer Laurence Little at the helm with (from left) control room operator Steve Murray, process engineer Graham Allen, mechanical technician Norman Petty and (front) plant operator Tim Hallam with (right) their course tutor.
New strip
The Keyingham and District boys' soccer team started the season in style — sporting a new strip donated by BPX.
The team, which was formed to join the local boys' football league, also received footballs and two holdalls for carrying the strips.
Safety adviser Vic Earle was on hand to present the equipment to the team before the season kicked off.
APPLYING TECHNOLOGY TO MEET BPX BUSINESS NEEDS
The Greek word from which technology is derived, is tekhne.
It means — perhaps surprisingly — art.
Tekhnologia, in Greek, means systematic treatment.
What it means to BPExploration was at the centre of last year's R&D strategy review.
Its conclusion?
That technological effort should be genuinely sought by the business and focused where it will make a significant impact.
Looking at it another way it is perhaps a neat coupling of the word's etymology.
To BPX in 1993, perhaps, technology means the art of systematically treating problems to meet ROC business needs.
This in turn has caused a re-appraisal of the role of technology in the exploration and production industry.
XTC chief executive David Jenkins, points out that ownership of the tools of technology does not in itself create such an advantage.
Competitive advantage, he argues, is only created by the ownership of quality assets and productive acreage.
That is not to say technological effort can not help maximise the value of assets.
‘Upstream profit margins can be increased by the astute use of technology, provided such use is tailored to specific business goals of BPX assets,’ adds Jenkins.
But the emphasis has shifted away from making ‘breakthrough’ technology an end in itself — breakthroughs should only be made when there is a clear business need.
The application of technology is one of the cornerstones of the ability of ROCs to meet their business targets.
But this is not necessarily a simple task.
Application of new technology inevitably involves some degree of risk.
Part of the emphasis is the need for BPX to be comfortable with risk-taking and risk-sharing.
Integrated working teams can help identify and understand technical risk and has become the working model for BPX.
To be really effective each member of the team needs to appreciate the nature of the uncertainty with which other members of the team are dealing.
These integrated teams also need to be outward-looking because technical know-how diffuses rapidly through the upstream industry.
The widespread relationships between partners and contractors ensures knowledge moves around and becomes extended and advanced.
In other words as technology matures, an efficient world market develops.
The importance of applying technology to meet BPX's business requirements worldwide is also being emphasised.
‘Having identified where the focused technology effort is needed we are definitely getting much better at transferring knowledge around the BPX world — and in from the outside,’ says Jenkins.
And that has meant getting the organisational framework right.
At Sunbury, XTP's activities are directed towards helping the business add value by early and expert use of technology — much of which originates from outside in the contractors, competitors, and at BPX sites.
The functionality division of XTC acts as an internal technology consultant which has four enduring themes guiding its activities.
These are establishing analogues, integrating technologies, understanding uncertainties and making sure the right people are in the right place at the right time.
This adds up to ensuring the transfer of effective technology practice.
Turning to XTC's third unit, XIT, ‘Most of what applies to technology generally can also be applied to information technology,’ says Jenkins.
Costs have been reduced and service improved.
But this is not the end of the story.
‘The focus is now on making more effective use of IT in improving business performance.’
‘To achieve high sustained performance in any technology application we must have the right processes and the right behaviour.
In particular it requires constant attention and continual effort.’
Stand first: What role does technology play in BP Exploration today?
How can technological effort, expertly applied, make a significant impact on business?
In this special feature, BPXPress assesses these questions and highlights some specific examples of technological achievement in BPX operations throughout the world.
FIRST MULTI LAYER WELL TEST IN COLOMBIA
The first multi-layer test (MLT) ever performed by BPX Colombia has recently been conducted at Buenos Aires-1, the long term test production well at Cusiana.
The MLT allows BPXC reservoir experts to calculate the productivity and formation damage from more than one oil producing layer.
The test measures producing rates and pressure as a function of time, says Jeff App, reservoir engineer from the Exploration department.
This specific and complex test was required, the experts say, because the Cusiana rock is quite variable, a condition that could not allow for the application of routine technology to asses well productivity.
This state of the art evaluation technique uses a 1  ″ tool that is run into the well.
It has a spinner on the bottom which electronically transmits the down-whole production rate to the surface.
The data — which is provided foot by foot — is electronically gathered and later analysed with a special software program for pressure transient analysis called PIE.
The testing at Buenos Aires-1 took two and a half days, Jeff App says, and the calculated formation damage (skin values) for the well's producing layers were approximately 50 for the lower and 13 for the upper layer.
The higher skin damage measurement in the lower layer indicates that loss circulation material possibly was stuck in the producing rock, a condition that might have been caused by initial drilling operating practices, says Chris Drysdale, Well Evaluation group leader.
Another important result was that the lower portion of the upper layer was not producing.
Based on the MLT results, the Well Evaluation group is now trying to minimise the lower layer's formation damage and it focuses on the reactivation of the lower portion of the upper layer's production capability.
This may be achieved through re-perforation with pivot guns or through a treatment called acidising, which is based on the use of special chemicals to reopen clogged perforations.
App says that the next well where the test might soon be applied could be Cusiana-2A, but that decision will be taken as this issue goes to print.
Nevertheless, the necessity to assess the productivity of most wells may mean the MLT procedure becomes standard practice for all early production phase wells.
New database has worldwide use
ANEW spatial database developed by BP Exploration's Data Integration group is now being used on projects in Colombia, Vietnam, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Eastern Europe.
The system was developed in association with the Spatial Technology group at BP's Sunbury Research Centre.
It was first used for a review of the Northern Tethys region — an area stretching from Romania in the west to the Pamirs and Tien Shien in China to the east.
The system uses Arc Info, a software package which enables complex information to be compiled quickly for use in regional reviews, and then stored in digital form.
The information can then be used for future projects or integrated with other data at a later stage.
‘These systems are incredibly useful,’ says computer geologist Jacky Bannon.
‘Arc is a specialist tool, not for everyday use, which we have found particularly useful for regional mapping.
‘If you want to include unusual information, like environmental data, pipeline data, bathymetry, topography or any remotely-sensed data, Arc has the ability to handle all these and display them in colour.’
The system is being used for pipeline planning in Azerbaijan and Colombia, slick mapping in Vietnam, a mud volcano study in Azerbaijan, and a regional review of Eastern Europe.
Senior geologist Andrew Wright, who led the Tethys review says:
‘The Arc Info system gives general information very very quickly.
It helps cope with specific problems by producing complex maps that include an area larger than your project area.
‘On Tethys we wanted to include hundreds of attributes like age, rock type, field outlines, age of discovery, temperature, reservoir performance and seeps, as well as coastlines, railways and rivers.
Once we had these we could immediately understand the commercial angles.’
The Arc Info maps, says Wright, helped solve issues such as how the proven play systems worked, what the exploration and development opportunities were and the impact of these on investment plans.
‘We ended up with twenty maps,’ he says.
‘It would have taken nine months to do them by hand, but it took six months this way.
And now that all the data is on the database, if I want to get that information back it is not a problem.’
Wright, who describes himself as ‘an enthusiastic convert to the use of Arc Info’ says the ability to update the maps is important.
They can be stored in the FINDER system which is more generally accessible within BPX: ‘You can regenerate all the maps at the press of a button.
For example, if you've shot new seismic, all you have to do is overlay the new seismic grid on an existing mapped data set.’
He stresses, however, that Arc Info is not a general purpose tool.
‘It is not a tool which can be put into the hands of the average explorer.
The success of this work — solving specific one-off problems for the exploration teams — is due to the expertise of Jacky Bannon and Tim McCarthy in the Data Integration group.’
TIGERS WITH STRONG FAMILY TIES
The Forties Tigers football team has strong family ties.
For the side's manager and four of the players are all related, and work for the same company.
The manager is Angus McMillan, whose brothers Gerry and Fred play alongside his son Tony.
Their team-mates include Angus' nephew Donny, whose son Sean is the team mascot.
Apart from Sean, they are all scaffolders with SGB.
The Tigers side comprises staff from BP, AMEC, COSL, Salamis-SGB and Scott.
They play inter-field matches against Bruce, Ninian, Claymore and Tiffany.
As well as being a good social vehicle, the teams raise money for worthy causes and recently donated almost £3200 to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children at Yorkhill, Glasgow.
Most of the games are played in the Glasgow area — on one occasion across the street from Ibrox, home of Glasgow Rangers.
An interested spectator was ‘Gers captain, Richard Gough, who acknowledged that the Tigers were different class!
SUNBURY RESEARCHERS ANSWER ‘TRUNK CALL’
BP researchers at Sunbury have joined the hunt to track down the cause of a mysterious illness affecting elephants in Zimbabwe.
The results of the highly unusual job show that lead or chlorohydrocarbons associated with pesticide are unlikely to be responsible for ‘flaccid trunk syndrome’ which is afflicting elephants around Lake Kariba.
More research will be needed into the problem which causes a progressive degeneration of the elephant's trunk which in turn means problems with feeding and drinking.
BP Africa, which supports Environment 2000, a group based in Zimbabwe, was approached for help.
‘We decided to help because we are associated with Environment 2000 and because as an oil company we wanted to know if lead from petrol was a contributory factor,’ says Paul Giblett, marketing services manager, BP Africa.
Local environmentalists had speculated whether heavy pleasure boat and fishing craft use of the lake might have resulted in lead pollution.
The trunk problem has similarities to floppy neck syndrome experienced by European swans which ingested anglers lead shot (now banned in Britain).
Samples of water, soil, mud and leaves were collected and sent to the Environmental and Chemical Analysis group at Sunbury, where analytical chemists Jim Crighton and Ian Roberts undertook the work.
Both lead (found in lower concentrations than the legal limit for UK drinking water) and chlorohydrocarbons were effectively cleared of being the cause of the problem.
Back in Africa, Paul Giblett has offered further technical help to environmentalists who are considering a geological survey of the region to establish whether heavy metals are being leached out and concentrated in areas used by the elephants.
EXTRA HYDROCYCLONES
Two hydrocyclone separators are to be installed on the Gyda platform next year to more than double the installation's water handling capacity to 35,000 barrels a day in readiness for an anticipated increase in produced water from the reservoir.
Artificial lift is also expected to be required on a number of producing Gyda wells which are under-performing because of low reservoir pressure.
Jet pump trials are to start on two wells early next year.
MINOR DAMAGE
The supply vessel Highland Star sustained only minor damage when it collided with one of the legs of the Ula quarters platform on August 30.
The vessel had lost power to one of its thrusters while drilling equipment was being unloaded.
Vibration to the platform caused the power supply to be disrupted when the generators stopped, creating a temporary disruption to production and affecting the drilling operation.
There were no injuries to personnel or structural damage to the Ula installation.
INDUCTION VIDEO — THE SEQUEL
It may not be as big a blockbuster as Jurassic Park — and it certainly won't create anywhere near as much hype — but, to Sullom Voe, updating the general site induction video is just as significant.
For two weeks last month, a film crew from The Grimley Partnership, an Aberdeenshire-based specialist television programme production company, was on site to shoot revised sections for the 40-minute video.
‘Since the current video was produced two years ago, a number of changes have been introduced in site practices and in legislation,’ explained employee relations officer Tony Fitzgerald.
‘The updated video will have new sections on the terminal's safe system of work, the COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) regulations and on the use of fire extinguishers, following the phasing out of portable Halon extinguishers on site.
‘In addition, shots of the Dan-Air ‘budgie’ at Scatsta will be replaced by the GillAir aircraft.’
The Sullom Voe team coordinating input to the new video comprises Tony, Bob MacGregor and Gordon Richard from the health, safety and environment branch, and senior electrical engineer Don MacDonald on the safe system of work.
While on site, The Grimley Partnership did filming for a separate ten-minute video on constant gas monitoring.
A more comprehensive video of the safe system of work is also to be produced in the near future.
VIETNAM SEISMIC BREAKTHROUGH ONLY THE BEGINNING
‘WE have achieved progress which has beaten everybody's greatest expectations,’ is how XTC's John Field describes a recent seismic processing breakthrough by XFI in Vietnam.
‘3D seismic data is critical for resolving subsurface uncertainty, but providing the data has always been a very slow and costly process,’ he says.
In Vietnam tight drilling deadlines created an urgent business need.
‘We needed a large amount of seismic data turned round very fast,’ says Keith Nunn, manager, Seismic Quality, XFI.
‘The one or two years normally needed to acquire and fully process 3D seismic data was too long.
‘The challenge was to shorten the 3D seismic turnaround time.’
By taking the computer processing offshore on to the survey boat — the Geco Resolution — for the first survey over a prospect in Block 6, the seismic team were able to collapse the serial process of acquisition, processing and initial interpretation, to a parallel process.
This meant putting more manpower — three extra BP people, three extra processors from seismic contractor Geco-Prakla — and a lot more computer hardware on the boat, says Nunn.
‘A critical success factor was the establishment of a close relationship with Geco-Prakla,’ he says.
‘We worked very closely with them on the hardware configuration, first in Oslo and then on the boat in Singapore, checking that our resources were capable of what we wanted to do.
‘Another key success factor was the dedicated team we had from BP — acquisition specialists Dave Buddery and Andy Laven; seismic processors Jim Keggin and Richard Berry; and surveyor Tony Drake — as well as from Geco-Prakla.’
The team succeeded in reducing the turnaround time, from the start of acquisition to the start of interpretation, from an average of 15 months to 11 weeks.
‘We halved the time by doing the processing on board the vessel, and then further halved it by using a limited part of the data set — 12-fold as opposed to 30-fold — which was perfectly adequate for the purpose,’ says Nunn.
At the end of the day the team delivered exactly on time.
‘The 424 km2 survey was shot from April 30 to May 26 and the processed 12-fold cube loaded and ready for interpretation on July 18 ahead of the deadline to impact the location of the Lan Tay observation well.’
In addition, the time saved has meant money saved in a traditionally expensive area of the business.
Demonstrating that the 3D turnaround time can be reduced to two months has given the Vietnam team confidence, Nunn says, to use this method again on their second 3D survey in Vietnam over a prospect in Block 5–2.
‘There we hope to continue to push back the technological frontiers and reduce the 3D turnaround cycle even further by doing even more of the seismic processing on board the vessel,’ he says.
The success has resulted in a technology transfer between XFI and XEU.
Teams from the two regional operating companies met with Geco-Prakla staff at Stockley Park prior to a 3D seismic survey on Amethyst in the southern North Sea and the same techniques have subsequently been used for the survey.
VIGILANCE IS THE WATCHWORD
The need to be extra vigilant at all times has been stressed by terminal operations manager Roy Beardall following a security alert at Sullom Voe in August.
Two exhaustive and systematic visual searches and a subsequent check by a police ‘sniffer’ dog failed to identify any suspicious object or sign of unauthorised activity.
The alert was raised after a hole had been cut in the terminal's perimeter security fence.
‘Everyone should be particularly vigilant and report anything of a suspicious nature immediately, no matter how trivial it may appear to be,’ said Beardall.
Operations support day supervisor (security) Stewart Eley remarked: ‘We'd rather check out false alarms in preference to a suspicious situation going unreported by staff.’
POLITICAL ANALYSTS MEET IN WASHINGTON
Political analysts from BPExploration and the BPGroup held a two-day meeting in Washington to discuss common issues and share lessons learned from activities worldwide.
‘Political relationships are core to the way we do business,’ said XHQ Government and Public Affairs manager Nick Butler.
‘In mature areas they can affect the fiscal terms under which we operate.
In frontier areas they are critical to our ability to win access.
And everywhere they are integral to maintaining our licence to operate.’
A key success, attributable in large part to good teamwork between GPA in BPX and the Group, is the changes to the UK's petroleum revenue tax which became law in July.
Lessons learned from that experience were shared with members of the wider team.
Other participants discussed the development of new relationships in Mexico, Algeria, Azerbaijan and a range of other countries.
Representatives from BPAmerica and XWH(N) explained how the business manages the complex issues of local, state and federal politics in the United States.
Ways of improving BPX's political effectiveness, how to overcome the chief obstacle faced by political analysts and how to integrate this activity fully into the decision-making process were also discussed.
WE ARE THE CHAMPIONS!
A pipe band coached by Forties platform manager Brian Lynch capped a memorable season by becoming champion of champions in their class.
The youngsters of the Bucksburn and District band (aged 10–18) clinched the title by winning the British championship in London for novice bands and also best corps of drums.
This followed first place in the European championships at Falkirk, runners-up in the world championship in Glasgow and first at the prestigious Cowal Gathering.
The band's aggregate scores gave them the Royal Scottish Pipe Band Association championship for their grade.
Despite the terrific end to a successful year, the band is not resting on its laurels and new pipers and drummers are needed.
Pipe Major Lynch would be delighted to hear from anyone interested, including beginners.
He can be contacted on Forties Delta.
CUSIANA CHALLENGE: REDUCE FORMATION DAMAGE, IMPROVE FLOW RATE
Work on the long term test at Cusiana in Colombia has highlighted the special need to ensure formation damage is minimised in the difficult geology of the Llanos foothills.
The productivity of Buenos Aires-1, which had been drilled, tested and suspended, was reduced dramatically once it had been completed and put on production — a fact which has challenged production teams.
The mechanical ‘skin’ on this well had increased to greater than 100 after its workover and completion, which indicated that although the well was producing 10,000 barrels a day it could be many times more productive.
The term skin relates to the level of permeability around the productive wellbore region.
A high skin means oil can not flow as easily as it could from an undamaged well.
A number of factors can cause the problem — such as swelling clays or water blocking within the pores around the well bore — but none of the more theoretical factors were present in Colombia.
The quartz aronite formation rock has a high permeability and, chemically-speaking, is very stable.
It was work completed in Alaska which helped provide a clue to the nature of the problem at BA-1, explains head of production technology Lindsay Brown.
Chris Dyke had studied hydraulically-fractured wells on the North Slope.
He found that although in theory, workovers should not have caused changes to the wells' productivity, productivity had been reduced — by up to 40 per cent in some cases.
The problem appeared particularly acute in those wells which had taken losses during the workovers — those where a large amount of water had been pumped into the well bore and the productive reservoir to keep the wellbore stable.
He concluded that the water had carried ‘fines’— small particles — into the fractures, effectively plugging them.
Although the Cusiana formation has very different qualities from those in Alaska, the phenomenon appeared similar.
During the re-entry and completion of BA-1 a large amount of brine was pumped into the well, carrying fines with it and plugging the pores around the well bore.
‘It looks as though this is the prime mechanism for reducing productivity at the long term test,’ says Brown.
Other factors appear also to have contributed — and work carried out by Bill Blosser and Santiago Mujica in Colombia has identified many of them.
The perforations for BA-1 are known to be very short in penetration length.
On the Forties field they are around 15 inches, whereas in Cusiana, because of the hardness of the rock, they are only 6–8 inches.
At the Schlumberger laboratories tests perforating real core under reservoir conditions are being completed.
A team at the Westport labs is looking at solids invasion in conditions of high permeability and large pore throat geometry.
The conclusions drawn are that perforations should be shot with the biggest charges possible, large negative pressure differentials, and that there needs to be a high shot density; also that the mud weight over-balance — that is, the degree of pressure maintained above the reservoir's natural pressure — during drilling should be as low as possible; and that losses of fluids and solids to the productive reservoirs should never be accepted as a matter of course .
‘Undamaged, productive wells are essential,’ says Brown.
‘It doesn't take a rocket scientist to work out that doubling productivity, and therefore halving the number of wells we have to drill, will greatly improve the economics of our activities in Colombia.’
Tense? stressed out?
Then try this relaxing contest!
Winners of BP money bags in September's competition are Ms B. Glaister, Sullom Voe; Barry McCulloch, Logistics, Aberdeen Heliport; Jim Harrington, XEG; Hughie Doyle, Forties Echo; and Brith Henriksen and Ivar Hoyem, both BP Norway.
This issue's wordsearch is offering six ‘stressballs’ as prizes.
That's right — stressballs.
Small inanimate objects ready to take the brunt of your tensions and frustrations, and still keep coming back for more!
To enter simply circle the following words in the square opposite and send your entry to the address below.
Only one entry per person please.
Entries by 21 October.
NEW WAYS OF WORKING TOGETHER
New ways of working together are introduced at Sullom Voe this month in the first move towards improving the utilisation of the terminal's resources.
From October 1, multi-skilled maintenance shift teams have been enhanced and a new operations division organisation structure takes effect following the departure of production superintendent Peter Robinson to Southern North Sea as operations manager.
A change programme ‘start-up’ team was set up last month under the leadership of control supervisor Ian Mincher, comprising Stuart Brown (operations), Brian Groat (control), Clive Watt (electrical), Bob Vice (mechanical), James Johnson (operations support) and Kenny Pearson (operations).
One of the team's first tasks was to identify which maintenance craftsmen would transfer from day working to shifts and also to establish the means for allocating routine maintenance to be undertaken by the shift teams.
‘We are switching five instrument and five electrical technicians from days to the five shifts,’ said Ian Mincher.
‘The day shift mechanical structure will remain unaltered for the time being because of current workload commitments.’
The emphasis of the shift teams — to be called operational maintenance teams — will be on site-wide preventative maintenance work.
‘Each member of the ‘start-up’ team is involved in listing the various shift field activities and verifying their necessity to the terminal's operational maintenance requirements,’said Ian.
‘In particular, they will be identifying any tasks which can be completed using the base skills of the craftsmen, or with minimal additional training.
‘By liaising with planners, site engineers and supervisors throughout the terminal, we shall be able to formulate a shift plan for the teams.
‘The role of the shift supervisors is key to the success of the transition from day to shift maintenance working.’
Team performances and the quality compliance of work standards are to be monitored and reviewed with the aim of improving working practices still further.
As training programmes are made available, and on-the-job experience builds up, it is anticipated that both maintenance and operations staff will take on a wider range of tasks.
The ‘start-up’ team, which is based in the ESB annex building, reports to electrical engineer Tom Buchan, who also has the ongoing accountability for the standard of maintenance work undertaken on shifts.
The new operations division organisation is also allied to the change process.