

PARTIAL INDEMNITY
‘KNOCK FOR KNOCK’ AGREEMENT relating to claims arising out of accidents occurring anywhere in the world (including claims where either insurance covers Third Party risks alone except under Clause 3 hereof) under Policies (the Agreement itself is NOT restricted to Motor Policies except where specified) issued by the parties hereto in Great Britain the whole of Ireland the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
DEFINITIONS
‘Vehicle’ means any mechanically propelled vehicle (including self-propelled machinery and plant) or trailer or cycle or handcart.
Touring caravans are at all times to be treated as trailers for the purposes of the application of the Agreement.
The term ‘Motor Policy’ includes cover under the Motor Section of a Composite Policy.
IN THE EVENT OF
Damage to
(1)(i) Damage being caused to any of the vehicles in connection with which indemnity is granted against Damage and/or Third Party Risks by the parties hereto: — 
(a)
resulting from a collision or attempt to avoid a collision; or
(b)
by the loading or unloading of a vehicle so far as concerns loading or unloading risk cover by a Motor Policy; or
(c)
by anything falling from vehicles or anything thrown up by the wheels of a vehicle; except as provided in Clause (2) each party shall bear its own loss (if any) in respect of such damage irrespective of legal liability.
(1)(ii) For the purpose of Clause (1)(i)‘Damage to Vehicles’ shall be deemed to include: — 
(a)
damage to accessories and other property including goods in transit on the vehicle;
(b)
compensation for loss of use;
(c)
medical expenses other than Emergency Treatment charges referred to in Clause (5);
when such damage loss or expense is insured under a Motor Policy.
Partial Indemnity Clause
(2) Damage arising from a direct collision between vehicles insured by the parties to this Agreement and the Policy issued by one of those parties being a fleet insurance or part of a fleet insurance as defined hereunder a) and not granting indemnity against such damage to the insured vehicle or b) being subject to an excess of more than $100 in respect of such damage, that party shall pay a) one half of the loss of the other party in respect of the damage to their Insured's vehicle or b) not more than half the excess save and except that if the amount recoverable is $50 or less this clause will be inoperative.
This Clause shall not apply to multi-vehicle accidents where three or more vehicles are involved.
For the purposes of Clause (2)
(a)
A fleet insurance means an insurance or insurances under a0 Motor Policy covering a number of vehicles in respect of which the risk is, or will be, rated on its own experience.
(b)
A motor trade insurance is not regarded as a fleet insurance.
(c)
Payments made under Clause (1)(ii)(b) and (c) shall be disregarded.
Makers etc.
(Loss of or Damage to Vehicles)
(3) Damage to or loss of a motor vehicle and/or its accessories whilst in the hands of a Maker Repairer Garage Proprietor Selling Agent or Coachbuilder who is insured for such loss or damage, or liability for such loss or damage the loss damage or liability shall be admitted and dealt with by the party hereto insuring the Maker Repairer Garage Proprietor Selling Agent or Coachbuilder subject to the limits of its policy, and if other insurance in respect of loss of or damage to such vehicle and/or its accessories exists with the other party hereto the latter shall subject to the limits of its policy reimburse to the insurer of the Maker Repairer Garage Proprietor Selling Agent or Coachbuilder one-half of the amount paid in respect of such loss or damage.
Note:— In the application of this Clause where there is an excess under either or both policies the following shall apply: — 
(a)
The excess shall be deducted prior to apportionment between the two insurers.
(b)
Where both policies carry an excess, the greater of the two excesses only shall be deducted before the apportionment.
If the excesses are of equal amounts one excess only shall be deducted.
(c)
Any difficulty in recovering an excess from a Policyholder shall not affect the adjustment under the Agreement.
Damage to
(4) Glass insured under a Glass Breakage policy or Fuel Pumps
Glass and Fuel Pumps
being damaged by or through a vehicle or as a result of loading or unloading of or of anything falling from a vehicle, the party insuring against such Third Party risks the owner or the driver of the vehicle or the person on whose behalf it is being driven shall pay three quarters of the loss of the other party in respect of such damage irrespective of legal liability.
Emergency Treatment
(5) A payment being made to a Doctor or Hospital under the Emergency Treatment provisions of the Road Traffic Acts it shall be borne: — 
(a)
where the injured party is in or on a vehicle by the Insurer of such vehicle
(b)
where the injured party is not in or on a vehicle by the Insurer of the vehicle actually striking him
(c)
in any other case, equally.
This Clause shall not apply to injury to a person in or on a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, liability for which injury is not covered by the Policy of the Insurer of such vehicle.
PROVIDED ALWAYS
Excess (see also Note to Clause (3)
(A) That an amount borne by the Insured of a party hereto as the first portion of the cost of each accident shall apply in priority to: — 
(1)
Damage to the Insured's own vehicle (if insured)
(2)
Third Party Claims (other than claims to which this Agreement relates)
(3)
Liability for damage to which this Agreement relates.
Exclusions
(B) That this Agreement shall not apply to any vehicle running on rails or to any aircraft or hovercraft.
(C) That this Agreement shall not apply to loss or damage by (fire other than such loss or damage arising out of a collision (and insured under a motor policy or its equivalent.
(D) That this Agreement shall not apply in any case where a policy is underwritten on the basis that the Insured is responsible for the payments of sums up to a predetermined aggregate amount.
AND PROVIDED FURTHER THAT
Notice
(E) Immediate notice of interest shall be given and cover declared forthwith.
Absence of Claim by Insured
(F) The Absence of a claim or of notice of accident by a Policyholder or other person indemnified by such Policy shall not prevent the operation of this Agreement between the parties hereto.
Where this Agreement provides that the loss or part thereof shall be borne by a party hereto, and the loss is paid by the other party hereto, the purposes of this Agreement shall be effected by reimbursement between such parties subject to the limits of the Policies issued by such parties.
(G) In the event of any occurrence giving rise to a dispute between a party hereto and its Insured or to a claim against a party hereto other than a claim for which this Agreement provides it shall be optional to such party upon notice thereof to suspend the application of this Agreement to such occurrence until such dispute or claim has been adjusted provided that such party shall indemnify the other party hereto against all costs and expenses incurred as a consequence of such suspension in defending its interests in a matter for which this Agreement provides.
(H) All differences arising out of this Agreement shall be referred to the arbitration of some person to be appointed by both parties, or, if they cannot agree, to the arbitration of a person to be appointed jointly by the Chairman of the Accident Offices Association and the Chairman of Lloyds Motor Underwriters Association.
Such Arbitrator shall be at liberty to construe this Agreement and deal with differences arising thereunder as an honourable engagement and not be bound by strict rules of law.
This Agreement shall come into force on that date and shall not apply to any accident occurring before such date.
Dated this day of 19
For and on behalf of For and on behalf of 
EXPLANATORY NOTES
1.
The Agreement operates only between the Insurers of the vehicles and/or drivers concerned in the incident.
2.
The phrase ‘a collision or an attempt to avoid a collision’ is to be interpreted in its widest sense.
Examples:—
(a)
Vehicle (A) strikes and knocks down a lamp post which falls and damages vehicle (B).
This is to be regarded as a collision and the Agreement will operate between the Insurers of vehicle (A) and vehicle (B).
(b)
Vehicle (A) swerves to avoid vehicle (B) and strikes a tree.
The Agreement will operate between the Insurers of vehicles (A) and (B).
(c)
The Agreement will operate as between the Insurers of all vehicles involved in multi-vehicle accidents.
3.
The phrase ‘by anything falling from vehicles’ shall include such things as mud or oil deposited by a vehicle on a road.
Examples:—
(a)
The Agreement shall apply to any claim brought against an occupier of land if the  mud is deposited by his own vehicles and his Insurers grant indemnity on the basis that the accident arose from the use of vehicles they insure.
(b)
The Agreement shall not apply to any claim brought against an occupier of land if the mud is deposited either by vehicles other than his own, or jointly by such vehicles and his own vehicles, and his Insurers grant indemnity to him in his particular capacity as an occupier of land and not as the user of the vehicles.
4.
The term ‘fuel pump’ is intended to encompass any type of pump used to to dispense fuel for use in vehicles.
5.
For the purposes of Clause (4) of the Agreement, in the event of glass) being broken or fuel pumps damaged as a result of a collision or an attempt to avoid a collision between two or more vehicles, the intention is that the Immobile Property Insurer shall only recover in total 75% of their loss provided that they have signed this Agreement with the Insurers of the vehicles concerned.
Nothing in this Clause shall, however, prevent the Immobile Property Insurer from exercising legal remedies against any negligent driver or owner with whose Insurer they have not signed this Agreement.
6.
In matters of potential Dual Indemnity for Third Party damage or injury caused by a vehicle the intention is that the Dual Indemnity Undertaking and Explanatory Notes (G.M. 22/7/76, C.L.'s 4/10/76 and 26/10/76) thereto shall apply.
7.
The definition of a ‘fleet’ has been established without any reference to a member of vehicles in order to overcome administrative difficulties for members.
Whilst this will allow a degree of variation in applying the Partial Indemnity Clause, nevertheless it is the intention that the Clause should apply in respect of a) risks underwritten at non-schedule rates, or b) if at schedule rates solely on account of experience or c) where the main features of the risk is the number of vehicles rather than the related experience.
8.
The Partial Indemnity Clause is intended to apply to fleets insured for Third Party risks and to fleets insured for Comprehensive benefits but where the policy bears a large excess.
An excess figure of $100 has been incorporated within the Clause but this figure will be reviewed periodically.
9.
In the event of a collision arising between two vehicles insured by policies offering different forms of cover the table of examples will produce a helpful guide to the way in which the Partial Indemnity Clause is applied.
10.
The Partial Indemnity Clause will apply to group schemes e.g. vehicles in the ownership or control of a firm or association and otherwise eligible for fleet terms but where they are in fact insured in the name of particular individuals.
The Clause will not apply to schemes covering categories of individual owners in common employment e.g. vehicles owned by Police Officers.
11.
The question whether the clause is applicable in any situation involving a Comprehensive Policy with an excess is determined by the amount of excess’ which applies at the time of the accident e.g. in the case of a vehicle being driven by a young and/or inexperienced driver where an excess applies in addition to a general excess, the product of the two excesses will determine whether the clause should apply.
12.
Where an excess applies on the basis of a percentage of the value of the claim rather than a fixed amount, the application of the clause will be determined by the actual amount of the excess to be applied when the cost of damage has been assessed.
13.
In the case of a policy underwritten on the basis of ‘New for Old’ or an agreed value, any payment should be regarded as the net outlay of the Direct Insurer and should be accepted without question by the other Insurer.
14.
The terms of Clause (F) of the Knock for Knock Agreement will be applicable equally to situations relating to the Partial Indemnity Clause thus ensuring that the absence of a claim or notice of accident by a policyholder will not be a reason for seeking to avoid the Clause.
15.
Where the action of a vehicle causes two other vehicles to collide the Partial Indemnity Clause will apply as between Insurers of the colliding vehicles provided that the collision involved two vehicles only.
H
16.
Where one vehicle collides with a number of other vehicles causing a series of two vehicle collisions such a situation will be regarded as a multi-vehicle collision thereby excluding its application from the terms of the Partial Indemnity Clause.
17.
Where a secondary collision occurs after an initial impact between two vehicles, this will be considered as one collision involving more than two vehicles irrespective of the extent of the time lapse between the two collisions, thus excluding the application of the Partial Indemnity Clause.
18.
Where two vehicles collide and one then suffers further damage by striking an immobile object (but not a parked car) all damage sustained by that vehicle shall be taken into consideration when applying the Partial Indemnity Clause.
19.
Where the cover which applies to the towing unit is different from that applicable to the trailer, the application of the Partial Indemnity Clause will be governed by the cover applying to the towing unit.
However if the trailer is detached deliberately the application of the Partial Indemnity’ Clause will be governed by the cover applying to the trailer.
20.
As wide an interpretation as possible should always be used in any case where the application of the Agreement is in doubt.
This index broadly follows the subject headings used in Current Law.
All headnotes for reports found in CLMSCASE commence with one of the subject headings found in this index.
Each section of CLMSCASE is arranged alphabetically by subject (but not necessarily alphabetically within subject category).
Use the ‘find’ command to get to the required subject.
NB — ONLY THE SUBJECT HEADINGS ARE TYPED IN UPPER CASE.
THE BODY OF THE FILE IS ENTIRELY IN lower case TO FACILITATE USE OF THE ‘FIND’ COMMAND.
INDEX:
LANDLORD
LIMITATION
MARINE
MIB
NEGLIGENCE
OCCUPIERS LIABILITY
PAYMENTS INTO COURT- see ‘DAMAGES’
PENSIONS — see ‘DAMAGES’
POLICE
POLLUTION
PRACTICE
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE
PROVISIONAL DAMAGES — see ‘DAMAGES’
LANDLORD — duty to repair path.
release 021v
king-v-south northamptonshire district council.tlr 3-12-91 ca.
despite no implied obligation on a landlord to maintain land over which a right of way had been given to a third party there was an obligation in the case where use of property would be impossible in the absence or without that obligation.
eg. lifts, stairs, paths, rubbish  chutes etc. this case concerned a path used by a plaintiff confined to a wheelchair who received injuries related to the poor state of the path.
LIMITATION — estopped release 067
fabbrica italiana asturci  bologna srl v targus europe ltd tlr 26.2.92
where defendants conduct leads plaintiff to incur expense in the reasonable belief that the action will proceed to trial regardless of the plaintiffs delay, the defendant is estopped from claiming that the action should be struck out for want of prosecution on the grounds of delay — even if the E limitation period has expired.
a defendant should take no action to induce a plaintiff to incur costs in the reasonable belief that he is willing for the case to proceed to trial.
LIMITATION — one day late release 064
hartley v birmingham city council ca 1992 all er 213
plaintiff one day let in serving writ through no fault of her own.
defendant should not be allowed a ‘windfall’ defence
LIMITATION — extension of time refused release 071
dale v british coal corporation tlr 2.7.92 ca.
the test of whether a plaintiff had acted reasonably in bringing a case late was an objective one not subjective.
the plaintiff, a diabetic, had suffered a burning injury whilst welding.
the injured leg was subsequently amputated, later followed by amputation of the: other leg.
the plaintiff had died by the time of the hearing.
the incident occurred in 1972 and despite direct advice from mr scargill had not commenced an action until september 1987.
the trial judge formed the view that there was a chance of success and disallowed s.11 of the limitation act 1980.
on appeal it was held that the plaintiff had acted unreasonably in ignoring the union advice and the coal board were prejudiced in respect of any enquiries which would have to be carried out.
LIMITATION — non-accidental injury — indecent assault release 101
stubbings -v-webb and another TLR 17.12.92 HOL
claims for personal injury arising out of complaints of indecent assault or rape were subject to the six year limitation period as set out in section 2 of the limitations act 1980 running from the date when the cause of action accrued.
MARINE — jet ski not a vessel — limitation — marine conventions act 1911 and merchant shipping act 1984 release 061
steedman v schofield and anr tlr 15.4.92
a jet ski is described by the manufacturer as a ‘personal watercraft’.
in his lordship's opinion it was designed to provide the thrill and enjoyment of waterskiing without the constraint of boat and towrope. as such it was not a vessel used in navigation and therefore not subject to the marine conventions act 1911 which imposed a 2 year limitation period as opposed to a 3 year limitation period.
MIB — uninsured driver — knowledge of passenger release 073
stinton v stinton & anr tlr 5.8.92
passenger, the driver's brother, knew vehicle was uninsured. he consented to ride in the vehicle when, with another, he and the driver set out on a night's drinking.
it was held that the circumstances were such that the conclusion had to be that the passenger was ‘a person using the vehicle’ for the purpose of clause 6(1) (c) of the mib agreement of 1972 and was not therefore entitled to compensation from the bureau.
NEGLIGENCE — sex abuse release 062
p and others v harrow london borough council tlr 22.4.92b
local authority under its duty under the education act 1981 sent boys with emotional and behavioural difficulties to a private school approved by the secretary of state for education.
the authority was not liable for the sexual abuse which was committed on the boys.
the boys contact with the authority was for assessment and placement purposes.
the abuse was not foreseeable.
there was no duty of care imposed where the children were placed in an independent school approved by the secretary of state.
NEGLIGENCE — strike — clearance of rubbish — injury release 070
woolfall v knowsley borough council tlr 26.6.92
failure to clear rubbish in fear of aggravating an industrial dispute would not excuse liability when 12 year old boy received eye injury from exploding aerosol can.
NEGLIGENCE — defective  premises-negligence-personal ; injury.
release 035
raymond frederick targett-v-tarfean borough council, ca (1991 npc 126)
council liable in negligence for injury caused to original tenant arising in £ residential premises designed and owned by the council.
NEGLIGENCE — temporary accommodation — safe premises — injury release 028
ephraim v newham london  borough council and another tlr 24.1.92
a local authority has a responsibility to ensure that accommodation in multiple occupancy housing for use by the homeless is safe and suitable, such that occupants are not injured.
appeal overturned judgement of lower court.
NEGLIGENCE — duty of care — golfer release 093
lewis v buckpool golf club cl nov 1992 816
golfer struck by ball driven from an adjacent tee.
defendant with handicap of 24 hit ball with toe of his golf club, so that it went off at an angle of 30 degrees.
on appeal upheld that defendant with his handicap should have had in contemplation that he was likely to mis-hit the ball.
it was not unreasonable to expect to wait until the plaintiff had finished putting and moved on.
NEGLIGENCE — allurement — duty to others.
release 020@
topp v london country bus (sw) ltd. tlr 3/12/91
owner of minibus who parks vehicle with keys in ignition although creating an allurement does not owe a duty to a person knocked down by minibus when it was in the hands of the thief.
this decision has now been confirmed by the court of appeal.
NEGLIGENCE — heart attack — act of god release 038
an explanatory article from the new law journal 21.12.90.
NEGLIGENCE — no duty of care to rescuer release 097
mcfarlane v e e caledonia ltd. tlr 30-9-93
judgment 29 july 1993.
there was no duty of care owed by the owners of an oil rig to a rescuer who was found not to be a man of ordinary fortitude and phlegm and who suffered psychiatric injuries from experiences during a rescue operation when an oil rig went on fire.
in his lordship's judgment, both as a matter of principle and policy the court j should not extend the duty to those who were mere bystanders or witnesses of Y horrific events unless there was sufficient degree of proximity, which required both nearness in time and place and a close relationship of love and affection between plaintiff and victim.
NEGLIGENCE — duty of care — trespasser release 102
adams -v-southern electricity board tlr 21.10.93 cg
electricity board owed a duty of care to an intelligent teenage boy to ensure that he was effectively prevented from climbing up a pole-mounted, high voltage electrical installation.
board held liable in part.
boy electrocuted after climbing pole over defective anti-climbing device.
NEGLIGENCE — duty of care — soil engineer — duty to purchaser of dwelling house release 103
preston -v-torfaen borough council (1993) tlr 21.7.93 ca
soil engineer advised local authority on ground conditions and foundation requirements for dwelling house.
failed to establish that house was built on infilled quarry.
held that engineer did not owe a duty of care to the first purchaser from the local authority nor to the owner occupier for the time being.
NEGLIGENCE — causation — subsequent events brought about by reckless driving release 105
wright -v-lodge and shepherd CA NLJ 18.9.92
driver of vehicle involved in collison with another vehicle exonerated for responsibility for subsequent events which occur because another driver has driven recklessly and which would not have occurred had that driver been driving merely negligently.
A lorry collided with a car which had broken down.
The lorry crossed a central reservation and other vehicles collided with it.
the driver of one of those vehicles was killed and another injured.
Lord Justice Parker differentiated between liability of the car driver to her passenger, who must have been within her reasonable contemplation as being likely to be affected by her omission to remove her broken down car from the carriageway and any drivers who may have been proceeding in the opposite direction on the other carriageway.
OCCUPIERS LIABILITY — ice on path.
release 003
murphy-v-bradford metropolitan council tlr 11-2-91
council found liable for not clearing and salting a path in school grounds.
path was downward sloping and notorious.teacher fell at 8.30am and path had been gritted at 6.00 and 8.00am.
on appeal held slipperiness of path and relevance to p's injuries did not need to be spelt out.
judge entitled to take into account the subsequent fitting of handrail indicating path was a candidate for special treatment and to conclude d's system in conditions prevailing at the time in question was inadequate.
OCCUPIERS LIABILITY — injury — crowd throwing.
release 026
cunningham — v-reading football club ltd. (1991) independent 20-3-91.
held-a football club as occupier should foresee that crowd could become unruly and break off pieces of concrete which if thrown could cause injury to visitors in this case on duty police officers.
OCCUPIERS LIABILITY — adult plaintiff gaining access to railway line — whether actions reasonably foreseeable — whether duty of care owed.
release 083
smith -v-c.i.e. cl oct 1992 399
p chased another person on to railway line.
p struck by train.
d owed no duty of care to p as his presence on track was not foreseeable.
upheld on appeal.
PENSION — see DAMAGES.
POLICE — split trial-damages for  wrongful arrest release 030
marks v chief constable greater manchester police tlr 28.1.92.
order for separate trials of liability and damages should be the exception rather than the rule.
POLICE — wrongful arrest — exemplary damages release 042u
shah -v-metropolitan police halsbury 11/91p24
award of damages for wrongful arrest increased from $300 to $1000 to include exemplary damages.
POLICE — policeman injured — senior officers negligence.
release 017
hughes v national union of mineworkers & others (1991) 4 all er
senior police officers not to be held liable to individual officers for injuries received at hands of riotous crowd.
senior officers must be free to make critical decisions without fear of potential negligence claims from subordinate officers.
POLICE — knowledge of hazard — duty of care — warning.
release 043
ancell -v-mcdermott & others tlr 17.2.92
whether a duty was owed would depend on the circumstances of each individual6 case.
in this case it was held that despite knowing that a vehicle had deposited diesel on the road there as no duty to take active steps to prevent another being injured by the negligence of a third party.
POLLUTION — right of action — free floating mussels.
release 016
mull shellfish ltd v golden sea produce ltd. tlr, 7/10/91
tenant of area of sea has right to sue for nuisance where pollution killed larvae even though at the time they were killed, tenant had not acquired a proprietary right of action.
PRACTICE — w/o prejudice — open offer release 074
cheddar valley engineering ltd v chaddlewood homes ltd (1992) 1wlr 820
it is the responsibility of the party wishing to change w/o prejudice negotiations to an open basis to ensure that the other party is fully aware.: mere use of the words ‘open offer’ is not enough.
such an offer made in a letter or over the telephone could still remain ‘without prejudice’ and would not be admissible in evidence.
PRACTICE — medical report disclosed accidentally release 088
pizzey v ford motor co ltd tlr 8.3.93
court of appeal decision: unfavourable medical reports obtained confidentially by a plaintiff for the purposes of personal injury litigation which were inadvertently disclosed on discovery to the  defendant could be used by them at the trial.
the defendants'  solicitor reasonably believed that the plaintiff's solicitor had waived the privilege that attached to the reports.
it was of utmost importance in the context of litigation that a party should be able to rely on the discovery of his adversary.
exceptions to that ability must not extend beyond fraud and mistake.
PRACTICE — defendant — order to undergo — striking out release 065
lacey v harrison tlr 22.4.92
court had discretion to order defence to be struck out unless defendant underwent medical examination to determine whether he was capable of remembering the accident where he was the only witness for his pleaded defence.
PRACTICE — disclosure of whole medical history release 089
dunn v british coal corporation tlr 5.3.93
in a personal injury action an employee who claimed damages for loss of earnings or impaired earning capacity had, if so requested by his employer, to disclose the general medical records of the whole of his medical history to his employers' medical advisers.
court of appeal decision.
PRACTICE — costs — taxed costs or fixed costs release 092
clarke v mcbrien civil engineering cl nov 92 376.
claim obviously under $1,000. abuse of process in order to obtain taxed costs.
specials agreed prior to trial — $313.99, general damages assessed at $250.: on appeal to house of lords confirmed fixed costs only.
house of lords also confirmed appropriate for defendant to make a calderbank offer.
if defendant had paid into court and plaintiff had accepted, plaintiff would have been entitled to an order for costs to be taxed if not agreed.
PRACTICE — estoppel — defendants conduct release 044
fabbrica  italiana astucci bologna srl -v-targus europe ltd tlr 26.2.92
where a defendants conduct led the plaintiff to incur expenditure in the reasonable belief that the action was to proceed to trial regardless of the plaintiffs delay even where the limitation period had expired, the defendant was estopped from claiming that the action be struck out for want of prosecution on the grounds of the plaintiffs delay.
it follows that it is important to recognise when the limitation period expires and ensure that no action is taken which could mislead a plaintiff.
the case should be diaried and the advised immediately on expiry of the limitation period if we intend to take the point.
PRACTICE — discovery of medical records.
release 096
elliot (janet denise) -v — mem, march 11, 1993; ca. cl aug 1993.
p signed forms of authority giving access to her medical records, with a proviso to the effect there should be no copying, in any way, of her records, and that consent was only in respect of information ‘relevant to my claim’.
d objected and claimed records were discoverable, making such an application, or a stay of action pending authority from p.
held: — 
d's appeal dismissed on the grounds the documents which the medical examiner considered relevant were to be disclosed, but indiscriminate disclosure of all the records would threaten the confidentiality of p, without securing any benefit to d.
PRACTICE — stay of proceedings — personal injury — vocational assessment release 104
bird -v-longridge halsbury's laws august 1993
a vocational assessment which would include an interview and testing of vocational skills was analogous to a medical examination.
PRACTICE — striking out — defence of champerty — car hire agreements release 106
sanders -v-templar; giles -v-thompson; devlin -v-bastington TLR 13.1.93
car hirers were not ‘trafficking in litigation’ where they agreed with potential plaintiffs whose cars were damaged in motor accidents and under repair, to supply them with free replacement vehicles provided the plaintiffs co-operated with the hirers in prosecuting claims against defendants and paid them the hiring charges from the damages they received.
such agreements were not champertous and contrary to public policy.
maintenance is the support of litigation by a stranger without just course; champerty is an aggravated form of maintenance, its distinguishing feature being the support of litigation by a stranger in return for a share of the proceeds.
PRACTICE — res judicata — personal injury action — claims by motorist whether claims should have been brought by passenger — estopped release 107
talbot -v-berkshire county council (1993) 1 wlr 708
a passenger in a car driven by B sues B for damages and B issued a third party notice against C, a local authority responsible for the highway, = claiming a contribution towards A's claim.
B, the driver made no claim for his own injuries.
A joined C as a defendant.
judgement was given to A, B and C each being held partly to blame.
could B subsequently bring a fresh action against C in respect of his injuries.
held that a personal injury claim by a motorist against a local highway authority was barred by the doctrine of res judicata when it could have been, and was not, included in an action by the motorist's passenger against both, with the authority as third party and then as second defendant.
PRACTICE — running down action — order 14 release 108
summons held in carlisle district registry.
defence insurers argued against the order 14 summons on two counts; first the plaintiff could not obtain summary judgement because there were two defendants and one might escape liability; secondly the first defendant sought leave to amend his defence to argue contributory negligence because the plaintiff had not worn a seat belt.
the district judge held that each defendant was bound to be found negligent.
both defendants were given leave to amend their defences to allege seat belt contributory negligence.
he gave the plaintiff judgement for 75% of damages to be assessed and directed that the seat belt issue should be tried separately from quantum.
PRACTICE — striking out — want of prosecution — acquiescence in delay release 109
harwood -v-courtaulds ltd TLR 2.2.93 ca
defendant acquiescing in a plaintiffs inexcusable, inordinate and prejudicial delay in prosecuting an action was thereby debarred from having it dismissed for want of prosecution.
This case has been circulated to all  liability claims managers in full.
PRACTICE — dismissed for want of prosecution — evidence — without prejudice correspondence release 113
family housing association (manchester) ltd -v-michael hyde and partners and others (1993) 1 WLR 354
without prejudice correspondence was admissible for the determination of applications to strike out for want of prosecution.
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE — structural survey — failure to detect substantial defects in property — whether negligent breach of contract.
release 080
heatley v william h brown cl oct 1992 402
failure to detect substantial defects in a property during a standard structural survey.
chartered surveyor.
surveyor could not gain access to roof voids but concluded was in reasonable condition for its age.
property uneconomical to repair and had to be demolished.
surveyor in breach of contract and should have advised further investigation of the property.
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE-structural survey-valuation wrong-measure of damages release 033
heatley & anr v william brown (1991 egcs 115)
survey gave clean bill of health to 200yr old building.
after purchase substantial work required and new survey indicated only value was that of the site.
damages  equalled the diminution in value.:
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE — valuation — level of damages release 032
watts v morrow 1991 ca.
in the event that a purchaser is  persuaded to purchase a property based on a surveyors valuation, the level of damages will be based on the correct market value allowing for the true condition of the property, and not the cost of repairs which need to be carried out.
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE-latent damage act(1986)-date time runs.
release 034
horbury v craig hall & rutley (24.5.91 qbd official referee's business)
time starts to run from the date on which a reasonable person in the position of the plaintiff would have realised he had suffered damage in the form of the acquisition of a defective house.
PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE — lack of supervision — policy conditions.
release 012
grahame summers and rosemary summers v congreve horner & co & independent ins.
limited (third party)(1991) policy did not provide indemnity of survey carried out by nominated person not holding professional qualifications or with 5 years experience and supervised by professionally qualified person.
simple supervision not enough and some attendance on site by a qualified person with nominated person essential in
absence of exceptional circumstances.
case now appealed.
degree of supervision would vary with qualification and ability of surveyor and would be such degree of supervision as would be commensurate with good surveying practice.
This index broadly follows the subject headings used in Current Law.
All headnotes for reports found in CLMSCASE commence with one of the subject headings found in this index.
Each section of CLMSCASE is arranged alphabetically by subject (but not necessarily alphabetically within subject category).
Use the ‘find’ command to get to the required subject.
NB — ONLY THE SUBJECT HEADINGS ARE TYPED IN UPPER CASE.
THE BODY OF THE FILE IS ENTIRELY IN lower case , TO FACILITATE THE USE OF THE ‘FIND’ COMMAND.
INDEX:
ANIMALS
BROKER
BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION
CHAMPERTY
CHILDREN
CONTRACTOR
COSTS
COUNCIL
CRIMINAL LAW
DAMAGES
DISCOVERY — see ‘PRACTICE’
ANIMALS — dogs — public place release 087
bates v dpp tlr 8.3.93
a dangerous dog, as defined by section 1 of the dangerous dogs act 1991, in a private car which was on a public highway was in a public place, within the meaning of section 10(2) of the act and was therefore required to be muzzled and on a lead as prescribed by section 1(2) (d) of the act.
ANIMALS — dogs.
release 010
hunt v wallis tlr 10.5.91
to determine the liability of the owner of a dog under the animals act 1971 a dog must be compared with other dogs of the same breed and not with dogs generally.
BROKER — duty of care — not owed in tort. release 053
verderame & ors -v-commercial union ass.co plc & anr tlr 2.4.92 ca.s7
broker acting for a company did not owe a duty of care in tort to individual7 directors.
contract was between broker and company and company alone not with individual directors.
BROKER — duty of care.
release 050
punjab national bank -v-de boinville & ors (1992) 1 lloyd's rep 7.
insurance brokers owe duty of care in contract and tort to insured.
individual broker owes duty of care in tort when entrusted with task undertaken by his employer.
individual and corporate brokers owe duty of care in tort to any non client who is in sufficiently proximate relationship.
BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION — defective building work — evidential bar release 063
colbart v kumar 1992 n p l 32
architect issued penultimate and final certificates which were unpaid by employer who claimed that certain work was defective.
contractor obtained judgement as defects complained of should have been recognised by the F architect.
jct contact was evidential bar to employer contending against contractor that work was defective after final certificate was issued.
CHAMPERTY — agreement void release 081
advanced technology structures ltd -v-cray valley products ltd ca tlr 29.12.92
managing director could not fund company's litigation for one third of damages recovered net of company's direct losses and legal costs.
such an agreement was champertous and therefore illegal.
assignment of rights of action possible but  assignee must be able to show genuine commercial interest.
CHILDREN — negligence of foster parents.
release 027
surtees v kingston upon thames borough council 1991 the  independent 27.3.1991
the court of appeal held that foster parents of a child, scalded when she put her foot under hot running water, were not negligent.the majority view was that a parent should not be responsible for  unforeseeable accidents of the type which occur in the best homes.
lord justice beldam dissenting observed it would have taken but a moment to move the child from danger before being left alone.
CHILDREN — in utero — right to sue.
release 014
cohen v shaw tlr 17.9.91
a child in utero is to be treated as already born thereby having a right to sue for damages for the death of his father.
see also b -v-islington health authority and de martell -v-merton and sutton health authority tlr 25.3.92 ca.
CHILDREN — foetus — claim by parent release 029
hamilton v fife health board tlr 28.1.92.
a child dying after birth from injuries received as a foetus is not to be considered as a ‘person’ dying in consequence of personal injuries for the purpose of the damages(scotland)act 1976. thus a claim from parents for loss of  society fails.
contrast this with the case of cohen v shaw (release 014) and a similar scottish case elliott v joicy (1935sc (hl) 57) both of which concerned a child in utero where it was decided that a child succeeds in a claim for injuries received.
thus a claim for injuries from a child in utero would succeed but a claim from a third party eg parents would not.
CHILDREN — discharge of claim.
release 008
this an opinion prepared with the niceties of scottish law in mind but the broad principals will be relevant in the rest of the u.k.
CHILDREN — contributory negligence — rta accident.
release 049
morales -v-eccleston (1991) r.t.r. 151, c.a.
on appeal 11yr old boy 75% to blame for running across road without looking.
motorist admits to not seeing boy who came from opposite pavement but accepted that motorist had only limited opportunity for seeing him.
high % of blame seems to have been related to boy's age.
CHILDREN — adoption — damages.
release 006
watson (administrators of) & others v willmott (1990) 3wlr1103
the obligation of adopted parents to maintain a child can affect the quantification of damages.
the  dependency on a natural father can be reduced by  dependency on an adopted father and a childs  dependency in relation to his natural mother is limited to the period between death and adoption.
CONTRACTOR — liability for work of.
release 022
alcock v wraith & others tlr 23.12.91 ca
contrary to the accepted general rule a defendant is liable to his neighbour for the negligence of an  independent contractor where work carried out between adjoining premises required particular care to ensure a waterproof joint was made.
such work would be considered extra hazardous although each such case would be considered on its merits.
in this case the defendants were required to settle a claim as the contractor was bankrupt.
COSTS — legal aid — set off against damages.
release 036
lockley -v-national blood transfusion service.
tlr 11.11.91y6
where a legally aided person fails in an interlocutory matter it often occurs 6 that an order for costs will not be enforced without leave of the court.
in such circumstances it would be appropriate to have the words ‘save by way of set off against damages and/or costs’ added to the order and our counsel should be advised accordingly.
COSTS — taxing between defendants release 040
seavision investments sa -v-evenett & ors, ctlr 29.1.92 ca
where plaintiff recovers costs of suing first plaintiff from second plaintiff they will be taxed on standard basis and not indemnity or solicitor and client basis.
COSTS — calderbank offer.
release 023
chrulew v borm-reid & co nlj 31.5.91
this is a useful description of the use and value of a calderbank letter.
COSTS — mark-up release 059=
loveday v renton and the wellcome foundation ltd qbd 12.12.91
this was a test case with 300 cases waiting in the wings, related to a whooping cough vaccine.
on appeal from a taxation it was held that it was wrong to depress hourly rates to justify an unjustifiable mark-up. a mark-up in excess of 100% had to be justified by showing that the case was exceptional.
the judge commented that there is a tendency among some solicitors to put forward grossly inflated percentages and failed to appreciate that to justify a mark-up even as high as 100% required a demonstration that the case was exceptional.
COSTS — plaintiff entitled to full costs — apportionment of defendant costs release 075
nash and others-v-eli lilly and others tlr 7.10.92
in a group action defendants costs were apportioned between all plaintiffs, ie 1/338 against each plaintiff.
held that it was inappropriate to award a successful plaintiff the same proportion of his costs and that he should receive all his costs.
COSTS — wasted time — counsel's negligence release 082
antonelli & others -v-wade gery farr (a firm) tlr 29.12.927
court could make an order for wasted costs against counsel.
counsel  accepting an unseen brief at short notice is guilty of improper conduct as it was improbable that he had time to grasp properly the issues involved.
COSTS — calderbank letter.
release 095
c & h engineering -v-f klucznik & son (no 2)(1992) fsr667, aldous j. cl aug 93.
the undertakings offered by d in the calderbank letter were unclear and difficult to enforce, and the sum offered on costs not  referable to the costs of the issues on which P succeeded.
in the absence of acceptance, the subsequent correspondence was written in response to a ‘wp’ offer and as such was privileged.
held, the action and counter-claim would be taxed as one proceeding, with each party being entitled to the costs of the issues in which it was successful.
COUNCIL — defective premises — negligence-personal; injury.
release 035
raymond frederick targett-v-tarfean borough council, ca (1991 npc 126)
council liable in negligence for injury caused to original tenant arising in residential premises designed and owned by the council.
COUNCIL — temporary  accommodation — safe premises — injury release 028
ephraim v newham london borough council and another tlr 24.1.92
a local authority has a responsibility to ensure that accommodation in (multiple occupancy housing for use by the homeless is safe and suitable, such that occupants are not injured.
appeal overturned judgement of lower court.
CRIMINAL LAW — theft — deception release 094
regina v gomez tlr dec 1992.
an act done with the authority of the owner could amount to an appropriation of goods for the purposes of the theft act 1968 where such authority or ‘consent had been obtained by deception.
in this case the house of lords in H hearing an appeal from the crown reversed the decision of the court of appeal.
DAMAGES — redundancy payment — loss of benefit release 086
campbell -v- f & f moffat (transport) cl oct 1992 738
claim for loss of redundancy payment which would have been received if employment had not been terminated because of accident, held to be ‘naturally and directly’ arising from the wrong.
a scottish case.
DAMAGES — drunken pilot — passenger.
release 002
morris v murray & another (1990) 3 all er 801 ca
a passenger accepting a joyride in an aircraft with a pilot whose’ drunkenness was so extreme and so glaring’was barred by the defence of ‘volenti non fit injuria’from claiming damages for personal injury.
(refer also to…release 35, 1990)
DAMAGES — fatal — deduction of benefits — income from assets release 045
wood -v-bentall simplex ltd tlr 3.3.92 ca
the appellants supplied a slurry storage tank.
the deceased entered the tank to rescue an employee and was overcome by fumes.
the appeal was on quantum only.
it was held on appeal that income from assets tied up in the deceased's farm could not be deducted from the  dependency claim by virtue of s.4 of the f.a.a as amended by the administration of justice act 1982. in this case the widow of a farmer inherited a share of a farm jointly owned by her husband and his brother.
an arrangement was entered into whereby the widow was to receive an income p.a of $5000 from her assets remaining in the business.
the appeal court dismissed the  argument that the income should be deducted pound for pound from the agreed  dependency .
to have succeeded the appellant would have to have shown that the amount on which the  dependency was based already included a sum which equated to a return on the assets of the business.
there had been no attempt by the appellant to show that any part of the deceased's income & 6]consisted of a return on assets as opposed to remuneration for labour and work on the farm.
DAMAGES — fatal accident — p.t.s.d release 054
jane wheatly (as administrix of paul wheatly) -v-nigel david  cunningham 
plaintiff wife of deceased was pregnant at time of deceased's death but later miscarried. held that as  plaintiff would most likely have given up work to take care of her baby  therefore the joint earnings approach to calculating  dependency was not appropriate.
the proposition that as 40% of marriages ended in divorce the multiplier should be reduced was rejected.
DAMAGES — aunt — deduction of foster allowance release 018
cresswell & others V eaton (1991) 1 wlr 1113
this case dealt with a death prior to enactment of the administration of justice act 1982 amendment of the 1971 fatal accidents act 1976 which did allow deduction of foster payments.
this case also dealt with the fact that the deceased mother had worked full time and this aunt had given up her job to look after the children.
DAMAGES — death — co-habitee — support.
release 004
morris v drysdale tlr mar.91
a scottish case which could be of persuasive value south of the border.
a widow's damages for dependency can be reduced by the value of co-habitee's support.
DAMAGES — death following injury.
release 025
hicks v wright (1992) 2 all er 65 hl
this case concerns a claim for pain and suffering lasting a few seconds prior to death arising from the hillsborough incident.
the court or appeal denied the recovery on the grounds that an action could only be brought where the pain and suffering was ‘reasonably prolonged.’
this decision confirmed in the Lords 5.3.92. to succeed in such a claim it be necessary to show that an injury had been received before death occurred.
in this case the medical evidence  concluded that death was from crushing of the chest which prevented breathing with death resulting within 5 minutes.
there was no evidence of any physical injury having been sustained before death
DAMAGES — nervous shock.
release 024
allcock & others v chief constable of south yorkshire police tlr 6.5.91 ca
hevican v ruane (1991) 3 all er 65u
ravenscroft v rederiaktiebolaget (1991) 3 all er 73
during the year of 1991 there were a number of cases dealing with the contentious issue of nervous shock.
the above have probably had the greatest impact.
the article from insurance law monthly summarises the current law and points the way forward.
DAMAGES — ex gratia payment of wages not deductible.
release 055
bews -v-scottish hydro — electric plc tlr 25.3.92
an ex gratia payment of wages to executors of employee killed in course of his employment cannot be deducted from a claim for damages against employer.
the court rejected an  argument against s1(5) (b) damages (scotland) act 1976.
DAMAGES — pension not deductible.
release 007
smoker v london fire authority (1991) 2 wlr 1053, hl(e)
wood & british coal corporation (1991) 2 wlr 1052, hl(e)
a plaintiff sustaining an injury forcing retirement does not have to give credit for loss of earnings monies received under pension scheme to which tortfeasor as employer had contributed.
DAMAGES — taxis — owner — third parties.
release 009
an opinion from counsel giving consideration to the types of claims available to interested parties other than the owner/driver or persons injured.
DAMAGES — loss pension rights — calculations — inflation — release 056
mitchell v glenrothes slt 10-5-91
in calculating lost pension rights the correct approach is 1) apply the appropriate multiplier to the appropriate multiplicand 2) the appropriate multiplicand is the pursuers level of wage which would have been received if currently employed 3) allowing for all contingencies including the chance of obtaining a pension in the future the multiplier for a 48 year old was 6 4) the resulting figure should be reduced for the accelerated benefit bearing in mind that the pension would not have been paid before age 65.
DAMAGES — fatal — dependency — likelihood of divorce — release 058
martin and others v owen tlr 21.5.92
the likelihood of divorce can be taken into account when assessing damages for  dependency .
court should not shut its eyes to fact that statistically one in three marriages end in divorce.
the chance would be substantially reduced if the marriage had already lasted some time and there were children.
in this case the plaintiff had committed adultery with two different men in the space of four or five years.
the multiplier was reduced from 15 years to 11 years to reflect the fact that the marriage might not have lasted for the whole of the natural life of the deceased.
DAMAGES — fatal — dependency — fathers services release 060
hayden v hayden tlr 8.4.92
infant dependant's mother killed in an accident in a car driven by the father.
father replaced mother's lost services by caring for the infant himself, the father's services did not accrue as a result of the death.
it follows that s.4 of the fatal accidents act 1976 does not apply and therefore the value of the fathers services should be taken into account when assessing the damages payable to the plaintiff.
appeal upheld decision of lower court.
DAMAGES — hire charges — after repairs completed — larger vehicle release 068o
mattocks v mann tlr ca 19.6.92
the measure of damages awarded to a plaintiff who was obliged to incur hire charges following a road traffic accident could include (i) the cost of hire of a car larger than the plaintiff's own (ii) the cost of hire after completion of repairs pending receipt by the plaintiff from the defendant's insurer of funds to meet the repairers bill.
lord justice beldam made it clear in this case that the insurer had made it clear they would indemnify the defendant.
the plaintiff had instructed repairs after the insurers engineer had negotiated repair costs.
it was not appropriate in these circumstances to follow ‘the liesbosch’ decision which held that impecuniosity was an effective cause of the need to hire so that costs were not recoverable.
DAMAGES — nervous reaction — ptsd — no trauma release 069
nicholls v rushton tlr ca 19.6.92
a plaintiff suffering no physical injury and only nervous reaction to the accident falling short of an identifiable illness cannot recover damages.
=Q
DAMAGES — interim payment — no insurance release 077Q
ferguson-v-mcgrandles scots law report (the times 31.8.92)
an interim award will be made if a defender can meet the obligation either from his own funds or from funds he could dispose of at will.
in this case the defender was not insured and was not licensed but an insurer was conducting a holding defence while they considered whether they should repudiate liability under a policy issued to the owner of the vehicle and persons taking the vehicle on hire.
the mib were not yet involved.
whilst the insurer was prepared to make an interim payment if providing indemnity they argued that the pursuer was not entitled to an award because he did not have the means to enable him to pay.
held that no award would be made as defender did not have means and resources to make the payment as there was not a contract of insurance in his favour.
it was not relevant that the insurer was prepared to make a payment in the event that they did provide insurance cover.
DAMAGES — more than one defender release 085
herbertson -v-ascomit co cl oct 1992 730s
a scottish case.
the pursuer succeeded in his application for an interim payment against his employer who argued they should only be liable to pay 50% because of the alleged negligence of the master of a ship.
it was held that the pursuer would almost certainly succeed against his employer but where a substantial question remained about his fault it would be inappropriate to make any award against the master.
DAMAGES — plaintiffs cost against other defendants.
release 039
qbe ins(uk) ltd & others -v-mediterranean ins & reins co ltd & anor (1992 1 all er 12)
a plaintiff accepting money in court is not automatically entitled to cost of  pursuing other defendants since costs of action refer only to costs against a specific party.the plaintiff may ask the court to exercise its discretion e.g if defendants liability is joint.
DAMAGES — plaintiffs costs — payment in by one defendant release 031
hodgson v guardall ltd & others (1991 3 al er 823) J
a paying in defendant can be ordered to pay the cost of not only the plaintiff but also the costs of co-defendants and the plaintiffs costs of proceeding against the co-defendants.
DAMAGES — time to accept — amended defence.
release 011
proetta v times newspapers ltd (1991) 1wlr 337 ca
if the risks in a case substantially increase for the plaintiff, especially as in this case where the defendant was given leave inter alia to amend their defence, there should be no extension of time to a plaintiff to accept a payment into court.
DAMAGES — writ issued only — not estopped. release 048
towers -v-morley tlr 11.3.92.
defendant in belief that it was necessary to enter an appearance before a payment into court could be made was not estopped when he sought to have  the case dismissed for want of prosecution on discovering that the writ had not9 been served.
by order 22 rule 1 it is possible to make a payment into court even though the writ has not been served but only issued.in such circumstances it not necessary to enter an appearance.
DAMAGES — arthritis. release 013
robertson v british bakeries ltd. slt 1991 434
a scottish case where pursuer succeeded in proving a risk of future serious deterioration and that onset of post traumatic osteoarthritis would be a recognisable threshold on which to assess further damages.
a provisional award of damages made as a consequence.
CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL MANUAL ENGINEERING CLAIMS
In the table of contents which follows, the screen number is shown against each heading.
To find a particular screen number use the FIND command followed by the screen number but with dashes on either side of the number — for example‘find -55-’ will find screen number 55.
INTRODUCTION (FEB 1991)
The Engineering and Computer Claims Handling Instructions are based on the current Engineering Policy wording SB2156 and Computer Policy wording SB2201.
Several other Policies fall within Scottish Boilers Control e.g. Business Interruption (Machinery) Policy SB2174-ET1 and specimen Policy wording should be obtained.
(These notes must be read in conjunction with the appropriate Policy wording, Excess Guide and SCI Instructions).
When a claim is intimated, either by telephone or claim form, it is essential to check the following:
1.
If notification received by telephone form SBC1000 must be completed.
2.
Claim form S.B. Claims 5 is to be issued for completion in all cases.
3.
Immediately the details of a claim are known, and provided Policy Liability engages, the appropriate Area Representative, Plant Safety, Loss Adjusters, Staff Motor Engineer, Liability Claims Depts. or HO Claims Dept.
Branch Claims must be contacted.
Section 3.0 of these notes contain instructions regarding the use of such support.
CLAIMS PROCEDURES (OCT 1989)
All claims provide the opportunity of impressing the client with an efficient service.
If a claim is not valid the Policyholder should be informed as soon as possible.
Then, at least, the Policyholder can consider alternative ways of dealing with the loss.
The aim should be to carry out a prompt and thorough investigation.
This is supported by General Condition 2 of the Engineering and Computer Policies which sets out the action to be taken by the Policyholder on the happening of any event which may give rise to a claim.
Prompt investigation of engineering claims is essential, the main reasons being:
1.
If liability is not accepted it is important that the Policyholder is informed as soon as possible so that there is no misunderstanding regarding who is to pay for repairs.
2.
After an accident it is often found that maintenance work as well as repairs is necessary and it is quite natural that the Policyholder will want both carried out at the same time.
Early investigation helps to identify both aspects so that a suitable apportionment of costs can be agreed.
3.
With certain types of plant it may be necessary for tests and Statutory Certification to be carried out after completion of the repairs and an early investigation provides the opportunity for testing arrangements to be made.
4.
Where injuries or property damage are caused by a defective machine an immediate investigation by an engineer is essential to establish the extent to which the claim can be defended.
WHO TO APPOINT (FEB 1991)
Engineering Policies cover a wide variety of Plant, both Mobile and Stationary.
Consequently it is important to instruct correct expert depending on the type of claim.
As a guide the following details are provided (note the list is not exhaustive).
Note: Some of the above Plant e.g. CRANES, WINCHES, FORK LIFT TRUCKS, are subject to STATUTORY INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION of their LIFTING EQUIPMENT.
If damage is to BOOM SECTIONS, HYDRAULICS, ROPES/CHAINS, Plant Safety should be instructed.
Note: These claims should be dealt with in the Department (unless limits as per Property SCI 7 exceeded), in conjunction with Suppliers (total loss) or repairers (partial loss).
Reference should also be made to the Specific Claims Handling Instructions, especially to calculate written down value.
LOSS ADJUSTERS
All Claims for Consequential Loss Computer failures exceeding $1,000 Theft Claims — dependent on amount and type of Plant — if in doubt refer H.O.
LCD UNITS
All Employee and TP Injury Claims All Claims subject to Litigation including recoveries.
HO CLAIMS (BRANCHES)
Claims exceeding Branch handling limits which are: Engineering Claims $25,000 Computer Claims $ 5,000 except for claims for Reinstatement of Data which should always be referred to H.O.
AREA ENGINEERING REPS
All cases, including the above, where difficulty.
Reference to H.O.
must follow existing guidelines i.e. MC73 etc.
ENGINEERING POLICY COVER COMMENTARY (OCT 1989)
The following section outlines the various Covers available.
It also explains the intentions of the Extensions, Conditions and Exceptions with examples on Claims Handling.
For more specific instructions, refer Section
STANDARD COVERS
Sudden and Unforeseen Damage
In general the damage sustained must necessitate immediate repair, therefore damage which does not affect the operation of the plant will not be covered.
The term sudden and unforeseen damage is self explanatory and covers damage from breakdown and any other cause not excluded.
It is the intention to include damage due to explosion and collapse which is often specifically included in the wording used by other companies.
Breakdown, Explosion or Collapse
The previous definition was:—‘Sudden mechanical or electrical failure including that caused by frost or moisture (other than flood) which renders the plant inoperative’.
In certain circumstances the previous definition created problems in that the cause of the electrical or mechanical failure was not defined which meant that the electrical and mechanical failure from accidental cause could have been construed as breakdown, when in fact it was an Accidental Damage claim.
The present definition makes clear that the cause of damage must be ‘mechanical or electrical defects in the plant’.
The definition of breakdown now adopted is in line with that used by other companies.
Both explosion and collapse are separately defined to avoid any confusion with explosion which would be covered by fire insurance.
The words ‘force of internal steam or fluid pressure’ makes the difference clear.
Accidental Damage
Accidental Damage is self explanatory and limited by exclusion of damage due to breakdown, explosion or collapse which in effect excludes damage from any inherent defect in the plant.
Legal Liability Hired-in-Plant
Cover will only operate when the Insured hires the plant under Conditions of Hire which are no more onerous than standard C.P.A. Conditions.
If other Conditions apply, then it will be necessary to prepare a separate endorsement, code 9 and if necessary charge additional premium.
Cover is in respect of the Insured's Legal Liability and will therefore include negligent breakdown and cover for loss of hiring charges payable to the owner of the plant.
General Exception 2 i.e. Fire and Theft etc., has also been deleted to ensure that the Insured's Legal Liabilities are fully covered.
Plant Movement
Provides cover for accidental damage whilst plant and machinery is being moved.
The nature of the movements for which plant can be covered is defined under the heading ‘Scope of Operations’.
When plant is being moved between locations cover provides for fire and theft when plant is outwith premises owned by the Insured.
Fire and Theft
This cover is not available on its own and can only be granted when cover for Sudden and Unforeseen Damage/Accidental Damage also applies.
The cover is usually only granted on portable/mobile plant and the wording makes clear that General Exception 2 relating to fire, theft, etc. does not apply to this cover.
STANDARD BENEFITS
The following covers are also provided as part of the schedule cover:
1.
Automatic Cover — Previously this was provided without limit as to the period of time by which the Company must be notified but as we can no longer rely on surveyors picking up additional plant, it is now a condition of this cover that the Insured notifies the Company before expiry of the current period of insurance.
This in effect means that there is an onus on the Insured to notify all changes which have taken place during the previous period of insurance.
2.
Supplementary Expenses — This cover was previously provided without any inner limit.
A limit of $1,500 has now been imposed due to difficulties having been experienced with certain claims, whereby the Company's interpretation of reasonable additional expenses differed from that of the Insured.
To avoid any misunderstandings, a limit of $1,500 has now been imposed.
3.
Temporary Removal — This cover was previously offered only on the widest General Engineering Policy cover i.e. General Accident Covers, and is now provided automatically.
It is not quite as wide for damage to the plant whilst in transit between sites, whereas such damage is only now covered provided the reason for removal is ‘cleaning, renovation or repair to other premises’.
Damage whilst on other premises is now covered, but would not have been under the previous Engineering policy.
STANDARD ENDORSEMENTS
endorsement 1 — reinstatement
The Policy is based on a Contract of Indemnity and reinstatement is not provided other than for explosion cover.
Associated with the explosion risk is damage to Own Surrounding Property, hence reason for specific reference to property damage under Clause (b) of Reinstatement endorsement.
Due to the automatic provision of reinstatement for explosion covers, it is standard practice to provide reinstatement cover on Boiler and Pressure Plant, and it is the intention that the cover will continue to be provided automatically for such plant.
Proviso 3 is intended to apply to situations where Local Authorities insist on work being carried out on parts of the property not even damaged, as can occur in the case of listed buildings.
Endorsement 2 — Third Party Liability
The wording used in the operative clause of the endorsement is ‘accidental’.
An accident has been legally defined in the House of Lords as ‘an unlooked for mishap or an untoward event which is not expected or designed’.
The use of the word accidental places the onus on the Insured to show that the injury, loss or damage, was accidental.
The liability must arise from:
1.
Explosion or collapse of Boiler and Pressure plant.
2.
Normal use of all other insured plant.
Exclusions
1.
‘Damage to property, land or buildings caused by vibration, excavation, removal or weakening of supports or by the weight of any machine and/or the load carried’.
2.
‘Subsidence or water pollution’.
Exclusions 1 and 2 are now deleted from G.A.
Liability policy wordings, however, they are relevant when talking about Crane/Contractors Plant and therefore, whilst they could be deleted an additional premium must be charged.
While the exclusion does not specifically refer to damage to underground pipes or cables, the above exclusions would be deemed to refer to such circumstances and therefore cover would only operate for damage to underground pipes and services when these exclusions are deleted.
3.
Damage to Goods being Lifted As these goods are in the custody of the Insured they are therefore also excluded by the operative clause of this endorsement.
Separate insurance can be arranged under endorsement 5.
4.
Road Traffic Act Requirements for explosion risks as defined in the policy can be covered on payment of an additional premium, thereby amending part of this exclusion.
Endorsement 3 — Damage to Own Surrounding Property
Previously when providing explosion cover on an air receiver, the insurance was deemed to include explosion of the air compressor working with the receiver.
It is no longer our intention to provide this cover automatically as an air compressor would be deemed as Own Surrounding Property and therefore would only be covered for explosion risks if this endorsement was taken out along with the basic cover on the air receiver.
Damage to goods being lifted is excluded as separate insurance can be arranged.
Endorsement 4 — Long Term Agreement
Not applicable to Claims.
Endorsement 5 — Adjustment of Premium (Annual Basis)
Not applicable to Claims.
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS (OCT 1989)
1.
EXCESS — This Clause is designed so that variable excesses can be shown on the Policy Schedule.
The minimum excess will however be $50 in all cases.
The excess is applicable to each and every occurrence therefore in the event of say two items being damaged in the same occurrence, the excess shown on the Policy Schedule will be deducted once.
2.
PERILS — These risks will normally be covered under a Fire Policy, or Special Sprinkler Leakage Policy.
Whilst explosion other than explosion due to force of internal steam or fluid pressure is excluded, certain forms of explosion e.g. transformers bursting due to electrical faults, are intended to be covered as the proximate cause is electrical breakdown.
Theft is excluded but this policy would cover damage caused by attempted theft.
3.
WEAR AND TEAR — These risks are considered uninsurable and relate to the cost of carrying out maintenance work generally.
a.
Wear and tear and gradual deterioration is a standard exclusion in almost all Material Damage Policies.
b.
Gradual developing defects, cracks, etc. are expected to be remedied by the Insured before they develop to such an extent that the stoppage of the machine and immediate repair which could be construed as breakdown of the machine.
c.
Loose parts or defective joints etc.
The cost of repairing such defects comes under the maintenance of the plant.
Tube joints in multitubular/watertube boilers deteriorate gradually, as do seams in tubes and plates, and this exclusion is designed to exclude such gradual deterioration.
It is our intention to continue to provide cover for the making good of nipple joints on sectional boilers, although unlike many companies, the following clause which normally appears in brackets after defective joints has been omitted (‘other than joints between the sections of the sectional heating or hot water supply boilers’).
Whilst the exclusion relates to the cost of remedying or making good such defects, it should be noted that the policy does not exclude an insured event (i.e. explosion, breakdown and sudden and unforeseen damage etc.) which is a result of these defects.
4.
MAINTENANCE — Part (a) reinforces what has been said under the general heading wear and tear.
Part (b) previously appeared as General Exception 3 on the old General Engineering Policy.
The cover now being granted is far wider in that the exclusion relates only to damage caused by application of any tool or process to the part in the course of maintenance.
Previously damage liability caused by or arising out of maintenance, process or modification or direct application or a tool was excluded.
This latter exclusion was construed to mean that if someone didn't tighten up a bolt properly during maintenance or left a spanner in the works, which resulted in damage to the plant, then no cover would have been applicable.
Under the revised wording this situation no longer arises.
5.
TESTS — In certain circumstances tests are considered desirable every few years e.g. Hydraulic Tests, Proof Load Testing and the like.
If this exception was not on the policy the Insured could attempt to hold the company liable if any damage to the plant or own surrounding property was caused by the test.
It is reasonable that the Insured should bear the loss when an item is discovered in this way to be defective for use in ordinary working conditions.
6.
SPOILAGE — Materials or substances being treated, handled or processed by the plant will often be damaged whenever the plant itself is damaged.
Such materials are however not part of the plant as defined in the policy exception makes clear that damage to such materials is not covered.
The plant should be designed to resist damage from materials it handles therefore damage to plant caused by such materials is excluded.
7.
DUAL LIFTS — There is an increased risk of damage whenever more than one crane is used to lift a single item.
The company want to be satisfied about the conditions under which the lift is being undertaken and may wish to charge additional premium to delete this exclusion.
We would expect the lift to comply with British Standard Code of Practice 3010 at the very least.
8.
TRANSIT — The policy is designed to cater for mobile/moveable plant and as such the situation shown on the plant schedule is amended to Anywhere in the United Kingdom.
Transit by sea or air must however be excluded as these are deemed to be risks insurable by Marine Dept.
9.
HIRING — We are only prepared to provide cover for plant hired out provided that it is under the terms of a Hiring Agreement which is no more onerous than C.P.A. Conditions.
If Hiring Agreements other than standard are utilised by the Insured, then the onus is on the Insured to notify the company of such hires when consideration may be given to amending this exception on payment of an additional premium.
10.
PENALTIES — The main purpose of the policy is to provide Material Damage to the plant.
It is not the intention to provide cover for products/performance guarantees/consequential loss as such risks can be insured under separate policies.
On occasions consequential loss or liability cover can be provided and therefore we qualify exclusion by saying ‘not specifically provided for by this Policy’.
11.
WAR — Standard exclusion.
12.
RADIOACTIVITY — Standard exclusion.
13.
SONIC BANG — Standard exclusion.
14.
EXCLUDED PARTS AND COMPONENTS — Previously plant definitions were used for the three main classes i.e. boiler, crane and electrical.
The definitions described in some detail the parts which were covered and those which were not.
It is no longer the intention to differentiate between the various classes of plant and the existing definitions have been incorporated into this general exception.
The policy has to cater for a wide variety of machines, some fixed and some mobile.
The exception is important as it avoids having to repeat descriptions on the plant schedule and makes clear what we are covering and what is not covered.
The approach adopted has been to say that all integral items of the plant described in the schedule are covered and then list those parts excluded in general exception which fall into three categories i.e.
a.
Those parts which require renewal in the normal course of working, but damage to the parts is covered if they require renewal as a result of damage to other parts of the plant for which the company has admitted liability.
Examples of these are:
‘EXCHANGEABLE OR DETACHABLE TOOLS’.
This means drill bits and cutting tools for milling machines, lathes, pneumatic drills/breakers and the like.
‘PARTS AND APPLIANCES REQUIRING RENEWAL IN NORMAL COURSE OF WORKING’.
This refers to wearable parts, wear pads, seals, bearings, brush gear, and the like.
‘CUTTING EDGES’.
Blades on shears, guillotines, knife blades on meat processing machinery and the tools of certain machine tools would be excluded by this exception.
‘NON-METALLIC LININGS’.
Glass linings in retorts, rubber linings and fibrous linings would not be covered.
‘MOULDS’.
In foundries castings are prepared in moulds, sometimes they are metal but often of a sand/glue mixture.
Such moulds are excluded.
‘PATTERNS’.
Patterns are made from drawings and are three dimensional representation usually in wood of the product.
Pattern making is a highly skilled occupation and patterns can be extremely expensive to produce.
Not being part of the machine they are excluded.
‘DIES’.
Dies are tools which can be used in presses to produce a particular shape usually by stamping or bending e.g. car body panels.
They are commonly used in the plastic industry for the formation of bottles and drums.
Apart from being expensive to produce they suffer wear in the course of use and as a result are excluded.
‘TRAILING CABLES’.
Some machines particularly overhead travelling cranes require a supply of electrical power in order to drive their motors (both cross travel and long travel).
Such ‘trailing cables’ which follow behind the machine are exposed and are susceptible to damage.
Such cables are often referred to in factories as ‘down-shop’ leads’.
‘ROPES, BELTS & CHAINS’.
Such items are obviously subject to wear and require periodic replacement.
They are also susceptible to casual misuse and damage through bad housekeeping.
b.
Supporting or enclosing structures i.e. lift shafts and foundations masonry and brickwork upon which the plant rests and which need not be replaced if new plant is installed.
c.
Electrical and/or mechanical ancillary equipment serving boiler and pressure plant is excluded, unless specifically described in the plant schedule i.e. oil burner unit would not be covered unless the description was ‘heating boiler and associated oil burner unit’.
15.
NORTHERN IRELAND EXCLUSION — This is standard wording.
GENERAL CONDITIONS (OCT 1989)
There are three categories of Policy Conditions: — 
1.
Conditions Precedent to the Policy — These are Conditions which apply to the conduct of the Insured before the inception of the policy, namely the duty of ‘utmost good faith’.
2.
Conditions Subsequent to the Policy — These are Conditions which relate to the conduct of the Insured after the policy has come into force.
3.
Conditions Precedent to Liability — Failure to comply with such Conditions means that we can refuse to deal with the claim, but the breach of the Conditions will not affect future claims.
The General Conditions are basically standard but the following comments are worthy of note:— Condition 2 — Claims Procedure On the happening of any event immediate notification to the company is desirable, as an immediate examination by an Engineer Surveyor/Loss Adjuster can assist in learning full details of any accident including the cause.
Delays in notification can mean that the cause of the accident is never found, and disputes can arise as to whether or not the claim was in respect of an incident covered under the policy.
It should be noted that we do not require immediate notification of any claim but in fact of any event which could give rise to a claim under the policy.
Condition 6 — Precautions
Sometimes the Insured will allow plant to run when its condition indicates that it should be stopped for overhaul, relying on the fact that the company will pay for repairs if there is an accident.
This Condition requires that the Insured acts with the same degree of care as though he was not insured.
The last part of this Condition allows the company to suspend cover.
From time to time the Engineer Surveyor may make recommendations in his report regarding the condition of the plant.
If suggested improvements are not carried out we have the right to suspend cover on the plant concerned until the Engineer Surveyor is satisfied with its condition.
SPECIFIC CLAIMS HANDLING (OCT 1989)
The following provides an outline of handling in relation to specific claims intimated under various covers:
AD FIRE AND THEFT — COVER CODES AF OR CF LESS VALUABLE OR INEXPENSIVE PLANT (DRILLS, SAWS, GRINDERS, ETC.)
Ownership must be established and related to cover i.e. own plant own use, own plant hired out, or plant hired in.
The current replacement cost of the plant should be established by reference to local supplier or Industrial Exchange and Mart (HO have copies of various trade publications if difficulties encountered.)
Enquiries should be made as to the availability of discounts, which can be as high as 40% in respect of certain types of plant.
Shown below is a simple and acceptable formula for calculating the written down value of smaller plant.
As a general rule the life expectancy of such plant should not exceed FIVE YEARS.
CLAIMS FOR FIRE, VANDALISM, ACCIDENTAL DAMAGE, WINDSCREEN BREAKAGE AND THE LIKE
Where a partial loss occurs the repair account should be requested and considered.
Windscreen claims are no different to those on motor policies and are subject to any excess applicable to the policy.
When a total loss arises the following formula can be used to establish the written down value.
Formula
The most simple value to ascertain is usually the current replacement cost and taking this figure as a start point, the following should be used in order to determine liability:
EXPENSIVE CONTRACTORS PLANT (EXCAVATORS, MOBILE CRANES, LARGE Generators and Compressors) Cover Codes AF or CF
1.
Claims For Theft Action is same as for less expensive plant i.e. establish ownership, use, etc. but consider instructing a Loss Adjuster.
To establish market values of this heavier type of plant it is necessary to contact dealers and check periodicals such as‘CRANE TODAY’(held in HO Claims).
2.
Claims for Fire, Vandalism, Accident Damage (Partial Losses) Plant Safety must be instructed and an Engineer's Report obtained where the damage is known to be of a mechanical or electrical nature, or affects such parts of the machine as may be subject to load testing or Statutory Certification.
The Staff Motor Engineer can be instructed where the nature of the damage is within his current field of operation e.g. where the Plant could have been equally well insured under Special Type Motor Policies.
IMPORTANT NOTE — RECOVERY
It is ESSENTIAL in each claim involving the hiring of plant to establish:
a.
the extent to which the Insured is liable under the Terms of Hire.
b.
Whether the Insured has a right of recovery against the Hirer (plant hired out).
Under certain circumstances, plant hired out under the model conditions of the C.P.A. (Contractors Plant Association) will provide the owners with a right of recovery in the event of loss or damage.
A specimen copy of the C.P.A. Conditions is held in the Branch Claims Library.
Please also note General Exception 9 if Plant hired out under any other form of Conditions.
BREAKDOWN EXPLOSION OR COLLAPSE COVER CODES A OR B
1.
Electrical Plant Claims involving induction furnace failure, breakdown of transformers, large motors, generators, lifts, switchboards and large control panels must be the subject of Plant Safety Engineer's Report.
2.
Mechanical Plant Large Engines, turbines, hydraulic pumps, compressors, presses, shearing machines, extrusion presses, milling machines, lathes, conveyors, powerscreens and refrigeration plant must all be the subject of investigation by a Plant Safety Engineer.
Usually maintenance work is carried out during the course of repairs following a breakdown.
Such maintenance work has nothing to do with breakdown as defined (see Policy Commentary) and the cost of supplying and fitting such parts should be excluded.
Please refer to the Policy commentary for details of what items should not constitute part of the breakdown account.
In cases of difficulty in deciding, reference should be made to the appropriate expert or Head Office.
3.
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Failure — Explosion and Collapse Claims under this heading will involve Boilers, Calorifiers, Low and High Pressure Steam Receivers, Sterilising Equipment etc.
Claims involving serious breakdowns or accidental damage to plant must be the subject of an investigation by the Plant Safety Engineer or Independent Consulting Engineer from whom a report must be sought.
IN ALL CLAIMS ALLEGED TO ARISE FROM EXPLOSION OR COLLAPSE, REGARDLESS OF THE TYPE OF PLANT INVOLVED, PLANT SAFETY OR HO BRANCH CLAIMS MUST BE TELEPHONED IMMEDIATELY FOR INSTRUCTIONS.
LEGAL LIABILITY — HIRED IN PLANT — COVER CODE D
IMPORTANT NOTE
Please ensure that, when handling this type of claim, reference is made to standard CPA Conditions of Hire and, in particular, Conditions 8 and 13.
A copy of the Conditions is held in the Branch Claims Library.
CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL MANUAL TRAVEL CLAIMS
In the table of contents which follows, the screen number is shown against each heading.
To find a particular screen number use the FIND command followed by the screen number but with dashes on either side of the number — for example‘find -55-’ will find screen number 55.
INTRODUCTION (JANUARY 1991)
The Travel Claims Handling instructions are based on the standard ‘IT’ Travel Policy but apply equally to the ‘OT’Policy and the Motor Breakdown + Travel policy (CTT).
Special Scheme Travel Policies may have slight variations in cover and should be handled accordingly.
The following Policy Sections are covered within the instructions: — 
Baggage
Personal Money
Personal Accident
Cancellation and Curtailment Charges
Medical and Emergency Expenses
Hospital Benefit
Personal Liability
Delayed Departure
Failure of Public Transport
Legal Expenses and Advice
Loss of Passport
When a claim form is received it is essential to check: — 
1.
The Claimant is insured under the policy.
2.
The date of occurrence is within the period of insurance.
3.
If winter sports is involved that the appropriate premium has been paid.
4.
The country where the loss occurred is within the territorial limits covered under the policy.
5.
General SCI Instructions 33 and 35.
BAGGAGE (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
Any claims involving correspondence abroad with EEC countries will be dealt with at the branches.
All other claims abroad involving correspondence must be referred to H.O.
Claims.
There is now an optional baggage section which does NOT apply to to OT or CTT policies.
COVER
Any loss/damage is covered unless a specific exclusion applies and provided we are satisfied the loss is genuine and the Claimant has exercised reasonable care.
Baggage Condition 2 also requires that the transport company, authority or hotel should have been notified in writing.
The Claimant should also have advised the Corporation of the loss/damage/ illness/injury etc., as soon as reasonably possible.
INVESTIGATING THE LOSS
The cost of checking that a loss has been reported to the Police, Hotel or Courier and the time taken to do so must affect the decision to carry out an investigation.
There is the possibility of no reply from overseas.
A report received from a tour operator's courier, completed in red biro warrants further investigation, as a leading Loss Adjuster has found that these reports are completed in red biro if the courier is not totally satisfied with the loss.
DOCUMENTATION
The original receipts etc. should be obtained if possible.
These provide evidence to substantiate the loss and prevent possible fraudulent claims.
If an original receipt is obtained and the Claimant requests it's return, then the receipt should be stamped with an official stamp and a claim number.
It is not unknown for claims to be submitted for the same items more than once.
Care must be taken when valuations are submitted to support a piece of jewellery.
This would suggest that there is an existing Home or All Risks insurance in force.
If the date on the valuation is after the date of the loss, then this is merely an estimate for replacement and does not prove the item was in existence.
In view of the new wording of Condition 2 the claimant must produce, if loss or damage is sustained while in the care of an airline, a Property Irregularity Report, a copy of the formal written notice to the airline which should have been written within three days of loss or damage and all travel tickets and tags.
REASONABLE CARE
Where it is considered that the Insured may have been in breach of the duty of reasonable care prompt investigations should be made.
A statement must be obtained from the Insured to establish the facts and to avoid subsequent dispute as to the circumstances.
The statement should cover all relevant aspects including: — 
1.
the value of the property at risk;
2.
the reason why the property was left there;
3.
the precautions taken to safeguard the property;
4.
the alternatives open to the insured.
The answers to these questions will help to determine what decision should be reached.
However, following the case of Sofi v Prudential and the 1989 I O B Report it was necessary for us to revise our interpretation in this respect.
The test now is whether the degree of carelessness amounted to gross or blatant negligence, recognising the practicalities of everyday life and that risks have to be undertaken.
Not only would momentary  inadvertence not constitute a breach of the duty of care but in addition the test should not be applied with hindsight.
Thus, if the Insured can demonstrate that thought was given to the safety of the property the duty will usually have been fulfilled even if subsequent events show that the precautions taken were inadequate.
Where no thought was given to the safety of the property and no real precautions were taken to prevent loss the Insured would be considered to be in breach of the duty of care.
For example, if the Insured goes swimming and leaves valuables in the care of a companion who subsequently falls asleep and the property is stolen, the duty of care will be fulfilled.
The Insured considered the safety of the property and took precautions even though they transpired to be inadequate.
However, if all members of a group went swimming at the same time and left valuables unattended, that would be an unnecessary risk where no real precautions had been taken and would be a breach of the duty of care.
The foregoing is a general guide and each claim must be considered on its merits.
See SCI 43 (General) regarding the procedure on indemnity issues.
UNATTENDED PROPERTY — SPECIFIC EXCLUSIONS
In view of the interpretation now applicable to the General Condition of Reasonable Care, two specific exclusions have been added to the policy in respect of unattended property as follows: — 
Loss of money and jewellery from a suitcase while in transit by air and therefore outside the Insured's control is excluded.
These items should be in the hand baggage during the journey.
Loss of valuables or money from an unattended vehicle is excluded unless it is from a locked boot.
In the case of estate cars and hatchbacks, property in the luggage space at the rear under a top cover and out of view, is deemed to be in a locked boot.
Valuables or money left in other parts of an unattended vehicle or in an open top vehicle such as a jeep are not, therefore, insured under the policy.
NOTE under the OT policy the exclusion wording on MONEY has not been relaxed and still refers to ‘loss of money from an unattended vehicle unless secured in its locked boot’.
See SCI 43 (General) regarding the procedure on indemnity issues.
VALUATION OF BAGGAGE/PERSONAL EFFECTS
The description of the property together with the age and purchase price should be considered for accuracy.
In the event of damaged articles, any salvage value should be deducted from the settlement.
As far as possible the Corporation should not attempt to take over any salvage from the Claimant.
Wear and tear and depreciation should also be deducted — very few items maintain their value — some such as jewellery increase in value.
Our policy is one of indemnity i.e. it provides for the Claimant to be in the same position after the loss as immediately before it.
REPAIR
An estimate for repairs should be provided by the Claimant.
Whilst it may be uneconomic to repair some goods, a Claimant should not expect the replacement of a damaged item, if an acceptable repair can be carried out.
Careful attention should be paid to claims for items such as suitcases which are damaged in transit.
Whilst these claims may only be small in amount, they are high in volume.
These claims should not merely be paid because the amount involved is small.
An estimate for repair should be obtained or the repairer should be contacted to confirm a repair is not possible.
In many instances the Claimant will not have the repair carried out, put a patch over the damaged area and continue using the case, which he would probably have done, even if the claim had been paid.
CUSTOMS DUTY
In the past where an item had been lost or stolen which was originally purchased abroad and the Claimant admitted that no customs duty had been paid our liability was the value of the goods less the amount of any duty payable.
If the Claimant did not wish us to approach HM Customs then we would refuse to deal with the claim.
In view of the recent decisions by the Ombudsman this policy will have to be changed.
He contends that in the absence of sufficient fact to establish, on the balance of probability, that the Policyholder could be subjected to a criminal prosecution in respect of the goods, then indemnity should be granted.
No reduction in the amount payable to represent unpaid duty or VAT can be made.
Enquiries into the loss will still have to be made but care must be taken not to ask questions where the answers might incriminate the policyholder.
AVERAGE
The IT and CTT policies are policies of indemnity and are settled up to the limits of each policy section less applicable excesses.
However average does apply to the OT policy.
Under the OT policy, if the value of property at risk exceeds the sum insured, then the Claimant will be held responsible for the difference and the amount payable will be reduced accordingly.
e.g. if an item valued at $100 was stolen and the total value of the Claimant's property was $3000 against the sum insured of $1500, then the Claimant would only receive $50: — 
SUM INSURED
AMOUNT OF SETTLEMENT
This should represent a fair indemnity to the Claimant i.e. either the value of the property at the time of the loss, taking into account depreciation/wear and tear and the original purchase price or the cost of repairing to the immediate pre-accident condition.
Once a fair settlement figure has been ascertained a letter of settlement should be sent to the Claimant explaining the computation, indicating our intention to draw and send the payment cheque immediately.
RECOVERIES
There are various ways in which a recovery can be obtained: — 
Airlines
In the event of loss or damage to checked baggage, a Property Irregularity Report must be obtained from the airline in question, within seven days to comply with the Carriage By Air Act (Warsaw Convention).
The airlines usual liability, although limited, will apply and we will be able to obtain a recovery.
It is advisable for the Claimant to obtain the report before leaving the airport, as airlines can dispute when the damage occurred i.e. in the airplane or after the Claimant had retrieved his baggage.
The Claimant must also have notified the airline in question of a potential claim in writing within 3 days and keep a copy of this letter.
Airlines can be difficult on claims for recovery in respect of such items as bottles of spirits, scent and other fragile and brittle articles packed in suitcases, including expensive cameras.
However, a letter should be sent to the airline.
Recoveries should be pursued against Airlines regardless of the amount.
A letter should be written to the Airline with: — 
1.
Copy claim form.
2.
Copy vouchers to substantiate amounts.
3.
Copy Property Irregularity Report.
4.
Letter to Airline from Claimant.
5.
Tickets and Baggage Tags.
If no offer is received from the Airline, then the amount involved must be taken into account when deciding on whether or not to pursue the recovery further.
Experience has however shown that the sooner these letters are written providing the above information the better are the prospects of success.
Home/All Risks Insurers
As the baggage section is now optional on the IT policy Branches should check this before any claim is paid as the claim may need to be directed to a Home Insurer.
On the other hand, if the baggage section is taken these instruction apply.
Home Insurance policies normally cover property temporarily away from the home including countries outside the UK.
Expensive items of jewellery may be insured under an All Risks policy.
An item insured separately under a Home or All Risks section is more specifically insured.
IT, OT and CTT policies do not include a ‘more specifically insured’ exclusion so even if an expensive ring for example, which may be lost or stolen, is separately insured under a Home or All Risks policy we can still only deal with this on an independent liability basis.
There is standard form, TRC15, for pursuing recoveries from Home/All Risks Insurers.
Reference should be made to the A.O.A. Agreement relating to AR/Home/Travel policies.
If a claim for $50 or less is received under a Travel policy, then subject to policy cover being in order, the claim should be settled without seeking contribution from the Home/AR Insurer.
If the claim exceeds $50 then a contribution should be obtained from the AR/Home Insurer on an independent liability basis (and vice versa).
E.g. Most Travel policies issued by Lloyds Underwriters include a ‘non-contribution’ clause.
If so, the claim would have to be dealt with under our own policy, with Lloyds Underwriters only being involved where the amount of the claim exceeds the sum insured, whereby they would have to deal with the balance of the claim over the policy limits.
‘Independent Liability’— This is the maximum payable under a policy in the event of there being more than one policy in force covering the subject matter of the claim but where neither policy is more specific, i.e. the amount which would have been payable if only one policy had been in force.
Dual-Insurance
Where there is more than one policy in force covering the same Insured the loss shall be shared on the basis of independent liability e.g. a claim for the theft of a watch from a holiday villa following forcible and violent entry would be covered under a Travel policy and a Home policy.
Any loss would be shared on an independent liability basis (subject to cover being in order).
EXCESS
If loss of Baggage and Money involved in one incident, only one excess should be deducted per person.
In respect of baggage claims there are occasions where a family is involved, when the deduction of a number of excesses could virtually eliminate the claim.
For instance if the policyholder is a married man with two young children and the value of the claim is $100 for the family, then to deduct four excesses would mean that the corporation would not make any payment for an incident where the Policyholder thought he had taken out cover.
Under these circumstances we would take a sympathetic attitude and only deduct one excess for the family.
On the other hand where a family has a number of teenage children who could be expected to be in charge of their own belongings then we should consider applying the policy wording and deducting an excess for each person.
Each case must be looked at and dealt with on its own merits considering the circumstances and amounts involved.
This interpretation applies to baggage claims only.
For claims in respect of other sections of the policy an excess per person should be deducted, if applicable.
Our approach to the application of the Excess and the Sum Insured has changed in discussion with the Insurance Ombudsman.
It has been agreed that we will deduct the excess from the loss and then pay up to the policy limit where applicable.
To illustrate we will consider the theft of a camera only where the baggage policy limit for valuables is $500.
PERSONAL MONEY (JANUARY 1991)
DEFINITION
The definition of money includes cash, travellers cheques, letters of credit, travel tickets, passports and green cards.
TRAVELLERS CHEQUES
In the case of travellers cheques, these should be cancelled through the issuing Bank and the Claimant will receive a refund from the issuing Bank.
If a claim is received for a loss of travellers cheques then the Claimant should be advised to claim from the issuing Bank.
PROOF OF LOSS
Any loss of cash must be substantiated i.e. proof of the existence of the cash, e.g. cheque stub, bank book, print-out, statement etc.
POLICE
All losses of cash must be reported to the Police within 24 hours.
It is however appreciated that it can be difficult to obtain a Police report in some foreign countries.
If it is considered necessary to write to the police abroad then for EEC claims this will be done by the branches or handling agents and for the rest the file must be sent to H O Claims.
LOSS OF CASH ONLY
Care should be taken for claims relating solely to loss of cash.
Normally a claim for the loss of a wallet or a purse would also be received.
It is very rare for money to be lost on its own!
EXCHANGE RATE
In the event of a loss of foreign currency payment should be made based on the exchange rate applicable at the date of the loss.
EXCESS
If loss of money and baggage involved in one incident, only one excess should be deducted per person.
See 2.13 — Excess
PERSONAL ACCIDENT (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
Experience has shown that this section of the policy is quite straightforward.
However there are certain aspects to consider carefully.
DOCUMENTATION
False documentation is a problem.
It is possible to obtain false ‘death’ certificates and other documents issued on genuine Government forms especially in some Third World Countries.
ALCOHOL/DRUGS/SUICIDE
Claims involving alcoholism, drugs and suicide must be investigated thoroughly.
POLICY EXCEPTIONS
The exceptions relating to this section are very important and refer to a number of activities usually carried out whilst on holiday.
E.g. para-gliding would be excluded due to the ‘other aerial activities’ exception.
Riding a motorbike of over 100cc would be excluded.
An injury sustained whilst playing football would be covered provided the claimant was not a member of a team on a football tour.
These exceptions also apply to Sections D and E of the Policy.
PERMANENT TOTAL DISABLEMENT
In the event of a claim in respect of item 3 — Permanent Total Disablement, benefit will be payable from the date of the Claimant's disablement, even though the Claimant is still on holiday at that time.
CANCELLATION AND CURTAILMENT CHARGES (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
Any claims involving correspondence with EEC countries will be dealt with at the Branches.
All other claims abroad involving correspondence must be referred to H O Claims.
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS The inception date of the policy is very important in relation to this section of the policy.
A policy taken out shortly before a holiday commences immediately followed by a claim under this Section requires careful investigation.
In the event of illness or injury to the Claimant it may be necessary to obtain permission to approach the Claimant's Doctor to confirm when the Claimant first consulted him.
No payment will be made if the Claimant, at the time of effecting the insurance;
was receiving inpatient treatment or was on a waiting list for inpatient treatment
had received a terminal prognosis
was intending to travel against the advice of a medical practitioner or intending to obtain medical treatment during the period of insurance
When approaching the Claimant's Doctor, care should be taken in the method of such an approach.
When writing to the Claimant's Doctor, it is essential that no guidance is given in our correspondence, as to what is or is not covered under the policy.
We should not advise him in what circumstances the claim would be covered under the policy.
It is accepted that in a large number of cases, we are involved with a seriously ill or injured claimant, where an urgent decision is required.
In such cases the claimant's doctor could be telephoned for the information but it is likely either Europ Assistance or H.O.
Claims or our EEC Branch or handling agent will be involved and they would be handling the claim.
UNAVOIDABLE CANCELLATION
This section of the policy clearly sets out the circumstances under which a valid claim exists, e.g. Unemployment, Jury Service, etc., before the commencement of the holiday.
The policy refers to unavoidable cancellation and does not apply to the likes of a broken engagement or where a Claimant has changed jobs and is unable to get the same holiday dates.
LOSS OF ENJOYMENT
We are frequently asked to consider claims for ‘loss of enjoyment’ of the holiday which is curtailed.
THERE IS NO COVER FOR THIS UNDER THE POLICY.
This is a policy of indemnity and we do not pay damages for such items.
CANCELLATION CHARGES
The ABTA scale of charges for cancellation should be noted.
The Tour Operator's cancellation invoice (original copy) should be obtained.
Pay attention to the Travel Agent who returns a proportion of the cancellation payment to the Tour Operator but retains his full commission.
The proportion of commission should be passed back to the Claimant.
CURTAILMENT
Curtailment is now defined in the policy as returning home prior to the scheduled return date.
In this case a proportionate refund will be made of prepaid travel and  accommodation charges based on each day of the holiday lost.
These claims should therefore be settled on a pro rata basis of the number of days lost based on the cost of transport and accommodation.
Under this section Europ Assistance are most likely to be involved.
The return trip to the U.K. will probably have been organised by them and major tour operators will often assist each other by swapping vacant seats on aircraft.
PREGNANCY
The question of when a pregnancy commences often arises.
No payment should be made where the expected date of birth is before, or within 8 weeks of, the expiry of the period of insurance.
Investigation may be required with the Claimant's Doctor but discretion must be used in view of the delicacy of the situation.
EXCESS
An excess is deductible for this section per person unless the claim is made for the initial holiday deposit only, in which case no excess applies.
The excess will be deducted from the loss and then payment made up to the policy limit.
MEDICAL AND EMERGENCY EXPENSES (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
Any claims involving correspondence with EEC countries will be dealt with at the branches.
All other claims abroad involving correspondence must be referred to H.O.Claims.
DOCUMENTATION
Fraudulent documentation is again a problem under this section of the policy.
Fraudulent bills and hospital accounts can be obtained in India, Africa, etc.
If these accounts are on ‘official’ paper, with a watermark, then these accounts etc. should be carefully examined.
It is unusual for a genuine clinic or hospital to use such paper.
In the event of a suspicious account, a photocopy may need to be sent to the ‘hospital’ or ‘clinic’for verification and the Claimant should be instructed to contact the ‘clinic’to verify the account and confirm to us immediately.
These requests are often returned by the Post Office as ‘unknown’.
There is a firm of loss adjusters available for enquiries in India and Pakistan and reference should be made to HO Claims if they are required.
MEDICAL ACCOUNTS
Large medical expenses accounts should have been checked by Europ Assistance but these should still be examined as it is not unknown for such accounts to include TVs and even bar charges.
These items would not qualify as medical or emergency expenses.
Substantial medical and hospital accounts from USA and Canada may normally need to be audited.
There are specialist companies in these countries who carry out this work and H.O.
should be consulted if this service is required.
EMERGENCY DENTAL TREATMENT
This section of the policy covers the cost of emergency dental treatment and care must be taken to ensure that any claims received only relate to emergency treatment and not cosmetic ‘treatment’, e.g. crowns, capping, etc.
Claims for broken or damaged dentures would be covered under this section of the policy and also the Baggage and Personal Effects section of the policy.
In the event of a claim for damaged dentures plus a resultant mouth injury, the whole claim should be dealt with under the Medical and Emergency Expenses section of the policy, when only one excess would be deducted.
A claim for the loss of a set of dentures would be covered under the Baggage and Personal Effects section of the policy.
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
This section of the policy excludes any expenses incurred when travel is undertaken against the advice of a qualified Medical Practitioner or if there is an intention of obtaining medical treatment during the period of insurance.
There are now two further exclusions which apply — if the insured at the time of effecting insurance is receiving inpatient treatment or is on a waiting list for inpatient treatment and if he has received a terminal prognosis then no payments will be made.
If the type of illness/injury suggests that any of the above exclusions may apply, then the Claimant's Doctor must be contacted (with the Claimant's permission).
If the Claimant was advised not to travel then we are entitled to repudiate the claim.
Care must be taken in cases where a tragic situation is concerned e.g. Claimant suffering from a serious or terminal illness as the exclusion will apply only if the claim arises as a consequence of the illness.
Europ Assistance may be required to guarantee hospital accounts for claims involving serious pre-existing illnesses and an early decision may be required.
It is accepted that in a large number of cases, we are involved with a seriously ill or injured claimant, where an urgent decision is required.
In such cases the claimant's doctor could be telephoned for the information but it is likely Europ Assistance or H.O.
Claims or EEC branches or handling agents will be involved and they would be handling the claim.
ADDITIONAL COSTS OF RELATIVE OR FRIEND
This section of the policy also covers the reasonable additional cost of continued occupation of accommodation and additional expenses in returning to the U.K. This also covers the cost of any one relative or friend required on medical advice to remain with or accompany the Insured.
A situation may arise where a family is involved and the father is unable to return to the U.K. If he requires someone to remain with him it would be unfair to say the children would have to go home alone.
Such cases would have to be considered on their merits.
If a relative has to travel abroad to accompany a sick or injured Insured Person home and the additional expenses claim includes the Travel Insurance premium of that relative, this may be accepted as part of the Travel and Accommodation Expenses.
RETURN AIR TICKET
In the case of a Claimant travelling alone and able to return to the U.K. on his own, if the return portion of his air ticket can be used to return to the U.K., then no claim can be paid as no additional expenses have been incurred.
If the Claimant was unable to use his return ticket then the cost of returning to the U.K. would be covered.
If any surcharge or additional expense was incurred, then the amount of the surcharge/expense would be covered under this section of the policy.
DEATH OF CLAIMANT
Where one of the insured persons has died abroad, the policy provides cover for funeral expenses or the cost of transporting the remains to the U.K. In such instances the wishes of the deceased's family are of paramount importance and they must be consulted very closely.
EEC COUNTRIES
Where medical treatment has been received in an EEC Country, the Claimant may be faced with a large hospital bill.
If a form E111 had been obtained from Department of Health and Social Security, prior to departure, then the claimant should not have to pay the bill or would only have to pay a proportion of the bill at the hospital/clinic, where the treatment was received.
This would be dealt with under an EEC Agreement.
If the E111 form was not obtained prior to departure, the medical costs are insured by the policy but it is possible to obtain recovery from the Department of Health and Social Security.
Initial contact should be made with the local office of the Department of Health and Social Security.
EXCHANGE RATES
The question of exchange rates arises under this section of the policy in relation to medical and emergency expenses paid abroad.
The amount payable under the policy would be equivalent to the exchange rate applicable at the date on which the Claimant paid the medical/emergency expenses.
EXCESS
An excess per person applies.
HOSPITAL BENEFIT (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
This section is quite straightforward.
If the Claimant is an inpatient in a  hospital ABROAD due to accidental bodily injury or illness sustained during the period of insurance and the hospital is licenced for surgery then benefit will be paid for each complete day of hospitalisation up to the limit of the policy.
EXCESS
No excess applies to this section of the policy.
PERSONAL LIABILITY (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
Most claims under this section of the policy will be quite small and relate for example to the breakage of a wash hand basin in a hotel.
We must be satisfied that the insured person is legally liable and not just morally liable, i.e. he may feel he is responsible for some damage but unless he has been negligent then no liability exists.
If the insured person has accidentally damaged this then subject to us being satisfied that legal, not moral liability exists, the claim can be paid after deduction of the policy excess.
INJURY CLAIMS
In the event of an injury claim e.g. a ski-ing accident or other serious claim, thorough investigation is necessary.
Either H.O.Claims, our EEC branches or handling agents, or the appropriate Liability Claims Department should be involved.
EXCESS
An excess applies — see policy wording.
DELAYED DEPARTURE (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
The cover under this section of the policy applies to delay in the departure from or return to UK of ship or aircraft on which the insured is booked to travel.
There is an exception however to this for delay due to strike or industrial action existing or notified by declaration of intent at the time of effecting the policy.
CANCELLATION/CURTAILMENT
This section also covers cancellation of a holiday where after a 24 hour delay in departure the insured decides to cancel.
An excess will apply to a claim of this nature.
There is no cover under this section of the policy if a claim is also made under item 1 of the section which makes payments for delays for every 12 hour period up to the maximum in the policy.
EXCESS
An excess applies if the claim is dealt with under item 2.
It will be deducted from the loss and payment then made up to the policy limit.
FAILURE OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
This section covers additional accommodation and travel expenses incurred in reaching the overseas destination or returning home as a result of the failure of public transport services in getting the insured to his departure port or airport by the time stated in the itinerary.
EXCESS
No excess applies to this section.
LEGAL EXPENSES AND ADVICE (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
This section covers legal costs and expenses incurred by the insured in pursuance of compensation or damages against a third party arising from death or personal injury or damage to the home which occurred during the period of insurance (or in the case of the home within seven days thereafter).
Europ Assistance will deal with any claim received from the insured and they will liaise with HO Secretarial.
However any legal costs or expenses incurred prior to the authorisation and approval of the claim by Europ Assistance are excluded.
EXCESS
No excess applies to this section.
LOSS OF PASSPORT (JANUARY 1991)
GENERAL
This section covers reasonable additional travel and accommodation expenses necessarily incurred in obtaining a  replacement passport are payable in the event of loss or theft of a passport whilst abroad.
The cost of the passport is covered under section B — Money.
EXCESS
No excess applies to this section.
CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL MANUAL PERSONAL ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS
In the table of contents which follows, the screen number is shown against each heading.
To find a particular screen number use the FIND command followed by the screen number but with dashes on either side of the number — for example‘find -55-’ will find screen number 55.
INTRODUCTION (OCTOBER 1990)
The Personal Accident & Sickness Claims Handling Instructions are based on the current Personal Accident & Sickness Insurance Policy.
There are also instructions included for Creditor Schemes (accident, sickness and unemployment schemes).
It should be remembered that the policy document is the definitive statement of cover and should be used as the prime reference document.
This is particularly relevant for Creditor Schemes cover where the policy has been tailored to meet the specific requirements of Clients e.g. Banks, Building Societies etc.
On intimation claim forms and front sheets must be prepared accurately and checked giving particular attention to: — 
claim validity
any change in occupation
policy endorsements
policy excesses or other restrictions on cover
Rules for referral to Head Office are as per SCI43 General.
Full use of a diary system is essential to keep a close watch on the progress of each claim.
If it is felt that incapacity should be at an end an unannounced visit to the claimant may be necessary.
In addition, where prolonged incapacity is anticipated it may be advisable to arrange an examination by a suitably qualified specialist of our choice.
The costs of such an examination would be met by the Corporation.
PERSONAL ACCIDENT (OCTOBER 1990)
COVER
This section provides cover for Capital Benefits and also a weekly benefit relating to total disablement from the Policyholders usual profession or occupation.
The benefits described in the Policy Schedule will be paid if the Policyholder suffers bodily injury caused by accidental means resulting directly, solely and independently of other causes in: — 
1.
Death.
2.
Total and irrecoverable loss of sight in one or both eyes.
3.
Loss of one or more limbs.
4.
Permanent and total disablement (other than by loss of limbs or sight) which, after 104 weeks from the date of injury, prevents the Policyholder from following, engaging in or giving attention to ANY KIND of profession or occupation.
5.
Total disablement from engaging in or giving attention to profession or occupation as specified on the policy schedule.
‘Bodily Injury’ does not include sickness, disease or naturally occurring condition or degenerative process but does include death or disablement as a direct result of exposure to the elements.
It will be presumed that death has occurred if the Policyholder has been missing for 90 consecutive days and sufficient evidence is provided to support the conclusion that death was caused by accident.
If Policyholder is subsequently found to be alive then any monies paid out shall be refunded.
The benefits for items 1–3 and 5 are only payable provided the contingency commences within 12 months of the injury.
Under item 4, the Policyholder must be unable to engage in or give attention to ANY KIND of profession or occupation.
In item 5, benefit is payable if the Policyholder is unable to engage in or attend to his DISCLOSED profession or occupation.
E.g. A lorry driver may sustain an injury which will prevent him from ever driving a lorry again.
However, if he is able to continue work as a clerk, no capital sum under item 4 is payable.
Weekly Benefit would be payable under item 5 as the Policyholder is unable to continue with his disclosed employment.
If a situation occurs where the Policyholder is unable to continue with his usual profession or occupation, but is now working in a sedentary position, a claim may be made under item 5.
Such cases must be referred to H.O.
CLAIMS for advice.
It should also be noted that older policies can include partial disablement cover in which case reference will be required to the policy for details.
LIMITS OF AMOUNT PAYABLE
The amount of benefits payable are shown on the Policy Schedule.
Items 1–4 are capital benefits i.e. one off payments.
Item 5 is a weekly benefit, of which the first 14 days of any period of incapacity is excluded and benefit is payable for 104 weeks from the 15th day of incapacity.
This 2 week deferment period must be added to the compulsory 2 week deferment for hazardous activities eg winter sports, making benefit payable there from the 29th day of incapacity.
Weekly benefits are paid at four weekly intervals, in arrears, following receipt of medical certificates.
If weekly benefit is being paid under item 5 and benefit becomes payable under any of items 1–3 e.g. Policyholder has leg amputated, the capital benefit under item 3 would be paid (effective from the date of amputation) but payment of the weekly benefit would cease.
Any overpayment of weekly benefit should be deducted from the capital benefit.
Payment under items 1, 2 or 3 of the Policy would stop any weekly benefit which was being paid.
Payment of any of the capital benefits under items 1–4 terminates cover under the Policy.
Prior to making benefit payment all calculation should be checked by another member of staff.
MEDICAL EXPENSES
If the Policyholder has a valid claim under item 5 — Total Disablement from engaging in or giving attention to profession or occupation — any medical expenses necessarily incurred in connection with the disablement are covered up to 15% of the total amount of the weekly benefit paid during the period of a claim e.g. if a total of $1,000 in weekly benefit had been paid, medical expenses up to $150 would be covered.
This would include prescribed medication and examinations by suitably qualified professions e.g. doctors, physiotherapists etc.
Proof of outlay should be obtained in every instance.
HOSPITAL BENEFIT
This benefit applies to the Accident section only.
It provides a payment of $10 a day up to a maximum of 30 days.
The period in hospital as an in-patient must be for a minimum of 24 hours.
It is possible for a claim to be made under this section when no claim is being made under the Personal Accident Section — eg where the accident claim falls within the 2 week deferment period.
SICKNESS (OCTOBER 1990)
This section of the Policy covers the Policyholder if they are TOTALLY DISABLED from engaging in or giving attention to THEIR PROFESSION OR OCCUPATION, as disclosed and declared on the policy, as a result of sickness.
Care should be taken to ensure that cover is in force as sickness is not covered under all PA policies.
The sickness must have been contracted in
U.K.
Europe
U.S.A.
Canada
Republic of South Africa
Australia
New Zealand
There are certain exclusions and these are clearly shown in the Policy.
The first 14 days of any period of disablement is excluded and benefit is payable for up to 104 weeks from the 15th day of disablement.
It should also be noted that this section does not insure against any sickness which occurs within 21 days of the commencement of the policy or is the result of  alcoholism .
The weekly benefit payable will be shown in the Policy Schedule.
MEDICAL EXPENSES
As with the Accident section of the policy cover is provided for medical expenses necessarily incurred in connection with the sickness up to 15% of the total benefit paid during the period of a claim.
This would include prescribed medication and examinations by suitably qualified professions.
Proof of outlay should be obtained in every instance.
GENERAL (OCTOBER 1990)
The following comments apply equally to Personal Accident and Sickness Claims.
WEEKLY PAYMENTS TO THE UNEMPLOYED
If the policyholder is not gainfully employed weekly benefit will only be paid if the policyholder is necessarily confined to house, hospital or nursing home on the advice of a qualified medical practitioner.
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
The claim form asks Policyholders if they have suffered from a similar illness previously.
The Policyholder's Doctor is also asked if the claimant has previously suffered from this complaint.
If the answers to any of these questions suggest the claimant has suffered from the illness or injury in the past, further investigations are necessary.
The proposal form should be checked to see if the Policyholder disclosed the illness/injury or if the complaint first occurred after inception of the policy, did the Policyholder disclose this at the appropriate renewal date.
It may be necessary to liaise with the Policyholder's Doctor but permission IN WRITING FROM THE POLICYHOLDER to approach the Doctor must be obtained before doing so.
If the information obtained from the Policyholder and the Doctor suggests there may be non-disclosure, the instructions set out in SCI 43 (General) should be fully complied with.
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
In view of the numerous illnesses and injuries which can affect people, it would be very difficult to provide guidelines on all of these.
However, useful information can be found in the Anatomical Atlas and Medical Dictionary, copies of which are in your Claims Department Library.
Additional information on certain injuries can be found in Section 5 — Medical Evidence — of the Claims Handling Procedural Instructions Manual.
FATAL ACCIDENTS
In every claim involving a fatal accident, a Fatal Accident claim form must be obtained from H.O.
CLAIMS.
Certain documentation is required to substantiate such claims and SCI 4 — Personal Accident & Sickness — details what is required.
It is imperative that these claims are dealt with discreetly to avoid any distress to the deceased's relatives.
OTHER CAPITAL SUM CLAIMS
All such claims should be advised to H.O.
CLAIMS as soon as possible e.g. loss of a limb.
Where subsequent to intimation of a claim it is clear that a Capital Sum Payment will be made, H.O.
CLAIMS and the Branch Underwriting Department should be advised.
In a lot of these claims, the sum involved will exceed $10,000 and it will be necessary for H.O.
to draw the cheque.
MEDICAL EVIDENCE/INVESTIGATION
Medical Evidence
The Personal Accident & Sickness claim form includes a medical certificate which should be completed by the Policyholder's Doctor.
The claimant should then submit medical certificates for the duration of their absence from work.
These would normally be submitted at four-weekly intervals, unless the injury or illness involved would clearly involve a lengthy absence.
In such circumstances, we may accept 2 or 3 monthly medical certificates but each case would have to be considered on its merits.
There are times when additional information is required from the Policyholder's Doctor.
For this purpose an Additional Certificate of Medical Attendant (Form PAC 8 for Accidents — SAC 8 for Sickness) should be sent to the Policyholder asking for completion by their Medical Attendant.
Any fees incurred in obtaining the Certificate are payable by the Policyholder.
In some cases it may be necessary to obtain a Private Medical Attendant's Report (PA 75).
This report MUST show the branch claim number so that it can be linked to the correct file.
These forms are highly confidential between the Doctor and the Chief Medical Officer.
Only current versions of this form should be used and a prepaid envelope, clearly addressed to the CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER, PITHEAVLIS, PERTH, PH2 ONH, MUST BE ENCLOSED.
These reports are required if for example we wish further information from the Policyholder's Doctor, of a confidential nature, in relation to the injury or illness.
The form is returned to the Chief Medical Officer who will comment on the content of the report, in relation to the claim.
Investigation
As part of the general handling of a claim the following points should be borne in mind: — 
1.
Issuing PAC 8/SAC 8 (Additional Certificate of Medical Attendant)
2.
Unannounced visits to Claimants
3.
Instructing independent Specialists
The handling of a claim may well include the use of all 3 of these elements depending on the circumstances.
Factors that would influence their use would include: — 
Nature of injury or illness
Occupation including the duties performed
Level of Benefit
Potential duration of the disability
Certain conditions can be described specifically e.g. broken limb etc, which when allied with the claimant's occupation can generally provide a good indication of the potential duration of a claim.
For example, a bricklayer with a broken arm may not be able to resume normal occupation for 2 — 3 months.
However, beyond this period enquiries should be made to ascertain what, if any, complications exist.
In the first 2 months there would normally be little benefit in invoking any of the actions shown above.
However, after 3 months we should be looking for positive indications from the policyholder's medical attendant with regard to a date for returning to work i.e. issue a PAC 8.
If the date for returning to work continues to slip for no apparent reason the claimant should be advised that we will be arranging for an independent examination.
It should be remembered that whilst such an action may accelerate a return to work in some cases, the use of an independent specialist has very positive advantages in confirming (or otherwise) a previous diagnosis and identifying our potential liability under the policy.
Another factor which may influence return to work is the amount of benefit in comparison with level of earnings.
Where the benefit approaches the level of earnings there may be little incentive to return to work.
Where the nature of the disability is less specific than the example shown (e.g. backache, virus etc) the progress of the claim should be monitored very closely.
In such cases it would be reasonable to expect positive responses from the medical attendant after 8 weeks.
If the response is not satisfactory a visit can have advantages in that the claimant can see that an interest is being taken in their welfare, the handler can consider whether or not an independent examination may be desirable and also may act as a catalyst in a speedy return to work.
In view of the nature of many illnesses, some of which may be terminal, the handling requirements will vary considerably.
Each case must be considered on its own merits though it is important that action is taken at the appropriate time.
For example, where due to prolonged illness there is a likelihood of the 104 week payment period being reached, the possibility of a claim for Permanent Total Disablement should be anticipated.
The standard of proof for Permanent Total Disablement payment is high and the fact that weekly benefit has been paid for the full period should not be regarded as intent to make a Capital Benefit payment.
ESTIMATING
The estimates for death and loss of sight or limbs claims are the capital sum benefits stated in the Policy Schedule.
For claims under item 4 — Permanent & Total Disablement — if it is clear from the outset of the claim that the Policyholder will be unable to carry out any profession, the capital benefit indicated in the Policy Schedule should be estimated.
For weekly benefit claims for total disablement under item 5 of the Personal Accident section and also claims under the Sickness section, the amount of the estimate will depend on the extent of the injury or illness.
The Policyholder's Doctor may indicate how long he expects his patient to be absent from work but normally every claim will have to be looked at individually and an appropriate estimate advised to I.S. As benefits are paid at four-weekly intervals, at least four weeks benefit must be estimated.
The type of injury/illness should be considered in conjunction with the Policyholder's occupation and an assessment made of the likely disability period e.g. a builder's labourer with a broken leg will in most cases be off work longer than an office worker with the same injury.
Estimates should be reviewed when medical certificates or PAC 8/SAC 8 forms are received.
If a claim is initially received under item 5 and weekly benefits have been paid for some time and the initial medical prognosis was poor, close attention should be paid to the possibility of a capital benefits claim being made.
If so, it is essential that the estimate is increased to cover this.
If medical expenses are being claimed, the estimate should include a provision for these and also any medical fees we may incur e.g. a PMA report or Additional Certificate of Medical Attendant.
If there is any doubt over the amount to be estimated, please refer to your Supervisor/Superintendent.
CLAIMS CHEQUES
Audit of claim files has shown that there is a need for special checking before payments are authorised.
It is important to verify policy cover and to see that this is correctly defined on the front sheet.
Before any payment is made calculations should be double checked.
In addition, Branch Managers have been requested to ensure that the Underwriting Supt or Section Leader counter-signs the front sheet to confirm payment is within the policy cover.
The following rules apply to the payment of benefit under Group PA&S policies: — 
Contributory Schemes
If the premium is paid 100% by the employee it is in order for benefit to be paid direct to the employee without deduction of Income Tax.
Non-Contributory/Partial Contributory Schemes
Where the premium is paid wholly or partly by the employer benefits should be paid directly to the employer.
In no circumstances should a payment be made directly to an employee as this would involve the Corporation accounting to the Inland Revenue for Income Tax deductions.
Front sheets for these claims should be marked DO NOT PAY EMPLOYEE DIRECT.
CREDITOR SCHEMES (FEBRUARY 1990)
Creditor Schemes (or Accident, Sickness and Unemployment Schemes as they are more generally known) are designed to protect the repayments of borrowers who have entered into loan or credit arrangements with various financial institutions.
The types of loan/credit arrangement include the following: — 
Mortgages
Unsecured/Secured Personal Loans
Credit Cards
The cover provided varies according to the requirements of the financial institution but generally includes the payment of benefit in the event of the insured customer being unable to work due to accident, sickness or unemployment.
Certain schemes cover purely unemployment whereas others include disability only.
It is particularly important with ASU Schemes that reference is made to the master policy as this is the definitive statement of cover.
As each policy is unique it should not be assumed that policy conditions, exclusions etc are common to all schemes.
The purpose of this section of the Personal Accident and Sickness manual is to clarify some of the ‘grey’ areas that can, and have, proved contentious in the past and to provide guidance for the handling of such situations in the future.
However, where Branches have any doubts about a course of action reference must be made to HO Claims.
It is normal practice with ASU Schemes for premiums to be collected, and certificates of insurance to be issued, by the financial institution with whom we have arranged cover.
However, it should be remembered that whilst the master policy will refer to the financial institution as the ‘Policyholder’ it is their client who is our insured customer.
Claims are normally intimated via the Policyholder who will advise that cover is in force, the amount of benefit and also that premium has been paid.
ACCIDENT/SICKNESS
The handling of accident and sickness claims under ASU Schemes will involve the same principles as illustrated in the earlier sections of this manual.
On receipt of the claim form it should be checked for completeness and in particular that the medical declaration has been completed and signed by the Medical Practitioner.
Section 4.5 Medical Evidence/Investigation considers a number of areas and actions that may be pertinent to the handling of individual claims.
The same considerations are equally applicable to accident and sickness claims against ASU policies.
Regular certification will be required from the claimant's medical practitioner to enable benefit payments to be made.
As with the Personal Accident and Sickness policy, the claims handler may need to obtain Additional Certificates of Medical Attendant (PAC 8/SC 8); make unannounced visits or seek independent medical advice where the nature of the claim requires further investigation.
UNEMPLOYMENT
On receipt of the claim form it should be checked for completeness and in particular that the Department of Employment (DHSS in Northern Ireland) section has been completed, stamped and signed.
In addition, most claim forms now contain a section for completion by the claimant's previous Employer asking for details of employment including the type of contract e.g. temporary/fixed term/permanent, period of employment and reason for unemployment.
It is necessary with every unemployment claim for previous employers to advise such information.
The definition of Unemployment can, and does, vary from scheme to scheme though generally would fall within one of the following wordings: — 
1.
‘A period commencing after the effective date of insurance and in respect of which the Customer is registered in the United Kingdom with the Department of Employment (DHSS in Northern Ireland) as unemployed and is actively seeking Employment’.
2.
‘Unemployment means a period commencing after the effective date of insurance during which the Insured Borrower is certified as unemployed by the Department of Employment’.
3.
Unemployment means a period commencing after the effective date of insurance during which the Insured Borrower is out of work as a result of redundancy as defined in the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 or any amendment thereto, dismissal where the contract under which the Insured Borrower is employed is terminated by the employer, or the financial insolvency of the business of the Insured Borrower's employer or the business of the Insured Borrower'.
4.
Unemployment means a period commencing after the effective date of insurance and the Insured Customer is: — 
a.
in respect of employed persons, out of work as a result of redundancy as defined in the Employment Protection (Consolidated) Act 1978, as amended, dismissal where the contract under which the Insured Customer is employed is terminated by the Employer, or the declared bankruptcy or liquidation of the business of the Insured Customer's employer.
b.
in respect of self-employed persons, in receipt of National Insurance Unemployment Benefit or in the absence of the entitlement to such benefit provides satisfactory evidence of being registered at the Department of Employment (DHSS in Northern Ireland).
The variations in the definition of Unemployment allied with the exclusions that apply to individual schemes can have a significant effect on the way claims are handled.
The following section attempts to clarify some of the more common areas where misunderstanding can occur.
GENERAL
Payment in Lieu of Notice
The treatment of payment in lieu of notice during an unemployment claim varies between Branches and Schemes.
The main problem centres on when unemployment is effective.
The policy wordings for the Clydesdale Bank and Northern Bank schemes exclude payment of the benefit under the policy during a payment in lieu period.
However at this time these are the only schemes that contain such a specific wording.
For all other schemes the following guidelines should apply.
Unemployment as defined by the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
If the definition of unemployment refers to the Act, unemployment is effective when the contract of employment terminates.
This is the date from which any excess/franchise period is applied subject to the registration requirements with the Department of Employment or DHSS.
In effect this definition excludes the payment of the benefit under the policy during any payment in lieu period as the contract of employment is still in force.
All other Unemployment Definitions
Where unemployment is not defined as per the Act the only common requirements within the policy wordings are that the claimant is in receipt of unemployment benefit (or registered as unemployed with the DOE/DHSS) and is available for/actively seeking employment.
The effective date of unemployment should therefore be regarded as the day the insured customer first registers as unemployed with the DOE/DHSS.
The effect of such a definition is that the policy benefit can be paid during the period of payment in lieu subject to the registration requirements being satisfied and the claim being valid under the policy.
Short Term/Fixed Term Contracts
The handling of cases which involve short or fixed term contracts requires clarification.
Short Term
ASU Schemes are not designed to provide cover for this type of employment.
The nature of the work tends to be task oriented e.g. to build a garage or a supply teacher to cover for absence etc.
In such cases unemployment is known to be impending at the outset of the contract and therefore the exclusion ‘unemployment known to be impending at the commencement of insurance’ will apply with a resultant repudiation of the claim.
Fixed Term
The policy wordings provide cover for unemployment occurring during the period of a fixed term contract.
As the phrase implies the contract of employment is for a fixed term e.g 1 year, 2 years etc.
The following examples illustrate the approach to claims handling: — 
1.
If after 1 year of a 2 year contract the insured is made unemployed cover under the policy exists until the end of the 2nd year subject to the terms and conditions of the policy.
Benefit payments are payable until the end of the 2nd year.
At the end of the 2nd year all benefit payments would cease as the contract has expired.
2.
If the employment contract is not renewed at the end of the 2 year period benefit should not be paid as the policy wordings exclude ‘unemployment which arises at the normal termination date of a fixed term contract’.
This type of situation is likely to occur in occupations involving Apprenticeships or Student Nurses, for example, where there is no guarantee of permanent employment at the end of the fixed term training period.
There are, however, instances where fixed term contracts are renewed automatically over a considerable period of time and can reasonably be described as ‘rolling’ contracts.
It is not the intention of the Underwriters to exclude such contracts from Schemes cover.
Where such contracts have been in force for 3 years or longer, but are not for a specific undertaking eg building a house, claims are admissible under the policy.
Short Term Work whilst Unemployed
The situation frequently occurs where benefit is being paid under a valid unemployment claim and the claimant is offered short term temporary employment.
Such cases should be considered sympathetically and the following guidelines should be applied.
Mortgage Type Schemes
For schemes where the benefit is X months benefit for each and every claim the payments should be suspended during periods when the claimant is in temporary employment.
Payments can then be continued when evidence of unemployment is again provided.
The claim should not be extended beyond the original benefit limit from the date of the claim.
For example, claim occurs in January 1987 under policy with 1 month excess and 12 month benefit period, claimant employed temporarily during June and July.
The benefit should be paid from February to May, August to January and then ended due to expiry of benefit period.
Personal Loan Type Schemes
For schemes where the benefit is payable for X months during the loan term payments should be suspended when the claimant is in temporary employment.
Payments can then be continued when evidence of unemployment is again provided.
The claim can then be extended until the maximum number of payments have been made, if applicable.
For example, claim occurs in January 1987 under policy with 1 month excess and 12 month benefit period, claimant employed temporarily during June and July.
The benefit should be paid from February to May, August to March and then ended as maximum number of payments have been made.
Government Training Schemes
The Government have requested that all Insurers give a generous interpretation when dealing with ASU claims where the claimant is attending an Employment Training Course.
General Accident is supporting this request and have taken the decision to continue with payment of benefit when a claimant attends such a course.
It is important to note that such courses only last for a MAXIMUM DURATION OF 12 MONTHS.
As it will not be possible for a claimant to satisfy the DOE/DHSS registration requirements in these circumstances, the claimant must first provide us with written substantiation from the DOE that the claimant is now attending an ETS.
If the claimant cannot supply such confirmation from the DOE, we will accept the written word of the College Principal/ Course Administrator/Head of Dept.
Once we are in possession of such proof, we can accept thereon the certification of attendance from the course tutor/administrator.
It should be remembered that Employment Training Courses are designed to help unemployed adults back into the labour market, participation being entirely voluntary.
Trainees may leave at any time if, for example, they wish to take up employment.
Employment Training Courses should not be confused with Government sponsored schemes, eg., Start Scheme.
The Start Scheme operates on the basis that financial support is provided to an individual who wishes to set up in business for themselves.
The individuals are effectively self-employed in such cases.
Registration with Department of Employment
There are cases where the claimant is unable to satisfy the registration requirements with the Department of Employment as they are in receipt of an alternative benefit.
This in itself should not be used as the basis for repudiating a claim as long as the claimant can provide certification from the appropriate Government Department e.g. DHSS that proves that they are both unemployed and available for work.
In such cases the condition of registration with the Department of Employment should be waived.
Wilful Act
Definitions of Wilful Act are many and varied and in many cases of little benefit to the claims handler when considering invoking the exclusion to repudiate a claim.
However, there are 2 prime areas for consideration and these would centre on the degree of recklessness involved in the act (similar to reasonable care on other contracts) and the  foreseeability of the consequence of the act.
A reasonable definition to cover wilful act would be ‘any act, omission or behaviour which the insured customer knew, or should have known, was contrary to the terms and conditions of his employment or which he knew, or should have known, would lead to the termination of his employment’.
Examples of acts considered wilful within this definition would include: — 
assault on employer/fellow employees
theft from employer
employers invoking disciplinary proceedings resulting in dismissal
major criminal acts e.g.fraud
Great care is required in differentiating between those acts that are negligent but result from carelessness as opposed to recklessness.
It would be very difficult to justify the repudiation of a claim where the act, omission or behaviour centred on negligence allied with carelessness.
Reference must be made to HO Claims if there is any doubt whatsoever regarding the repudiation of a claim on the basis of wilful act.
Referral to HO Claims
Many instances have occurred where Claims Departments have not followed the referral rules specified in SCI 43 (General) on matters of indemnity and policy interpretation.
It should be remembered that this SCI is as applicable to Creditor Schemes business as any other class of business.
CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL MANUAL THE HANDLING OF LIABILITY CLAIMS IN SCOTLAND
In the table of contents which follows, the screen number is shown against each heading.
To find a particular screen number use the FIND command followed by the screen number but with dashes on either side of the number — for example‘find -55-’ will find screen number 55.