

CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL MANUAL
HOME CLAIMS HANDLING PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS
In the table of contents which follows, the screen number is shown against each heading.
To find a particular screen number use the FIND command followed by the screen number but with dashes on either side of the number — for example‘find -55-’ will find screen number 55.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION (OCTOBER 1992)
The Home Claims Handling instructions are based on the cover applicable under the standard Home Insurance range of policies.
Special Scheme Home policies may have slight variations in cover and should be handled accordingly.
THE NOTES MUST BE READ IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE APPROPRIATE POLICY WORDING, EXCESS GUIDE AND STANDING CLAIMS INSTRUCTIONS (SCI).
When a claim is intimated it is essential to check:
1.
The policy in question was in force at the date of occurrence.
2.
The extent of cover at the date of occurrence.
3.
As far as possible, if the loss or damage is covered under the policy.
4.
If it is necessary to appoint Loss Adjusters or another Branch to investigate the claim.
5.
If the claim can be progressed or concluded by telephone.
6.
If we can direct the insured to a contractor/retailer we recommend or with whom we have a discount arrangement.
2.0 INSURED PERILS (OCTOBER 1992)
The cover under the policies is as follows:
CONTENTS
4*/5* MAXPLAN All Risks on Household Contents and Valuables & Portable Possessions.
2*/3* Specified perils on Household Contents, All Risks on Optional selected items.
1* BUDGET Specified perils on Household Contents.
BUILDINGS
WIDER COVER All Risks.
STANDARD COVER Specified perils.
2.1 FIRE
For a fire to have taken place, there must have been combustion, that is the violent chemical combination of a substance with oxygen in a manner that generates a quantity of heat and some light.
The substance can be the damaged goods or a fuel (e.g. coal or gas) or tobacco.
If there was actual combustion of the damaged goods, however caused, there has been damage by fire.
This peril is not subject to any special exclusions but does provide a number of problems.
SMOKE DAMAGE
CIGARETTE BURNS
SCORCHING/MELTING/DISCOLOURATION DUE TO OVERHEATING
EXTINGUISHMENT COSTS.
2.1.1 Smoke Damage
THE UNDERNOTED PARAGRAPH RELATES PURELY TO 1* BUDGET CONTENTS CLAIMS.
FOR
ALL OTHER CONTENTS CLAIMS AND ALL BUILDINGS CLAIMS UNDER THE HOME INSURANCE RANGE OF POLICIES, REFER TO PARAGRAPH 2.3.
Smoke damage from a fire is covered, whether the fire is in the Policyholder's home or a neighbour's house i.e. smoke from a fire in neighbour's house causes smoke damage to Policyholder's property.
However, if there has been no combustion, there has not been a fire e.g. smoke from a defective heater would not be fire damage and no payment would be made.
2.1.2 Cigarette Burns
Many claims are received in respect of cigarette burns to furniture, carpets etc. and although there has been no actual ‘fire’, it is generally accepted that such claims can be considered as fire damage.
This is because there has been combustion between the burning object and the item damaged by fire.
NOTE — THE CONTENTS SECTION OF THE FRIENDLYCARE POLICY SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDES CIGARETTE, CIGAR OR TOBACCO BURNS.
2.1.3 Scorching melting or discolouration of furniture, etc.
This is not considered as fire damage unless there has been combustion at the source of heat and either direct contact between the property and the source or direct radiation of heat from the source to the damaged property.
Scorching of furniture left too near to an open fire or a gas fire would be considered as fire damage, but if it was an electric fire or a radiator, then this would not be fire damage as there would have been no combustion.
Likewise, scorch marks on kitchen worktops due to a hot pan being placed on a worktop is not considered as fire damage.
2.1.4 Extinguishment Costs
These costs include the re-filling of fire extinguishers or damage caused by the fire brigade to a building to enable them to put the fire out and would be covered under the fire section.
2.2 EXPLOSION
Explosion whether caused by fire or otherwise is covered.
2.3 SMOKE
2* Contents — 5* Maxplan Contents policies and both Buildings policies provide cover in respect of loss or damage caused by Smoke.
However, all these policies specifically exclude loss or damage caused by agricultural or industrial operations or any gradually operating cause, e.g. an oil heater which emits smoke over a period of time causing decoration to become discoloured.
2.4 LIGHTNING AND THUNDERBOLT
It is essential to check with the local Meteorological Office to confirm that there was lightning and/or thunderbolts in the area on the date of damage.
(See Section 6.17)
2.5 EARTHQUAKE
This type of damage is fortunately fairly rare in the United Kingdom, but should an earthquake occur, it would be advisable to appoint Loss Adjusters.
NOTE — EARTHQUAKE IS NOT COVERED UNDER 1* BUDGET CONTENTS POLICIES.
2.6 THEFT OR ATTEMPTED THEFT
Theft can be described as where one person unlawfully removes the property of another person with the intention of permanently depriving the owner of such property.
The peril of theft includes loss or damage arising from burglary robbery and larceny.
BUILDINGS Theft or attempted theft covered except when the home has been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for over 30 days.
(See Section 3.7)
4*/5* MAXPLAN Theft or attempted theft covered except when the home has CONTENTS been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for over 30 days.
1* BUDGET/ Theft or attempted theft covered except when the home has
2*/3* CONTENTS been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for over 30 days.
There must be evidence of forcible and violent entry when the home or any part of the home is lent, let or sub-let.
All thefts or attempted thefts must be reported to the Police.
2.7 CIVIL DISTURBANCE
This contingency includes loss or damage due to vandalism or acts of malicious persons.
All such incidents must be reported to the Police immediately.
In the event of damage caused during a riot, it is essential that such claims are dealt with immediately as it is possible to obtain a recovery against the local Police authority.
In England and Wales a claim must be lodged with the Police authority within 14 days of the incident being declared a riot.
In Northern Ireland the time limit is 10 days, although this can be extended by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
In Scotland there is no time limit but claims should be notified with minimum delay.
See General SCI 61 for full details, including the definitions of riots.
Under both Buildings and Contents sections, if the home has been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for a period in excess of 30 days, then there is no cover for vandalism or acts of malicious persons.
2.8 BURSTING, LEAKING OR OVERFLOWING OF WATER TANKS, PIPES OR APPARATUS
This contingency covers damage to the Building and Contents following bursting, leaking or overflowing of water tanks, pipes or apparatus.
The
Buildings section of the policy also covers damage to water tanks and pipes themselves unless due to normal wear and tear.
Water apparatus includes items such as washing machines and dish-washers.
Under both Buildings and Contents sections, if the home has been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for a period in excess of 30 days, there is no cover for bursting, leaking or overflowing, etc.
2.9 LEAKAGE OF OIL FROM ANY FIXED HEATING INSTALLATION
This contingency covers damage to the Building and Contents following the leakage of oil from a fixed heating installation e.g. oil fired central heating system.
Any claim for the loss of oil would be covered under the Contents section of the policy.
Under both Buildings and Contents sections, if the home has been insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for a period in excess of 30 days, there is no cover for leakage of oil.
NOTE — LEAKAGE OF OIL IS NOT COVERED UNDER 1* BUDGET CONTENTS POLICIES.
2.10 STORM
There is no precise definition of a storm but it must be noted that strong winds (unless storm force) or heavy rain alone do not constitute a storm.
Storms generally consist of violent winds usually accompanied by rain, hail or snow.
However, it is accepted that exceptional rainstorms and snowstorms can occur without violent winds and damage caused in these situations would be covered where such conditions are abnormal.
Where any doubt exists that storm conditions prevailed on the date in question, it is advisable to check with the local meteorological office.
The Beaufort Wind Scale is the traditional method of describing wind speeds and the associated effects of the wind.
Beaufort Description Wind Speed Limits Specification
Force Number Knots Miles per hour
0 Calm 1 1 Calm; smoke rises vertically.
1 Light air 1–3 1–3 Direction of wind shown by smoke drift
2 Light breeze 4–6 4–7 Wind felt on face; leaves rustle
3 Gentle breeze 7–10 8–12 Leaves, twigs in constant motion
4 Moderate breeze 11–16 13–18 Raises dust, paper, small branches move
5 Fresh breeze 17–21 19–24 Small trees in leaf begin to sway
6 Strong breeze 22–27 25–31 Large branches in motion; hard
to use umbrella
7 Near gale 28–33 32–38 Whole trees in motion; difficult to walk into wind
8 Gale 34–40 39–46 Breaks twigs off trees; impedes walking progress
9 Strong gale 41–47 47–54 Slight structural damage occurs
10 Storm 48–55 55–63 Trees uprooted; considerable structural damage occurs
11 Violent storm 56–63 64–72 Widespread damage occurs
12 Hurricane 63 72 Widespread damage occurs
Strictly, the Beaufort Scale applies to the average wind speed over a 10 minute period.
Additional studies by the Building Research Establishment indicate that isolated structural damage can occur when gust speeds exceed about 39 knots and widespread damage can occur when gustspeeds exceed about 49 knots.
However, all the speed thresholds mentioned are for guidance only.
There are no clear cut threshold speeds at which damage can be guaranteed to occur.
Roofs, particularly flat roofs, can be damaged as a result of weight of snow lying on them.
This is not storm and should not be dealt with as a storm damage claim.
We should only consider such cases where there is clear evidence of extreme weather and abnormal falls of snow having occurred over a short period of time.
In claims for roof damage it is important to be satisfied that the cost of repairs met under the policy is restricted to the area of the roof actually damaged.
We should satisfy ourselves that any work beyond this was necessary because a restricted repair was not practical and re-roofing in part or in full was the only effective method of repair.
The policy does not provide cover for remedial work required due to normal wear and tear or to the failure by the Policyholder to exercise ordinary care and maintenance over his property.
It is generally accepted that the life span of the traditional flat felt roof is about 10 years.
The fact that a storm may show up the poor condition of a flat roof does not signify that storm was the proximate cause of damage.
The cause of deterioration is mainly due to the covering becoming thin and brittle because of weathering i.e. the action of heat and cold over a period of time.
Any such claims submitted without a specific date of occurrence e.g. ‘over a period of time’, are clear indicators of lack of maintenance.
Where a claim arises allegedly due to storm damage it has to be established that storm conditions did occur in the area, on the date of the alleged damage.
This can be checked with the local Meteorological Office or Prime
Loss Adjusters.
If during repairs, further underlying damage is found, this damage may only be accepted as coming within the cover of the policy if it is directly related to the incident giving rise to the claim.
Frequently wet rot or dry rot is identified.
The remedial cost for this damage is not admissible unless it can be shown to relate directly to damage to the roof in respect of which a claim is or has been accepted.
Rot of any sort does not manifest itself immediately.
It arises from a combination of factors e.g. dampness and absence of adequate ventilation over a significant period of time.
It is therefore highly improbable if not impossible that recent damage to a roof would have caused rot in underlying timbers.
If rot is present there, it does not stem from recent damage to the roof and remedial work to the areas affected would not ordinarily be accepted as a valid part of the claim for repairs to the roof.
Any attempt to show causal connection between roof damage and rot must be carefully examined, if necessary by the instruction of suitable experts.
Claims of this nature giving rise to doubt should be referred to
HO Home Claims & Support for consideration.
Claims are occasionally received when damage occurs to internal decorations and/or contents due to rainwater entering a building through a faulty roof.
If the damage occurred over a period of time, there is no cover.
If the damage occurred following a specific storm, the Policyholder should be asked:
(a)
If he was aware of the faulty roof
(b)
If he was aware, how long had it been faulty
(c)
Why had the roof not been repaired
If the Policyholder was unaware of the faulty roof or did not have reasonable time in which to carry out repairs, then it is in order to deal with the claim for the damage to the internal decorations and/or contents but not the repairs to the roof, which the Policyholder should have carried out as soon as possible.
If the Policyholder had been aware of the faulty roof for some time and had taken no action to prevent damage to the home, there may have been a breach of the reasonable care condition.
If so, a full explanation should be obtained from the Policyholder and thereafter the matter should be dealt with in accordance with normal indemnity considerations (see GENERAL SCI 43).
If damage has occurred to internal decorations and/or contents through ingress of water unaccompanied by storm conditions there is no cover under
Buildings — Standard Cover or 2* or 3* Contents policies.
However, there would be cover under Buildings — Wider Cover policy and 4* Contents and 5*
Maxplan Contents policies as accidental damage.
There is no cover for storm damage to gates, hedges or fences.
NOTE — 1* BUDGET CONTENTS POLICY DOES NOT COVER STORM DAMAGE.
2.11 FLOOD
This relates to the escape of water from its natural confines e.g. river, stream, lake, etc.
It does not relate to burst pipes etc.
There is a separate contingency for that type of damage.
There is no cover for flood damage to gates, hedges or fences.
2.12 FALLING TREES
Damage to Buildings and Contents as defined, caused by falling trees is covered.
This includes damage to gates, hedges and fences.
The cost of removing the fallen trees which have caused damage to the Building and/or Contents is also covered.
Where no damage has arisen to the Buildings or Contents, the cost of removing or making a safe a tree is not covered.
Where a policyholder's tree has fallen and damaged third party property, this may give rise to a public liability claim (see Section 7.4).
NOTE — 1* BUDGET CONTENTS POLICY DOES NOT COVER DAMAGE CAUSED BY FALLING TREES.
2.13 SUBSIDENCE, HEAVE AND LANDSLIP
In the event of subsidence, heave or landslip damage, Loss Adjusters must be appointed, irrespective of the extent of the damage.
SUBSIDENCE
SUBSIDENCE the downward movement of a site on which a building stands from causes unconnected with the actual weight of the building.
PROCEDURE
Subsidence Claims Advice leaflet (PC17) should be issued to policyholders in every case where a subsidence claim has been intimated as this will forewarn the insured of the procedures and timescales likely to be involved.
Subsidence can result from a number of causes.
Where the adjuster feels there is likely to be a valid subsidence claim he should appoint a Consulting Engineer promptly to carry out the necessary investigations.
In many cases adjusters will be able to make use of their in-house engineers.
Investigations will usually involve a full site investigation and the boring of trial holes.
Payment of Consulting Engineers fees should be dealt with in a similar manner to Adjusters fees.
If the early evidence suggests that there is not a valid claim under the policy, the insured should be asked to appoint a Consulting Engineer to prove his claim.
The insured must bear the costs of the Engineers fees unless liability is subsequently established under the policy.
CAUSE AND REMEDY
The Consulting Engineer's report should establish the cause of the movement and give an opinion as to the necessary remedial action.
The Loss Adjuster and the branch should not be afraid to challenge the proposed course of remedial work where the Consulting Engineers are recommending remedial work which appears to be well in excess of what is required to stabilise the property.
Our liability under the policy is to restore the property to a sound condition.
We are not responsible for any additional measures which could be considered to be of a preventative nature for the future.
Most subsidence claims are capable of being resolved without the need for underpinning.
The important issue, before deciding upon remedial action, is to establish the cause of the movement.
Movement can be due to a variety of causes and sometimes results from the combined effect of more than one cause.
The type of subsoil upon which the foundations are built is a very influential factor.
Buildings founded upon highly shrinkable clay soil are more likely to be affected by subsidence than buildings founded upon less shrinkable organic soil.
Damage to properties owing to clay shrinkage is most likely to occur following long periods of drought and this condition can be exacerbated by the influence of tree roots or vegetation.
Where the movement is confirmed as being due to the influence of tree roots or vegetation, effective action should be taken against them.
This may require the complete removal of the vegetation or trees.
Alternatively a programme of tree management may be sufficient.
If a tree is pollarded and thereafter maintained at a much reduced height than before, it may no longer affect a nearby building.
It may be necessary to appoint a tree specialist (arboriculturist) to provide a professional opinion on the level of action required.
Whilst we will agree to meet the fees involved in producing the arboriculturist's report, the actual costs of tree removal or pollarding (severe pruning) fall outwith the scope of the policy and require to be met by the insured.
See also paragraph on Heave, below.
Leaking underground pipes and drains present another common cause of subsidence.
In most cases if the leaking apparatus is repaired the property should stabilise without the need for underpinning.
The proximate cause of the damage must be established to determine whether it is appropriate to deal with the matter as a burst pipe or whether it is a subsidence claim and the subsidence excess should be applied.
If the pressure of ground movement has resulted in the pipe or drain breaking, this is a subsidence claim.
If the pipe has leaked owing to other causes such as wear and tear, faulty joints, etc, it would be appropriate to deal with the claim as a burst pipe claim.
(The cost of repairing the pipe itself would not be covered.)
MONITORING THE PROPERTY
In most cases after the cause of movement has been established and a course of action has been decided upon, such as drain repairs, tree removal, etc, it will be necessary to monitor the property to see whether the movement is progressive or whether the property will stabilise without the need for major repairs such as underpinning.
Monitoring can be a lengthy process.
Loss Adjusters generally outline the steps being taken, the reasons for this and the likely period involved.
In some cases when a property is to be monitored for a lengthy period, i.e. over 12 months, we are prepared to consider paying for temporary cosmetic repairs to keep the property more presentable internally.
We would accept costs involved in temporary filling of noticeable cracks in walls or redecoration of badly affected rooms.
In some cases subsidence damage will have come to light when a property is being sold and we may find ourselves under pressure to resolve the claim quickly to allow the sale to proceed.
In such cases our attitude should be the same as outlined above.
We must complete full investigations prior to commencing remedial repairs.
In such cases it may be appropriate to consider continuing full cover on behalf of the new owner of the property until the end of the monitoring period, at which time we will be responsible for any remedial work required.
UNDERPINNING THE PROPERTY
Underpinning should only be accepted as a last resort when all other reasonable options have been considered.
Where branches are in any doubt regarding the correct action to be taken or whether underpinning is required, the full file should be submitted to HO Home Claims & Support.
POLICY EXCLUSIONS
The following policy exclusions are of importance in determining whether a valid subsidence claim exists: o Defective design or inadequate construction of the foundations — e.g. where the foundations of a property have not been constructed to a level required by regulations applying at the time of construction.
o Damage to outbuildings or walls where the main dwelling has not been damaged at the same time.
o Damage to or resulting from movement of solid floor slabs unless the foundations beneath the exterior walls of the dwelling are damaged at the same time.
SETTLEMENT
It is important to distinguish between SUBSIDENCE and SETTLEMENT
SETTLEMENT Normal lateral movement as the building beds down.
Any such movement usually occurs in the early part of a buildings's life but this may not always be the case depending upon the nature of the subsoil upon which the building is founded.
Settlement is an inevitable movement which occurs due to the weight of the building upon the subsoil.
It is not influenced by external factors.
SETTLEMENT IS NOT COVERED BY THE POLICY.
HEAVE
HEAVE Movement in an upward direction i.e. the opposite of subsidence.
Heave damage can occur following the removal of trees if their roots have been causing subsidence damage to the building.
The action of removing the trees to halt the subsidence damage can have an adverse effect on the soil, resulting in heave damage to the building.
Care must therefore be taken when the question of removing trees is raised.
LANDSLIP
LANDSLIP A small landslide.
One definition is ‘a rapid downward movement under the influence of gravity of mass rock or earth on a slope.’
Landslip can occur following storm conditions or periods of excessive rainfall.
The storm section of the policy excludes landslip damage but the damage could be covered under the landslip section of the policy.
Such damage normally involves earth retaining walls but unless the private residence is also damaged at the same time, there would be no cover for the damage to the wall under this section of the policy.
DIMINUTION OF MARKET VALUE
There are instances when a valid subsidence or heave claim is received but the Policyholder does not wish to have the repairs carried out for some reason e.g. elderly Policyholder does not wish upheaval, cannot pay the policy excess.
It is possible to settle the claim on a diminution in market value basis, provided this would not exceed the cost of repair.
The Adjuster should provide two values:— one relating to the value of the building in an undamaged condition, the other relating to the value of the building in its present damaged condition.
The difference between the two figures would be the diminution in market value and after deduction of the policy excess, the balance would be the amount payable.
The Adjusters would obtain valuations from independent valuers/surveyors.
In this respect
General Accident Property Services should be used where possible.
If such a settlement is agreed, the matter should be referred to your Underwriters immediately and they will decide what cover can be given for the future.
OTHER INSURERS
Subsidence can occur over a period of time without the knowledge of the Policyholder.
During this time the cover may have been held by more than one insurer.
The Corporation may have been on cover for several years and when subsidence damage is discovered, it requires full underpinning.
Where only a proportion of the damage has occurred since we have been on cover, we should pay the cost of the underpinning, subject to the adequacy of the sum insured and the policy excess.
We would not necessarily seek a contribution from the previous insurers where the remedial work required to rectify the damage occurring whilst we are on cover has swamped any pre-existing damage.
However, occasions will arise where contributions are justified and this should be actively pursued with the insurer concerned.
If we have only been on cover for a short time and it is clear that the majority of the damage occurred before we came on cover, the claim should be referred to the previous insurers.
2.14 IMPACT BY ANY VEHICLE TRAIN OR ANIMAL
BUILDINGS Standard Cover and Wider Cover policies exclude loss or damage caused by insects, birds or domestic pets.
1* BUDGET CONTENTS does not provide cover for impact damage.
2*/3* CONTENTS policies exclude damage caused by insects, birds or domestic pets.
4*/5* MAXPLAN No special exclusions (i.e. impact by insects, birds CONTENTS and domestic pets is covered.)
This contingency covers impact damage to the Building and/or Contents by any vehicle, train or animal.
The scratching/tearing/chewing of furniture etc. by a cat, dog, etc. is not impact damage.
Such damage may however be considered under 4*/5* Maxplan Contents policies as accidental damage.
2.15 AIRCRAFT AND OTHER AERIAL DEVICES OR ARTICLES DROPPED FROM THEM
This section covers damage to the Building and/or Contents caused by aircraft or other aerial devices or articles dropped from them.
This could arise if an aircraft crashed and there was damage to houses in the area.
In view of the possibility of recovery from the aircraft owner you should seek at intimation the advice of HO Home Claims & Support.
2.16 TELEVISION AERIALS
This contingency covers damage to the Building and/or Contents caused by the breakage or collapse of television and radio aerials, satellite dish aerials, aerial fittings and masts.
Damage to the aerial itself is covered under the Contents section of 2* — 5* policies.
NOTE — 1* BUDGET CONTENTS POLICIES DO NOT COVER THIS CONTINGENCY.
2.17 FROST
This peril is only covered under Buildings — Wider Cover policies.
There is no cover for damage to terraces, patios, driveways, footpaths, garden walls and hedges.
Care should be taken with frost claims as the damage could result from lack of maintenance or the policyholder's failure to take reasonable precautions to ensure the safety of their property.
E.g. it is reasonable to expect all pipes and tanks in an attic to be lagged; when a property is to be unoccupied for a period particularly over the winter months, all water tanks, pipes, etc should be drained and adequate heating provided.
2.18 ALL OTHER ACCIDENTAL LOSS, DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION
This contingency is covered under Buildings — Wider Cover policies and under the Contents sections of 4* Contents and 5* Maxplan policies.
It is possible to obtain some wider cover under certain extensions of Part C of 2* and 3* Contents policies.
Although cover is provided in respect of all other accidental loss, damage or destruction, there are certain exclusions such as wear and tear, electrical breakdown, etc.
Refer to the policy booklet for full details.
3.0 BUILDINGS — STANDARD COVER AND WIDER COVER (OCTOBER 1992)
3.1 COVER
The Buildings as defined in the policy are covered against loss or damage due to(i) specified perils under Standard Cover policies and (ii) all risks under Wider Cover policies.
Both policies are subject to certain exclusions.
The Perils covered are detailed in Section 2 of these instructions.
In addition, the following cover is provided.
3.2 FIXED GLASS
All policies exclude accidental damage to fixed glass if the premises are insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for more than 30 days.
Fixed Glass includes windows, doors, fan lights and sky lights.
Care should be taken when handling claims involving double glazed windows and doors.
It may be suggested that the window frame or complete door has to be replaced due to damage to the double glazing unit.
These claims should be investigated very closely as it may be possible for a local glazing firm to carry out a satisfactory replacement of the glass or glazing unit without replacing the window frame or door.
Double glazing firms will offer full replacement rather than the repair or replacement of the damaged part.
These firms should be challenged as to why a replacement is necessary.
Claims may be submitted for double glazing as a result of ‘broken down sealed units’.
This results from a failure in the sealing of the unit and causes condensation to build up between the panes of glass.
The unit then requires to be replaced.
It should be noted in such circumstances there is no breakage of glass and therefore this type of occurrence does not constitute a valid claim.
Where safety glass is required to comply with the Code of Practice BS 6262, we will pay the additional cost without seeking contribution from the Policyholder.
3.3 SANITARY FIXTURES
All policies exclude accidental damage to sanitary fixtures if the premises are insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied for more than 30 days.
Sanitary Fixtures include baths, wash-hand basins, w.c. 's, shower bases/cubicles, bidets, etc.
A common problem occurs when part of a bathroom suite is damaged beyond repair and a similar replacement part is no longer available.
There are several firms who specialise in the colour matching/repair/replacement of bathroom suites and Branches should approach the undernoted firms if replacement items are not available elsewhere: — 
1.
The Bathing Machine, Leeds.
Telephone 0532 702534.
2.
Churchmans, Preston.
Telephone 0772 555822.
3.
Holmware Supplies Co., 26–28 St Davids Hill, Exeter, Devon.
Telephone 0392 31087.
4.
J R Hullock, Builders Merchants, Curzon Road, Ashton-under-Lyne, Manchester.
Telephone 061 330 1815.
5.
Peachurst Ltd, The Mill, Galgate, Nr Lancaster, Lancs.
Telephone 0524 751393.
6.
Newport Pagnell Kitchens and Bathrooms, 14 St John Street, Newport Pagnell, Bucks.
Telephone 0908 615615.
7.
Southbourne Kitchens and Bathrooms, 124 Seabourne Road, Southbourne, Bournemouth, Dorset.
Telephone 0202 427700.
8.
Obsolete Bathroom Specialists, 42 Thomas Street, Packmoor, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs, ST7 4SS.
Telephone 0782 786868.
9.
Dealkent Ltd, Dewsbury Road, Fenton Industrial Estate, Fenton, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs, ST4 2TE.
Telephone 0782 745575.
Fax 0782 545535.
All policies contain a Matching of Items clause.
If an individual item cannot be matched, the wording of this clause should be brought to the attention of the policyholder.
Under the policy we are only responsible for providing a replacement item and are not responsible for supplying matching items.
However where the insured wishes to replace the whole suite a negotiated settlement may be agreed calculated on the cost of replacing the damaged item plus up to a maximum of 50% of the cost of the remainder of the suite.
The payment should include the cost of re-tiling any damaged tiles or tiles affected by the replacement items.
If matching tiles are not available, the payment should be based upon non-matching tiles only for the damaged area.
3.4 UNDERGROUND SERVICES
These include underground service pipes and cables e.g. gas, water, electrical, drains, for which the Policyholder is responsible.
Culverts would be accepted as drains.
The pipes or cables must require repair or replacement due to accidental damage not due to wear and tear.
Pipes and drains which are blocked are not accidentally damaged and the cost of clearing the blockage is not covered.
Any damage caused to service pipes or cables whilst clearing or attempting to clear a blockage is excluded.
The cost of tracing the damage is covered provided there has been accidental damage to the pipes or cables.
However, in some cases it is not possible to determine the cause without costly excavation and it may be more economical to re-lay the pipes.
There are grounds for a compromise and each case must be considered on its merits.
3.5 ALTERNATIVE ACCOMMODATION/LOSS OF RENT
All policies provide cover under the Buildings Section in respect of: — 
1.
the cost of reasonable alternative accommodation if this is necessary
2.
loss of rent payable to the Policyholder, e.g. from a tenant.
3.
maximum of two years ground rent, if the Policyholder is liable while the home remains uninhabitable as a result of destruction or damage insured under the policy.
The limit payable under this section is restricted to a maximum of 10% of the Buildings sum insured.
IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT:
1.
We will only pay for alternative accommodation if this is NECESSARY.
The Policyholder may move to a guest house or hotel but we would only pay reasonable accommodation costs, commensurate with the standard of the existing accommodation.
We do not pay the cost of meals at the temporary accommodation.
2.
If the Policyholder leases the building to tenants then any loss of rent due to him would be covered, for the period the building was uninhabitable.
3.
If the Policyholder has to pay ground rent in respect of his building, then this would also be covered for the period the building was uninhabitable.
4.
In the event of serious damage to the building which could take 6 months or more to repair, consideration should be given to renting a property on a short term basis.
This may prove less expensive than hotel accommodation.
5.
In the event of a claim under this section from an owner/occupier, contribution will arise with the Contents Insurers where the Contents cover is held with another Insurer.
See Section 4.11 also.
3.6 INSURANCE WHEN THE HOME IS BEING SOLD
The policies provide cover in respect of the Policyholder's interest and buyer's interest when the Policyholder has agreed to sell his house, up until the date on which the contracts are completed or date on which the missives are signed.
In the event of a claim where the buyer has an insurance policy in force to cover the house, the Corporation would only pay its rateable proportion of the claim (see Section 9.3 of these instructions).
3.7 INSUFFICIENTLY FURNISHED FOR FULL HABITATION OR UNOCCUPIED
In the event of the building becoming insufficiently furnished for full habitation or unoccupied, cover under both policies is restricted as follows:
Full cover up to 30 days.
After 30 days, no cover for:
1.
Breakage of or damage to fixed glass and sanitary fixtures.
2.
Loss or damage, other than by fire or explosion, caused by theft or attempted theft, vandalism or acts of malicious persons.
3.
Damage caused by bursting, leaking or overflowing of water tanks, pipes or apparatus.
4.
Damage caused by leakage of oil from any fixed heating installation, pipes or apparatus.
When is a building sufficiently furnished for full habitation?
There should be sufficient contents for the normal habitation, although not necessarily in each room in the house.
There should be bed(s) and bedding, cooking facilities, cutlery, pots, crockery, seat(s) and floor coverings.
This subject is an area of contention and any problems should be referred initially to your Manager.
If a property is insufficiently furnished for full habitation, it may also have been unoccupied for some length of time.
If so, it may be that endorsement H21 (Unoccupancy Clause) is or should be applied.
This endorsement is applied to restrict cover on properties which are unoccupied for long periods.
In certain cases the insured or members of his household may not have been in residence for a considerable period but has relied upon friends or neighbours to perform an occasional check of the property.
This may involve a 5 minute check on a daily basis.
However, this does not constitute occupancy as there is no element of residency present (e.g. sleeping overnight).
3.8 PROFESSIONAL FEES AND OTHER COSTS
The policies provide cover in respect of architects, surveyors, legal and any other fees which are necessary to rebuild, repair or replace the home, following destruction or damage insured under the policy.
If for example rebuilding is necessary and plans have to be drawn up by an architect and approved by local Council, any fees incurred here would be covered.
There is no cover for fees incurred in the preparation of a claim, e.g. Policyholder's Assessors fees or fees incurred in the investigation as to the cause of destruction or damage unless the investigatory work would have been necessary to rebuild or repair the building.
This section of the policy also covers:
1.
CLEARANCE COSTS
Removing debris, dismantling, demolishing, shoring-up or propping up the home following destruction or damage insured under the policy.
The
Corporation must give the Policyholder consent to have such work carried out unless immediate action is required in the interests of safety.
The Corporation should also however take the views of an independent specialist e.g. Structural Engineer, Consulting Engineer, etc.
2.
STATUTORY COSTS
If, following destruction or damage insured under the policy, additional works are required to comply with building and government regulations and/or local by-laws, then the cost of the additional works will be covered under the policy, unless:
(a)
Such work was notified to the Insured before the destruction or damage occurred.
(b)
The costs relate to undamaged parts of the home.
THE MAXIMUM PAYABLE FOR ANY ONE CLAIM FOR REBUILDING OR REPAIR OF THE HOME INCLUDING PROFESSIONAL FEES, CLEARANCE COSTS AND STATUTORY COSTS IS THE AMOUNT INSURED FOR BUILDINGS.
4.0 CONTENTS (OCTOBER 1992)
4.1 WHAT CONTENTS ARE COVERED?
HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS Furniture, furnishings, domestic appliances, clothing & linen.
VALUABLES & PORTABLE POSSESSIONS Including jewellery, furs, money, photographic equipment, and PORTABLE radios tv's and hi-fis.
Certain contents are excluded and reference should be made to the appropriate policy.
4.2 WHOSE CONTENTS?
1.
Belonging to the Policyholder or for which he/she is legally responsible — but only to the extent of the Policyholder's financial liability to the owner e.g. Policyholder rents T.V. — only responsible for the financial liability i.e. value of T.V. at time of loss or damage, not the cost of a new set.
The written down value of the T.V. should be ascertained from the Rental Company, who will probably have advised the Policyholder in writing.
2.
Belonging to members of the Policyholder's family living permanently with him/her.
Claims can be submitted in respect of property belonging to the Policyholder's son or daughter who are attending university where the loss/damage occurred at the student's residence or rented accommodation.
If the Policyholder can show that the permanent address of the son or daughter is the policyholder's address, then subject to the loss/damage being caused by an insured peril, it is in order for the claim to be dealt with, being property temporarily away from the home.
(See Section 4.13).
One way of interpreting this is to ascertain whether the student was in halls or rented accommodation which was only available during term time.
Alternatively if the student was in rented accommodation on a 12 month lease it can be assumed that the student is not temporarily away from home.
For claims in respect of common law husbands/wives or  co-habiting partners, two factors must be established:
a.
The partner living with the Policyholder must be permanently resident at the risk address in a stable relationship and
b.
The partner must be contributing financially to the household.
If both conditions have been satisfied, then there would be cover for the contents belonging to both partners, subject to the adequacy of the sums insured.
If two people are merely sharing a house or flat, e.g. two friends, unless the underwriters have been asked specifically to cover both persons' property, there would only be cover for the property of the Policyholder.
3.
Domestic employees of the Policyholder.
Ascertain if there is any other insurance in force to cover the loss or damage.
If so, the other insurance may be more specific and the loss should be dealt with under such policy.
4.3 WHERE AND WHEN ARE THE CONTENTS COVERED?
2*/3*/4* and 5* Maxplan policies provide cover for contents:
1.
In the home.
2.
In the open within the boundaries of the home.
3.
Whilst temporarily away from the premises including whilst in foreign countries.
(See Section 4.15).
The cover under Part B of 2* and 3* policies is restricted and reference should be made to the ‘Household Contents Away From The Home’(Section 4.15), which gives details of the actual cover applicable.
If a loss occurs in a foreign country, enquiries should be made to see if there is a Travel policy in force.
If so, there may be a possibility of obtaining a contribution.
(See Section 10.3).
The 1* Budget policy provides cover for contents:
1.
In the dwelling.
2.
Within the boundaries of the home (restricted cover).
The 1* Budget policy does not provide any cover for contents away from the home.
4.4 MONEY
All policies provide cover for personal money and the definition of money is as follows:
1.
Current coin or bank notes, cheques, travellers cheques.
2.
Postal or money orders, current postage stamps.
3.
National Savings stamps or certificates, premium bonds.
4.
Luncheon vouchers, travel tickets.
5.
Trading stamps.
6.
Stamps for payment of TV licence, gas, electricity or other bills.
1.
When a claim for loss of cash is received the Policyholder should be asked to provide evidence of the existence of the cash e.g. cheque stub, bank book, bank statement/print-out, etc.
2.
If a cheque is lost this should be cancelled by the drawer, as soon as possible.
A loss of travellers cheques should be referred to the issuing bank or travel agent who should be able to refund the loss to the Policyholder.
3.
Loss of or damage to gift or record vouchers would be covered under this section of all policies, provided this was due to an insured peril, details of which are shown in Section 2 of these instructions.
4.
Money held for business purposes is specifically excluded under all policies.
Money held on behalf of charities, etc., e.g. Christian Aid, Scouts, etc., would be considered as Personal money.
Enquiries should be made to ascertain whether or not there is any other insurance in force.
(See Section 10.3).
Where the Policyholder runs a guest house or bed and breakfast establishment from his home, any loss of money relating to the business would be excluded.
4.5 BASIS OF SETTLEMENT
1.
5* MAXPLAN CONTENTS
a.
ALL ITEMS
We pay for loss or total destruction of items on the basis of cost of replacement as new.
Claims for articles damaged but repairable are paid on the basis of the repair cost.
An adjustment for wear and tear will be made, where applicable if the sums insured are inadequate or there is no intention to replace or repair.
2.
4* CONTENTS
a.
ALL ITEMS
Items less than 5 years old — cost of replacement as new.
Items more than 5 years old — cost of replacement as new less an adjustment for wear and tear.
An adjustment for wear and tear will also be made, where applicable if the sums insured are inadequate or there is no intention to replace or repair.
3.
3* CONTENTS
a.
ALL ITEMS OTHER THAN CLOTHING, LINEN AND PEDAL CYCLES
We pay the replacement cost as new, in the event of loss or damage beyond economical repair or total destruction.
Claims for articles damaged but repairable, are paid on the basis of the repair cost, subject to the sums insured being adequate.
b.
CLOTHING, LINEN AND PEDAL CYCLES
We pay the replacement cost as new less an allowance for wear and tear but see Sections 4.8 and 5.4.
4.
2* CONTENTS
a.
ALL ITEMS OTHER THAN CLOTHING, LINEN AND PEDAL CYCLES
Items less than 5 years old — As per 3(a) above
Items more than 5 years old — As per 3(b) above
b.
CLOTHING, LINEN AND PEDAL CYCLES — As per 3(b) above
5.
1* BUDGET CONTENTS
All contents — As per 3(b) above
4.6 OPTION TO REPLACE
Under the Contents section, we have the option of replacing an item which has been lost, stolen or damaged.
If we are able to provide a replacement then the Policyholder should be advised at the outset of our intentions, but the suggestion of replacement should not be used as a negotiating factor.
If the Policyholder does not wish the item replaced but requests a cash settlement, we must make it clear that this is not really a policy entitlement and our offer should be restricted to the price it would have cost us to replace taking into account any discount we would have obtained.
However, in most cases the claim will be settled on the basis of the repair or replacement cost, as supported by estimates/receipts submitted.
See also Section 6.1.
4.7 WEAR AND TEAR
Allowance for wear and tear must be taken into account in the following circumstances:
1.
All Contents claims under the 1* Budget policy.
2.
All claims for clothing, linen and pedal cycles under 2* and 3* policies.
3.
Items over 5 years old under Contents Parts B & C of the 2* policy and Part B of the 4* policy.
4.
Where the sum insured is inadequate i.e. is lower than the actual value of the total property at risk and the lost or damaged items were not in a new condition.
As a general rule if the sum insured represents 85% of the value of property at risk, or less, the claim should be dealt with on an indemnity basis.
If the sum insured is less than 60% of the value of property at risk, due consideration should be given to avoiding the policy (refer Section 6.2).
5.
The Policyholder does not intend to replace or repair the lost or damaged items.
The Policyholder would receive the value of the items at the time of the loss i.e. replacement value less an allowance for wear and tear.
It should be noted that this is merely a guide and each case must be considered on its merits.
4.8 SUMS INSURED
The ‘Sum Insured’ is the maximum payable in respect of any one claim and continues in full following the payment of any claim — i.e. there is no need for the Policyholder to reinstate the sum insured following payment of a claim.
The sum insured applicable to a claim is the figure which applied at the date of the loss, i.e. the sum insured at inception/renewal date plus the appropriate index-linking to the date of loss.
The appropriate sum insured will be shown on the Home Underwriting advice.
4*/5* MAXPLAN The Policyholder must select separate sums insured for: — 
HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS
VALUABLES & PORTABLE POSSESSIONS (Unspecified and specified)
Both of these categories are mutually exclusive.
The sum insured must be adequate under each category for the insured to obtain the full benefit.
Under no circumstances should we allow a ‘topping up’ situation to arise where one S.I.
is adequate and the other is not.
E.g. if a claim for jewellery or valuables exceeds the S.I.
for Valuables and Portable Possessions, the balance should not be met under the Household
Contents item.
A claim may be received for a piece of jewellery or a valuable, which is not specified under the policy, but the value of the item exceeds the policy limit for unspecified items.
If the sum insured on unspecified items is adequate to include the item in question, it is in order to pay the limit for unspecified items to the Policyholder.
2*/3* HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS — The Policyholder must select an overall sum insured to cover all contents, ie Household Goods, Clothing & Linen, Valuables & Portable Possessions, etc.
WIDER COVER FOR SELECTED ITEMS — The Policyholder must select individual sums insured (other than for pedal cycles or money) for the sections required.
See also Section 5.6.
1* BUDGET HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS — The Policyholder must select an overall sum insured to cover all contents, ie Household Goods, Clothing & Linen, Valuables & Portable Possessions, etc.
4.9 ALTERNATIVE ACCOMMODATION/LOSS OF RENT
Cover is provided in respect of: — 
1.
Reasonable alternative accommodation, if this is necessary.
We would pay for accommodation, e.g. in a guest house or hotel but not the cost of meals as the Policyholder would be saving on the cost of food, cooking, etc.
If Policyholder can stay with relatives, then perhaps a ‘token’ payment could be made by way of‘rent’.
2.
Rent which continues to be payable either to the Policyholder or by the Policyholder while the Policyholder's home is uninhabitable as a result of destruction or damage caused by an insured peril.
The total amount payable under this section is restricted to 20% of the Sum Insured shown in respect of HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS under 1* BUDGET/2*/3*
POLICIES.
Under 4* and 5* Maxplan policies the total amount payable is restricted to 25% of the total Sum Insured shown in respect of HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS AND VALUABLES & PORTABLE POSSESSIONS
In the event of a claim under this Section from an owner/occupier, contribution will arise with the Buildings Insurers where the buildings cover is held with another Insurer.
See also Section 3.5.
4.10 FATAL ACCIDENT INSURANCE
In the event of a claim under this section of the policy, the following documents are required:
1.
Letters of Administration or Probate.
(In Scotland — Confirmation to Executor Dative or Nominate).
2.
Death Certificate.
3.
Marriage Certificate.
4.
Birth Certificate.
The policies provide cover for death of the Policyholder or spouse in circumstances which are clearly detailed in the policy.
The above documents should provide sufficient proof that a valid claim exists under the policy.
This section of the policy does not apply if the Policyholder's wife/husband does not normally live at the same address as the Policyholder e.g. if Policyholder and wife are separated.
In 4* and 5* policies the time limit for injuries resulting in death is 60 days from the date of accident.
In 2* and 3* policies the time limit for injuries resulting in death is 30 days from the date of accident.
NOTE — THERE IS NO FATAL ACCIDENT COVER PROVIDED BY THE 1* BUDGET POLICY.
4.11 MIRRORS AND GLASS
2*/3*/4*/5* MAXPLAN Accidental Damage
1* BUDGET Specified Perils (No Accidental Damage cover)
This section includes: — 
1.
Mirrors.
2.
Glass tops.
3.
Fixed glass in furniture.
Under 4*/5* Maxplan policies, the damage is covered under the ‘All Other Accidental Loss or Damage’ heading.
(See section 2.18)
The amount payable is the replacement cost or repair cost (where a repair is possible).
4.12 LOCKS AND KEYS
4*/5* MAXPLAN Replacement keys and locks for external door locks for safes and alarms where the keys have been LOST or STOLEN.
Limit £500.
2*/3* Replacement and fitting of external door locks of the private residence where the keys have been STOLEN.
Limit £250.
1* BUDGET The Contents section covers the cost of replacement keys if stolen but not the locks unless damaged in burglary, when cover would exist under the Buildings section, if this was effected.
4.13 HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS AWAY FROM THE HOME
2* AND 3* POLICIES have an extension, ‘Household Contents Away From The Home’, which provides cover for ‘Household Contents’, as defined in the policy, whilst TEMPORARILY away from the home but still in the U.K., Republic of Ireland, or the Continent of Europe.
The cover is the same as
Part B, Section 1 but with certain exclusions as listed in the policy.
The following points should be noted:
1.
The policy covers theft from any building in which the Policyholder or a member of his family is living or employed.
This would include schools, if the insured's son or daughter had property stolen.
There is no cover provided by the policy for theft of property not contained in a building i.e. theft from a motor vehicle is not covered.
2.
Money is not covered outwith the dwelling.
The amount payable is limited to 20% of the sum insured in respect of Household Contents.
(Subject to certain article limits.)
4* AND 5* MAXPLAN policies provide a more wide ranging cover for contents away from the home and includes items temporarily removed to anywhere in the United Kingdom or the rest of the world.
1* BUDGET policy does not provide cover for contents away from the home.
4.14 DEEDS AND DOCUMENTS
4* and 5* policies cover the cost of reinstating Deeds and Documents.
The limit of amount payable under this section is £500.
4.15 METERED WATER
4* and 5* policies cover all sums for which the policyholder becomes legally liable to pay for loss of metered water resulting directly from accidental damage to water pipes and apparatus providing service to the buildings described in the schedule.
A record of meter readings must be maintained and any unusual fluctuations reported to the Water Authority as a condition of this cover.
There is a £1000 limit during any one period of insurance.
5.0 2*/3* POLICIES — PART C — WIDER INSURANCE (OCTOBER 1992)
This section provides all risks cover for certain property and the Policyholder selects which property is to be covered.
Cover is available on the following: — 
SPORTS EQUIPMENT
PEDAL CYCLES
PERSONAL EFFECTS & CLOTHING
PERSONAL MONEY
VALUABLES
FREEZER & REFRIGERATOR CONTENTS ***
CREDIT, CHEQUE & CASH CARDS ***
Cover is provided for contents accidentally lost, destroyed, damaged or stolen, other than for the items marked *** above.
The cover for the items marked *** is shown in Sections 5.7 and 5.8 of these instructions.
The cover under PART C is subject to certain exceptions, detailed in the appropriate policy.
In the event of damage to an item which is repairable, the claim would be settled on the basis of the repair cost.
If the item is beyond economical repair, the Policyholder must provide written confirmation of this from a repairer/dealer.
5.1 BASIS OF SETTLEMENT
The basis of settlement is the same as for Part B of the policy.
Refer Section 4.5.
The maximum payable is the sum insured including index-linking as shown on the Home Underwriting advice.
5.2 SPORTS EQUIPMENT
Boats, sail boards and wind surfers are specifically excluded under all Home policies.
It should also be noted that guns and firearms, parachutes, camping equipment and sub-aqua equipment are also excluded from this section.
5.3 PEDAL CYCLES
This section has a fixed limit which is not subject to index-linking and any settlement would be subject to wear and tear, where applicable.
Of the main range of Home Insurance policies only the 5* Maxplan policy provides full new for old cover in respect of bicycles.
1* — Indemnity basis
2* — Indemnity basis
3* — Indemnity basis
4* — Up to 5 years — New for old Over 5 years — Indemnity basis
5* — New for old
The following table should be used as a guide for calculating the appropriate amount of wear and tear:
AGE OF CYCLE WEAR & TEAR
It must be stressed that the above figures are only intended as a GUIDE and every claim must be considered on its merits.
e.g. Value of cycle = £275, excess = £50, policy limit = £200.
Value less excess = £225.
Maximum payable = £200. i.e. maximum payable would be policy limit, excess being deducted from loss.
It should be noted that the policy excludes the theft of any pedal cycle left both unlocked and unattended away from the home.
This must be strictly adhered to.
5.4 PERSONAL EFFECTS AND CLOTHING
Any settlement under this section of the policy in respect of clothing will be subject to a deduction for wear and tear, where applicable.
Fur coats/jackets, etc. are not covered under this section but would be covered under Jewellery and Valuables if effected under the policy.
Sheepskin coats/jackets would be considered as clothing.
5.5 PERSONAL MONEY
This relates to personal money excluding money held for business purposes.
See the Definition of Money (Section 4.4).
This section has a fixed limit which is not subject to index-linking.
5.6 VALUABLES
This section covers valuables which are accidentally lost, destroyed, damaged or stolen.
The cover is subject to certain exceptions, detailed in the policy.
It can cover unspecified and/or specified valuables.
In the case of unspecified valuables, there is a total sum insured and a separate single article limit.
Specified items are covered up to the amount shown on the Home Underwriting advice.
In the event of a claim in respect of an unspecified valuable exceeding the single article limit, where the cause of the loss/damage would be covered under Part B of 2*/3* Contents policies e.g. theft from the home, strictly speaking the maximum payable would be the single article limit.
If the single article limit is exceeded, then provided (a) the loss is covered under Part B, e.g. theft, and (b) the combined sums insured are adequate to cover the value at risk, then the balance of the claim can be dealt with under Part B. However, the Policyholder should be advised to review the sums insured under the policy to ensure adequate figures are maintained for each of the sections and the Underwriters should be notified accordingly.
NOTE — no such ‘topping up’ can be accepted under the 4* and 5* policies as the two categories within the contents section are mutually exclusive.
(See also Section 4.8.)
5.7 FREEZER AND REFRIGERATOR CONTENTS
This section covers damage to the contents of freezers and refrigerators, not the freezers etc. themselves, within the house or in the Policyholder's garage.
If the damage has been caused by an insured peril covered under Part B e.g. fire damage, then the damage to the freezer would be covered under Part B — Household Contents.
The damage to the contents of the freezer must be due to:
1.
Accidental failure of the freezing unit.
2.
Refrigerant fumes.
3.
Accidental failure of electricity or gas supply not caused by the deliberate act of the supply authority.
There is no cover under this section where the freezer plug has been accidentally removed or where the appliance has been switched off in error.
When dealing with a claim for freezer contents it is worthwhile considering the capacity of the freezer in relation to the size of the claim.
5.8 CREDIT, CHEQUE AND CASH CARDS
This section covers the Policyholder's LEGAL LIABILITY to pay any sums which are required under the terms of any credit, debit, charge, cheque or cash card following its loss and subsequent fraudulent use.
Care must be taken to ensure that the Policyholder is in fact legally liable to pay such sums within the terms and conditions of the credit card etc. agreement and that there is no other insurance in force to cover such losses (e.g. bank or issuing authority).
The Policyholder must report any loss of a card to the issuing authority and the police WITHIN 24 HOURS OF DISCOVERY OF THE LOSS.
He must also comply with the terms and conditions of the issuing authority.
(e.g. not disclosing personal identity number to anyone).
Since the introduction of the banking code for personal customers in December 1991, responsibility for disputed transactions on lost or stolen credit cards or cash cards has shifted from the customer to the bank.
The code means that the onus is now on the bank to prove serious negligence or fraud by the customer, otherwise the bank will require to pay.
There is a fixed limit under this section, which is not subject to index-linking.
It should be noted that 4* and 5* Maxplan Contents policyholders are entitled to use the Credit Card Registration Service.
All losses must be reported to the Helpline within 24 hours of discovering the loss.
6.0 GENERAL COMMENTS (OCTOBER 1992)
6.1 PRO-ACTIVE HANDLING OF HOME CLAIMS
It is clear that by taking positive action at the earliest possible opportunity we have the opportunity to control how a claim develops.
When a claim is intimated it is essential that we endeavour to direct the policyholder to a repairer or supplier of our choice.
There are clear financial advantages in doing so and the handling of the claim should be improved by involving reputable firms with whom we have developed a relationship.
Branches should avoid merely asking the insured to obtain estimate(s) or quotation(s) unless the type of claim or the remoteness of the location means that we cannot make use of our own local or national arrangements with traders.
Various national arrangements are in place at present and details of these are as follows:
Carpetland see Appendix 1
Solaglas see Appendix 2
Comp-U-Claim see Appendix 3
Clydesdale (Scotland only) see Appendix 4
Express Cycle Specialists see Appendix 5
In addition branches should seek to develop discount arrangements locally to supplement the national/regional arrangements already in place.
Normally, a discount of at least 10% would be expected from traders but it should be possible to obtain discounts of up to 30% from jewellers.
Branches should also be familiar with Helpline's Traders List for their own geographical area and continue to monitor the costs and standard of services provided.
6.2 UNDER-INSURANCE
Under-insurance arises when the sum insured is inadequate to cover the value of the property at risk.
As a general rule where the S.I.
is greater than 85% of the value at risk, we should proceed to settlement without taking into account the under-insurance present.
We should however insist that the S.I.
is immediately increased to the correct level.
Where the S.I.
represents between 60% and 85% of the value at risk, we should deal with the claim on a strict indemnity basis.
Again we should insist upon the S.I.
being immediately increased to the correct level.
Where the S.I.
represents less than 60% of the value at risk, we should obtain a full statement from the insured to establish how this has arisen.
If it seems clear that the insured is in breach of the full value declaration we should seek to avoid the policy and return the premium.
In these cases it may be appropriate after advising the insured of the position, to offer to make a payment based upon importing average into the contract and applying average to the amount of the claim.
If further guidance is required on any individual case, please submit full underwriting file and claim file to HO Home Claims & Support.
It is possible for a Policyholder to take out a policy without the benefit of index-linking.
If so, the policy would be endorsed with endorsement HO2 — Under-Insurance Clause and in the event of under-insurance, i.e. where the the sum insured represents less than the value at risk, the settlement would be subject to average, and the Policyholder would be responsible for a rateable proportion of the loss.
Index-Linking applies to all policies other than those endorsed with HO2.
The Underwriters should be advised of any cases where under-insurance exists, to enable them to take the appropriate action.
6.3 LOSS ADJUSTERS
Branch staff are encouraged to resolve claims without use of Loss Adjusters particularly in respect of claims anticipated to cost less than £1500.
Claims with an anticipated value of between £1500 and £3000 may still be handled by branch staff, either by telephone or visit, if they have or have access to the appropriate expertise.
This may particularly apply where only a small number of items are involved, e.g. jewellery/carpets.
Claims with an anticipated cost of over £3000 should normally be passed to Loss Adjusters.
Loss Adjusters should generally be appointed in the following circumstances:
1.
poor claims experience
2.
the claim is not straightforward under a policy in its first year
3.
reasons exist to be suspicious
4.
possible subsidence
We have special arrangements in place with Prime Loss Adjusters to ensure prompt claims investigation at a high standard combined with agreed scale fees.
Only Prime Loss Adjusters must be appointed for Home claims unless special circumstances arise.
When instructing Adjusters it is essential that full details are passed to them regarding policy cover and in particular any non standard features, endorsements, etc.
Adjusters reports should be carefully checked and any omissions or queries referred back to the Adjuster.
This is particularly relevant upon receipt of a final report when all estimates, receipts, etc, should be checked.
6.4 CLAIM INVESTIGATIONS
All claims require to be investigated.
This does not always mean that damaged property requires to be inspected or that Loss Adjusters must be appointed in every case.
There are no specific rules as to when damaged property should be inspected (other than when Loss Adjusters are appointed).
Obviously all claims not requiring the appointment of Loss Adjusters cannot be inspected but certain categories require closer investigation than others.
For example:
1.
Claims in the first year of the policy.
2.
Where there have been previous claims on the policy.
3.
Claims submitted with only vague details e.g. make, model numbers unknown, no receipts or valuations available and cannot recall where or when item was purchased.
4.
Claims submitted with only a vague description of how loss/damage occurred.
Certain categories of losses may require closer investigation to ensure the loss occurred as stated e.g. spillage of liquid in video recorder, camcorder accidentally left on seat of train, etc.
Where a claim is submitted stating ‘paint spilt on carpet’ investigations should be made to establish that the room was actually being redecorated at that time.
5.
Insured appears overly eager for a quick cash settlement.
6.
Suspicious documentation e.g. changes or alterations to estimates or invoices, same writing or typing on estimates or receipts as on claim form, no company logo on documentation.
Advances in technology mean that desktop publishing machines are now available which can reproduce precise legitimate invoices and estimates which may appear to be in order.
Where doubt arises as to the authenticity of such documentation it will be necessary to either discuss the invoice directly with the company or compare quality of the paper with another such invoice.
Care should be taken when items are claimed to be damaged ‘beyond economic repair’ particularly if the confirmation is received from a firm which has not been heard of previously.
In such cases, a phone call should be made to the firm and if any doubt still remains, it may be appropriate to obtain a second opinion by a known reliable firm.
Where a trader advises that an item is beyond economical repair, we should seek to ascertain, by phone if necessary, the actual cost of repair.
It frequently arises that an item is considered beyond economical repair based upon the second hand value and not the replacement value.
If an item requires to be replaced we should ensure that we are replacing on a like for like basis and not giving the insured a superior item containing advanced features and additional facilities.
This is particularly relevant in relation to electrical goods, photographic equipment, etc.
6.5 SALVAGE
The Claims Salvage Register must be used for all types of salvage.
There are obvious dangers in leaving the salvage with the Policyholder and therefore salvage should be retained by the Corporation.
However, it is accepted that there will be specific cases where it is necessary to leave the salvage with the Policyholder for the purposes of a settlement, in which case some adjustment should be made to the settlement figure.
6.6 THREE PIECE SUITES
This is a common cause of problems under Home policies and usually arises when one part of the suite, e.g. an armchair, is damaged.
If the damage can be repaired or invisibly mended, using perhaps a piece of material from a part of the armchair which is not normally in view, then the cost of repair would be paid, less any policy excess applicable.
However, if a repair is not possible, then the cost of re-covering the armchair in matching material would be the extent of our liability under the policy.
The main problem arises when repair is not possible as matching material is not available and the Insured claims the cost of a new Three Piece Suite.
All Home Insurance policies contain a Matching of Items clause.
If an individual item cannot be matched the wording of this clause should be brought to the attention of the policyholder.
Under the policy we are responsible for replacing only the damaged item and not undamaged matching items.
The claim should be settled on the basis of the cost of re-covering the damaged item, e.g. the armchair.
However where the insured wishes to have the whole suite recovered, a negotiated settlement may be agreed calculated on the basis of the cost of recovering the damaged item plus a maximum of 50% of the cost the remainder of the suite.
In cases of extreme difficulty, the papers should be passed to HO Home Claims & Support for advice.
6.7 CARPETS
Another problem area is where the Policyholder has the same carpet throughout his home.
If the carpet in one room is damaged beyond repair and the same carpet is available, then that carpet would be replaced.
If the carpet is no longer available, the Policyholder may claim the cost of a replacement throughout his house.
If so, full details of the lay-out of the Policyholder's house should be obtained.
If there are dividing doors or partitions then we should only pay the cost of the replacement carpet in the room where the damage has occurred.
If there are no doors or dividing partitions and the house is open plan, then it may be necessary to pay the cost of replacing the entire carpet with a carpet of similar quality.
It is essential that the quality of the carpet is identified, thereby ensuring that we replace like with like.
In most cases there should be no need to replace the underlay, carpet grippers, etc, when carpets are being replaced.
Door bars may require to be replaced as they often buckle when being lifted.
Underlay will most likely require replacement following water damage.
It is not always possible to determine at time of intimation whether a carpet will clean satisfactorily or whether it requires to be replaced.
This depends upon the material of the carpet, the nature of the substance spilt on it and how long the substance has been on the carpet without being treated.
Specialist advice should be sought from Servicemaster, Carpetland, etc, before authorising replacement.
However the undernoted information may act as a general guide to clarify what action may be required: — 
6.8 PAIRS AND SETS
This is another area where problems can arise when one item is lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed.
If the damaged item can be repaired, the cost of repair would be the amount payable.
However, if the item was lost, stolen or damaged beyond repair and there was cover under the appropriate policy, strictly speaking, the amount payable should be the cost of a replacement item.
However, a more sympathetic approach is normally required and a contribution made towards the cost of the undamaged item(s).
Refer Matching of Items instruction below.
It is often possible for a manufacturing jeweller to produce a replacement of the one item.
In some cases items may be specified on the policy as a pair or a set e.g. a pair of earrings.
In such case we must treat the pair as one insured item and if a repair or replacement of the lost/damaged item is not possible the insured is entitled to the sum insured for the pair or set.
In such cases it would be relevant to establish whether there is any salvage value in the undamaged item(s).
6.9 MATCHING OF ITEMS
All Home Insurance policies contain a Matching of Items clause.
This clause makes clear that we will not pay for the cost of replacing any undamaged item or parts of items forming part of a set or suite when damage occurs within a clearly identifiable area or to a specific part.
Problems most commonly arise in relation to sanitary fixtures (refer Section 3.3) and three piece suites (refer Section 6.6).
However, similar problems can arise with regard to kitchen units and fitted bedroom furniture, etc and similar considerations apply.
If an individual item cannot be matched, the wording of this clause should be brought to the attention of the policyholder.
Under the policy we are only responsible for providing a replacement item and are not responsible for supplying matching items.
However where the insured wishes to replace the whole set or suite, a negotiated settlement may be agreed calculated on the cost of replacing the damaged item plus up to a maximum of 50% of the cost of replacing the remainder of the set or suite.
However greater care should be exercised before negotiating up to 50%, particularly where the sums involved are larger.
Many permutations do exist but as a general rule, the matching of items clause should apply where the remaining undamaged parts of a set or suite can still fulfill the role for which they were purchased.
e.g. an undamaged chair which was part of a three piece suite can still fulfill its function.
If one of a pair of riding boots is damaged the other boot cannot be used on its own and we should pay for the cost of a new pair.
Branches should refer to HO Home Claims & Support in the event of difficulty or where further guidance is required.
6.10 ESTIMATES, INVOICES & PAYMENTS
Section 6.1 encourages pro-active handling of home claims in particular to direct a policyholder to tradesman or suppliers with whom we have local or national arrangements.
If no such arrangements are available the following procedures should be followed.
1.
ESTIMATES
An estimate for repair should be obtained where appropriate.
This should be sufficient to enable the repairs to be authorised.
However, if it is felt that the estimate is excessive, an alternative estimate should be obtained.
The original estimate should be forwarded by the Policyholder.
If the policyholder requests its return, it should be stamped with the Branch stamp plus a note of the claim number.
Where a quotation is submitted for replacement of an item, the cost should be compared against Comp-U-Claim or alternative suppliers to establish whether we can obtain the item more cheaply elsewhere.
It may also be appropriate to discuss with the firm supplying the original quotation to see whether we can obtain a discount.
2.
INVOICES
Where claims are settled on the basis of of an invoice, the original invoice should be obtained and kept on the claim file.
However the following exceptions are acceptable: — 
a.
Where we are reimbursing another insurance company in respect of their outlay it is not necessary to obtain sight of the original invoice.
A copy of the invoice will suffice.
b.
If the insured insists on the original invoice being returned to him the invoice should be noted and stamped to show that the GA have included this invoice as part of a claims settlement.
The note and stamp should be in an area of the invoice where it would be difficult to erase.
A copy of the invoice should be retained.
c.
If the insured insists on retaining the original invoice, we will accept a copy invoice which bears a company stamp and the signature of an authorised signatory.
However, the company concerned must note our interest on the account before a copy is taken and we must reserve our right to audit the original invoices at any time.
This facility should also be allowed where it has proved impossible to obtain original invoices.
A record of the companies who have been given this dispensation should be held in order that this may be checked by the auditors.
3.
INTERIM PAYMENTS
Generally, interim payments should not be made and every attempt should be made to settle the claim by one payment.
However, it is accepted that there are occasions when an interim payment is justified.
Loss Adjusters may recommend an interim payment to assist the Policyholder.
There may be a dispute over the amount of settlement and in such circumstances we should pay what we believe represents ‘indemnity’ whilst continuing any dialogue with the policyholder.
4.
PAYMENTS
Payment should be made to the Policyholder AND any other interested parties noted in the policy, e.g. a bank or building society as mortgagees.
If the Policyholder authorises us to pay a contractor direct and there is an interest noted on the policy, we must obtain written confirmation from the interested party that it is in order to pay the contractor direct.
As far as contents are concerned, if we are replacing an item, we can advise the Policyholder that we are settling the claim direct with the retailer/supplier.
We can then pay them direct with the possibility of obtaining a discount.
6.11 APPLICATION OF POLICY EXCESS AND SUM INSURED
When a policy limit has been reached and an excess applies, the following procedure should be adopted.
The excess should be deducted from the loss and then payment will be made up to the policy limit where applicable.
The following examples illustrate how the excess should be applied to the theft of cash under a ⅔*; Contents policy with a policy limit of £200 and a policy excess of £50.
EXAMPLE 1
Amount of loss £300
Policy excess £50
Claim net of excess £250
Policy limit exceeded, therefore payment would be policy limit ie. £200.
EXAMPLE 2:
Amount of loss £210
Policy excess £50
Claim net of excess £160
Claim within limit and we would therefore pay the sum of £160.
6.12 VALUE ADDED TAX
In the majority of home claims, the Policyholder will not be registered for VAT and therefore any settlements must include any VAT payable.
There are cases where the Policyholder is registered for VAT and is able to claim the VAT back.
In such circumstances, VAT should not be included in the settlement.
Repairs to a building or an item of contents may be required but the
Policyholder does not wish to have the repairs carried out immediately and requests a cash settlement.
This should not include VAT, as this is only payable when the repairs are carried out by a contractor/repairer who is VAT registered.
6.13 CUSTOMS DUTY
In the past where an item had been lost, stolen, destroyed or damaged which was originally purchased abroad, and the Policyholder admitted that the item was brought in to the U.K. without being declared at H.M. Customs then the extent of our liability was the value of the item less the amount of duty payable.
If the Policyholder did not wish us to approach H.M. Customs, then we would refuse to deal with the claim.
In view of the recent decisions by the Ombudsman this policy has to be changed.
He contends that in the absence of sufficient fact to establish, on the balance of probability, that the Policyholder could be subjected to a criminal prosecution in respect of the goods, then indemnity should be granted.
No reduction in the amount payable to represent unpaid duty or VAT can be made.
Enquiries into the loss will still have to be made but care must be taken not to ask questions where the answers might incriminate the Policyholder.
6.14 GUNS AND FIREARMS
Under the 1* Budget policy, guns and firearms are covered for standard perils.
Under 2* and 3* policies, guns and firearms are covered for standard perils but excluded under Wider Cover for Sports Equipment.
Under 4* and 5* Maxplan policies, they are covered for all perils.
Under the liability section of all policies, liability arising from the ownership, possession or use of firearms is excluded but this does not apply to shotguns or airguns which may be legally owned without possession of a firearms certificate.
However, in certain areas such as Guernsey and Northern Ireland, a firearms certificate is required for all guns.
It is the intention of the policy to provide liability cover in respect of the types of shotguns and airguns which do not require a licence within mainland Great Britain.
6.15 NO CLAIM DISCOUNT
2*, 3*, 4* and 5* Maxplan policies have provision for a No Claim Discount.
The NCD relates only to CONTENTS sections of these policies.
A claim in respect of Buildings only will have no affect on any existing NCD.
The scale of discount is as follows: — 
Where a claim is made affecting the NCD, ALL existing NCD will be lost.
Claims which do not affect No Claim Discount can be categorised as follows: — 
(a)
Where no payment is made
(b)
Where all payments have been recovered in full 
(c)
Where all payments are in respect of Buildings
(d)
Where payments are only for investigatory fees incurred by General Accident
(e)
Where the only payment made is under an agreement with a Third Party Insurer in the absence of which no payment would have been made.
Category (e) should also cater for the situation where a payment may be made to another insurer in accordance with current market practice as opposed to a specific agreement, e.g. a Travel insurer may seek partial reimbursement from us as Home insurers having dealt with a claim which is covered under both policies.
In such a case, we should pay our proportion and allow the NCD as the policyholder has not intimated a claim under the Home policy.
The computer system will automatically recognise all claims which fall under categories (a),(b) and (c).
However, it will be necessary to manually advise underwriters of all claims which fall under categories (d) and (e).
Form C15 — Non Motor Reinstatement of No Claim Discount should be completed and passed to the Personal/Underwriting section as soon as possible.
The Claim Front Sheet should be marked to show the date when form C15 has been issued and the initials of the person concerned.
6.16 PROCESS OF CLEANING
Certain sections of the policy contain an exclusion relating to loss or damage caused by any process of cleaning, repair or alteration.
This exclusion applies equally to domestic cleaning as to professional cleaning.
Therefore the following are examples of types of incidents which are not covered by the policy: — 
1.
Items of clothing which have shrunk, dyed or been otherwise damaged whilst undergoing cleaning, e.g. in a washing machine, tumble drier or washer/drier.
This includes cases where the damage results from a fault in the apparatus or where the wrong washing programme has been selected.
2.
Similarly, carpets, curtains and other such household contents would also be excluded whilst undergoing a cleaning process.
6.17 ENDORSEMENTS
There are three sets of endorsement which can be applied to Home Insurance policies, ‘H’ prefix, ‘N’prefix and ‘P’prefix.
H Prefix endorsements are pre-printed except for H90 — H99 which are free-format and require careful checking.
‘N’ prefix endorsements all carry variable terms and each must be checked.
‘P’ prefix endorsements are issued with renewals and normally update existing policies with new wordings, limits, etc. which are provided under the up to date policies.
Specimen copies of ‘H’ and ‘N’prefix endorsement wordings are contained in Public File Folder CLMSPOLS within Host.
7.0 LIABILITY (OCTOBER 1992)
7.1 LIABILITY CLAIMS DEPARTMENT
The Liability Claims Departments control the following types of claims:
1.
Third Party Injury claims
2.
Public Liability claims where the estimate exceeds £2500
3.
All claims involving litigation including recoveries Branches will deal with Public Liability claims where the estimate does not exceed £2500.
The liability cover under the policies is varied and the following paragraphs provide a summary of the cover available.
7.2 LIMITS OF LIABILITY
All policies provide cover for the Policyholder's liability: — 
1.
As owner of the present home — if Buildings cover is in force.
Limit of amount payable — £1,000,000.
2.
As occupier of the present home and in a personal capacity — if Contents cover is in force.
Limit of amount payable — £1,000,000.
3.
To his/her domestic employees — if Contents cover is in force.
Limit of amount payable — unlimited.
4.
As a tenant — if Contents cover is in force.
Limit of the amount payable — 10% of Contents sum insured (see paragraph 7.6).
5.
For Irrecoverable Court Awards — if Contents cover is in force.
Limit of amount payable £1,000,000.
7.3 OWNER'S LIABILITY
This covers the Policyholder's legal liability as owner of the Building.
The Policyholder may consider he is morally responsible but he must be LEGALLY responsible for the injury, illness, loss or damage, etc.
The type of situation covered here could be where a passer-by is injured when a loose slate falls from the Insured's roof and the Insured was aware of the loose slate.
This would create a legal liability.
This section also provides cover for the Policyholder's liability under the Defective Premises Act 1972 in connection with any previous homes occupied by the Policyholder.
7.4 OCCUPIERS LIABILITY
This covers the Policyholder's legal liability as occupier of the Building, not his moral responsibility.
If a friend was visiting the Policyholder and tripped over a loose carpet there could be liability subject to the Policyholder being negligent, ie if the Policyholder had been aware of the loose carpet for some time and had done nothing to prevent an accident happening.
If the friend was injured through no fault of the Policyholder, then although the Policyholder may feel morally responsible, if there has been no negligence, then there is no cover.
One situation which arises frequently is where a neighbour's house is damaged by roots from the Policyholder's trees.
If the Buildings were covered by one insurance company and the Contents covered by the Corporation or vice versa, subject to the Policyholder being legally liable, the claim would be dealt with by the CONTENTS insurers, under the Occupiers Liability section.
There is a market agreement on this subject.
This section also covers the Policyholder in a personal capacity e.g. the Policyholder's pet dog may attack and kill some sheep in a field.
If the Policyholder is legally responsible, there would be cover.
The cover under this section also includes members of the Policyholder's family living permanently with him.
Another example is where a burst pipe occurs in our policyholder's home causing water damage to neighbouring property.
This would fall to be considered under the occupiers liability section of a contents policy even where the occupant is merely a tenant and responsibility for maintenance of the pipes lies with the owner.
7.5 LIABILITY TO DOMESTIC EMPLOYEES
This covers the Policyholder's legal liability to domestic employees e.g. if a cleaner employed by the Policyholder, is injured in the Policyholder's home, due to negligence on the part of the Policyholder, or a fault in the premises or property supplied by the Insured, there would be cover under this section of the policy.
The cover under this section also includes negligence, etc. by a member of the Policyholder's family living permanently with him.
7.6 LIABILITY AS A TENANT
This covers the Policyholder for all sums which he is legally liable to pay as tenant, not the owner of his home.
This would apply to rented accommodation, council houses, etc.
This section covers: — 
1.
Damage to the home and/or interior decorations caused by any of the contingencies covered under Part B — Household Contents of the policies.
2.
Accidental damage to underground service pipes and cables.
3.
Accidental breakage of fixed glass and sanitary fittings.
The Policyholder must be legally responsible for the damage under the terms of the lease or tenancy/rental agreement.
If necessary a copy of the lease etc. should be requested from the Policyholder.
There are certain exclusions and these are clearly set out in the appropriate policy.
The total amount payable is limited to 10% of the sum insured in respect of‘Household Contents’ under the 1* Budget, 2* and 3* Contents policies or ‘Household Contents and Valuables and Portable Possessions’under 4* Contents and 5* Maxplan Contents policies.
7.7 IRRECOVERABLE COURT AWARDS
This section covers any sums which have been awarded to the Policyholder in a court in the United Kingdom and have not been paid to the Policyholder within 3 months of the date of the award.
However, cover is only present if the Liability section of the policy would have covered the Policyholder, if the roles had been reversed.
For example, Policyholder visiting a friend's house, trips over a loose carpet and injures himself.
Policyholder sues friend and the court awards damages to Policyholder, but friend has no insurance in force and is unable to pay the award.
There would be cover under this section of the policy, as cover would exist under the Owners/Occupiers Liability section of the policy, if the roles had been reversed, i.e. the Policyholder's friend suffered the injury at the Policyholder's home.
Once we have paid the claim, consideration should be given to pursuing recovery against the Third Party, by way of the Subrogation condition in the policy.
8.0 GENERAL CONDITIONS (OCTOBER 1992)
8.1 GENERAL
The conditions are standard and most are straightforward but certain ones require comment.
8.2 REASONABLE CARE
General Condition 3 of the policy, ‘Your Duty of Care’ presents frequent problems and the following notes can only be used as a guideline.
All Home policies carry a condition requiring the Policyholder to exercise reasonable care of the property insured to prevent it sustaining loss or damage.
The intention is to ensure that the Policyholder will not unnecessarily cause the safety of the property to be endangered.
Any breach or suspected breach gives rise to a policy indemnity question.
It is stressed that where matters of policy indemnity arise it is essential that prompt investigations be made.
The Policyholder should be informed that a question of policy indemnity has arisen and will require to be fully investigated.
A statement must be obtained from the Insured to establish the facts and to avoid subsequent disputes as to the circumstances.
The statement should cover all relevant aspects including: — 
1.
the value of the item at risk;
2.
the reasons why the item involved was at the location;
3.
the precautions taken to safeguard the item;
4.
the alternatives open to the insured.
The answers to these questions will help to determine what decision should be reached.
Following the case of Sofi v Prudential and the 1989 I O B Report the test now is whether the degree of carelessness amounted to gross or blatant negligence, recognising the practicalities of everyday life and that risks have to be undertaken.
Not only would momentary  inadvertence not constitute a breach of the duty of care but in addition the test should not be applied with hindsight.
Thus, if the Insured can demonstrate that thought was given to the safety of the property the duty will usually have been fulfilled even if subsequent events show that the precautions taken were inadequate.
Where no thought was given to the safety of the property and no real precautions taken to prevent the loss the Insured would be considered to be in breach of the duty of care.
For example, if an Insured left an item such as an expensive camera on view in his car without giving any thought to its safety or concealment perhaps on the basis that it was insured anyway that would be indicative of an unnecessary risk where no real precautions had been taken.
However, if the Insured intended to take the camera with him when leaving the car but forgot due to momentary  inadvertence that would not be a breach of the duty of care.
Similarly, it the Insured considered the risk to the camera but decided that it would be safer in a locked car than taking it to where he was going he could demonstrate that precautions were taken even if they subsequently proved inadequate and the car was broken into and the camera stolen.
This illustrates the vital importance of prompt and detailed investigation to establish the FACTS in each case to enable a decision to be made.
Indemnity issues should be dealt with in accordance with SCI 43 (General).
8.3 OTHER INSURANCES
This is the ‘Contribution’ condition and would apply when there is more than one policy.
For example, the Policyholder may have a 5* Maxplan policy with cover for unspecified valuables — Sum Insured £2,000 — Single
Article Limit £500.
He may also have a separate All Risks policy covering unspecified valuables — Sum Insured £5,000 — Single Article Limit £200.
If a ring valued at £350 is stolen, there is cover under both policies but the maximum payable is £300, assuming that a £50 excess applies.
The claim would be shared between insurers or policies on an independent liability basis and the Corporation would only pay its rateable proportion, i.e. 
Attention should be paid to the Home/Motor Etc Agreement within the Claims Agreements on HOST where special arrangements apply between the signatories of the Agreement.