

Fine Bone China
Wedgwood first produced fine bone china in the early years of the 19th century and since the turn of the 20th century it has become the company's major product.
In the past 30 years the design and manufacture of bone china has been considerably developed and today combines the latest in ceramic technology with craft skills.
Fine bone china is made from three main raw materials — china stone, china clay and animal bone.
It is the bone (reduced to a fine ash) that gives china its whiteness, translucency and above all its considerable strength.
Bone china tableware accounts for the greater part of output at the Wedgwood factory, where about one hundred designs are currently used in the production of this distinctively English ceramic ware.
Queen's Ware
Wedgwood's greatest achievement and contribution to the British pottery industry was his development and production of cream coloured earthenware.
Later to be known as Queen's Ware by royal assent of Queen Charlotte in 1765, this new, inexpensive and beautiful tableware put fine earthenware within reach of all, and his success was immediate and world-wide.
Josiah's most famous commission of all was in Queen's Ware, a dinner and dessert service for Empress Catherine II of Russia.
The dinner service consisted of 952 pieces decorated with free-hand paintings of 1,244 different English scenes.
Today, the Queen's Ware tableware range offers classic and contemporary designs to suit many tastes.
Oven to Tableware
To answer today's need for a more relaxed and casual style of entertaining, Wedgwood introduced, in 1965, their first range of oven-to-tableware.
Since then, several shapes have been introduced in many varied forms of decorative treatments.
Developed by Wedgwood ceramists, oven-to-tableware is made for strength and to withstand hard use.
It also provides labour-saving dishes, with casseroles and serving dishes available for use direct from the oven to the table.
Casual Tableware
For those who enjoy making every meal a special occasion — whether it's Saturday brunch or a dinner party for eight — and so are looking for something between their ‘best’ fine bone china service and oven-to-tableware, Wedgwood has introduced a range of ‘casual’designs, on fine bone china, on Queen's Ware and on their new fine china body.
Affordably priced, the Casual Dining collection is designed for you to use for any meal, every day.
Jasper
The last of the ceramic bodies developed by Josiah Wedgwood I, Jasper ware was perfected in 1774 after years of search for the right ingredients.
Jasper was prized by Wedgwood above all his productions and provides today one of the most valued and sought after ranges of ornamental ware in the world.
Josiah's crowning achievement in this ceramic body was the first replica of the Barberini or Portland Vase — the first satisfactory copy being made in 1789.
Jasper ware has been made continuously by Wedgwood from the 18th century to the present day.
The finely detailed bas-relief ornaments are applied by hand today, as they were in Josiah's day.
Black Basalt
The first ornamental ware to be developed by Josiah Wedgwood in 1768 was Black Basalt, a result of many experiments to improve the rather crude ‘Egyptian Black’ wares already made by some Staffordshire potters.
Popular through three centuries for vases, teawares, busts and cameos and a wide variety of ornamental wares.
Black Basalt has been true to the prophecy of Josiah Wedgwood who said of it: ‘The Black is sterling and will last forever.’
Jewellery
Wedgwood cameos in Jasper ware and Black Basalt were, in the 18th century, mounted as items of jewellery, in cut steel mounts made by the famous Birmingham engineer Matthew Boulton and other leading manufacturers.
Today, Wedgwood jewellery is still in extensive production.
Precious metals are now often used as settings for both traditional and modern jewellery designs.
Tiny bas-relief cameos are produced by the unique processes of figuremaking and ornamenting and many of the subjects are taken from Greek and Roman mythology.