

CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
Donald P. Brennan, Chairman
The continuing recession and reduced consumer spending worldwide affected Group revenues in 1992 In parallel, the Board continued with its determination to reduce substantially the cost base in both the Waterford Crystal and Wedgwood Group businesses.
Group operating profit for the year was steady at IR£9.1 million (1991: IR£9.1 million).
While sales revenues dropped to IR£273.6 million (1991: IR£292.1 million), overall volume substantially held up, a creditable performance in a year when most of the Group's major markets were in recession Financing costs at IR£7.7 million (1991: IR£6.5 million) reflect higher average debt over the period The taxation charge at IR£2 million was lower than the previous year due to lower profits in high tax jurisdictions.
There has been significant restructuring of the Waterford and Wedgwood businesses.
The resulting exceptional costs totalled IR£18.4 million.
The resultant loss for the year, after inclusion of the exceptional items, was IR£19.0 million.
The measures taken are consistent with the Board's strategy embarked upon 2 years ago, to return the Group to acceptable profits.
Net borrowings as at 31 December 1992 were IR£54.6 million, leading to gearing of 54 per cent, reflecting the significant cash impact of the IR£7.7 million restructuring at Waterford and capital investment in both businesses over the year.
The year has been particularly difficult for the Wedgwood Group with sales down on the previous year at IR£197.3 million (1991: IR£219.1 million).
In Sterling terms, however, sales were down 4 per cent(Stg£191.4 million against Stg£200.1 million for 1991).
Operating profit fell to IR£8.6 million from IR£10.3 million in 1991.
In my statement last year, I indicated that the strategy for the Wedgwood and Johnson Brothers brands involved significant reductions in manufacturing costs allied with investment in the latest production technologies: much has been achieved across the Wedgwood Group.
Surplus factories have been closed and capital spending projects increased.
Non-manufacturing costs have also been analysed to identify further savings for the current year.
These cost reduction and restructuring actions are being implemented and will provide additional funds for marketing support to build brand strengths whilst improving overall margins.
Waterford Crystal produced an operating profit of IR£0.5 million in 1992 (1991: loss of IR£1.2 million), the first operating profit generated by Waterford Crystal since 1986.
Sales increased to IR£76.3 million (1991: IR£73 million); at constant exchange rates, sales improved by 9 per cent.
A highlight of this performance was the contribution of the Marquis brand to the improvement in Waterford Crystal's operational profitability.
Total Waterford Crystal US sales were over 10 per cent up on 1991.
The recommendations of a study especially conducted in early 1992 have been largely implemented — involving manpower reductions, factory reconfiguration and the acceptance of a vital cost improvement agreement by the Waterford workforce.
The changes auger well for the return of the business to acceptable levels of profitability and are helpful signs for the future success of manufacturing in Waterford.
The Board believes that the increased marketing expenditure now budgeted for strengthening the Waterford brands will contribute to profitable growth in this business.
Throughout the year, the Group continued to invest in maintaining and enhancing the value of its tree existing core brands; Wedgwood, Waterford and Johnson Brothers.
A significant accomplishment for 1992 has been the addition of a fourth — Marquis by Waterford Crystal — to the Group's portfolio of internationally renowned brands.
Launched in the Autumn of 1991 in the United States, Marquis is now believed to be the sixth most popular line of premium crystal sold in the U.S. during 1992 — one of the most successful launches ever of a new crystal brand in that country.
For 1993, the Group has budgeted additional resources for the repositioning of Johnson Brothers.
Given the current retail environment in the U.K. and the U.S., the Group sees significant growth opportunity in 1993 for the repositioned Johnson Brothers brand.
During late 1992 and early 1993, Sterling and the Irish pound were devalued.
As a result of the Group's hedging policy, the benefits of these currency movements will partially impact 1993 and will clearly be seen in 1994.
Shareholders' funds have reduced by IR£37.4 million due to the loss for the period (IR£19 million), an adjustment to Waterford Crustal assets reflecting the restructuring completed in that business and the impact of the strong Irish Pound versus Sterling at 31 December 1992.
It is appropriate that I here take the opportunity of welcoming the thrust of recent authoritative reports detailing guidelines for good corporate governance.
The main recommendations are already in operation in the Group and we intend to adopt procedures that may be necessary to ensure compliance with the key aspects of recommended best practice.
On behalf of the Board and the shareholders I would like to thank all employees in both Group businesses for their continuing valuable contribution in another extremely difficult year.
Despite the likely continuance of a difficult climate for the current year, the Board is confident that the Group will maintain progress through implementation of measures, as in 1992, which increase the competitiveness of our business and in this way translate into higher operating margins.
The creation and enhancement of shareholder value is at the core of Group strategy for the long term — 1992 has seen a watershed in the Group's achievement of this aim.
The Waterford and Wedgwood brands are supported by world-renowned trademarks.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S REVIEW — WEDGWOOD GROUP
The Management team: Chief Executive Kneale Ashwell (seated centre) with Directors (left to right) Roger Little (sales), Christopher Johnson (production), Richard Barnes (finance), Robin Ritchie (marketing), George Stonier (human resources).
The effects of the continuing worldwide recession can be seen in the Wedgwood Group's 1992 results, with sales down 4 per cent in Sterling terms (10 per cent Irish) and operating profit by 11.7 per cent(16.5 per cent Irish).
Despite the drop in sales value, the Group's volume base remained intact, the number of pieces despatched being similar to 1991, reflecting a worldwide consumer trend towards lower-priced products.
Most of the Group's markets were affected by the prevailing economic environment.
There was even some downturn in Japan, though Wedgwood remains the leading imported brand and was not as badly affected as many other luxury goods businesses.
Sales in the important U.K. domestic market showed no improvement on 1991's disappointing level, and Continental Europe, particularly France, fell back against prior year.
Contrary to this general trend, the U.S. market showed solid signs of recovery with an overall sales gain of 9 per cent, within which Johnson Brothers was up a robust 22 per cent .
Despite Australia's economic difficulties, sales also rose there by 3 per cent.
Restructuring of the Business
Since December 1991, the Group has reduced its ceramic manufacturing locations from 11 to 7.
This action has consolidated production into an easier-to-manage, smaller number of units more suited to a continuing investment in new technology.
As the rationalisation and modernisation process continues, the Group will improve its ability to generate profits commensurate with the excellence of its products and the worldwide strength of its brands.
An integral component of restructuring has been the increased focus given to the Johnson Brothers' brand.
Johnson Brothers will be repositioned in 1993 as one of several important new marketing initiatives.
Employees
Primarily reflecting the reconfiguration taking place in manufacturing, the Group's worldwide employee base fell by around 500 to a 1992 year end total of 6,250.
This reduction was largely achieved on a voluntary basis, and our employees showed remarkable resilience and loyalty, despite such difficulties.
I would like to thank them for their continuing forbearance and understanding, and for their hard work throughout the year.
Environment
During the year, the Group made progress towards achieving its commitment to become an industry leader in its awareness of an approach to environmental issues.
Supported by our employees, many  initiatives were undertaken during 1992 to minimise the impact of our operations on the environment.
These included waste reduction, paper and cardboard recycling and improving energy efficiency.
In many cases, both the minimisation of environmental impact and cost savings compared with previous practice have been achieved.
Further initiatives for 1993 will include the measurement of our environmental performance against agreed standards, enabling future improvement targets to be set.
Management Team
During the year, Roger Little, formerly Managing Director of Waterford Wedgwood Australia, joined the U.K. Board as Sales Director, following the departure of Hugh Gledhill.
Roger brings a wealth of experience to the senior management team and will work closely with the marketing team on development strategies for the Company's key brands.
Robert Johnson, Managing Director of Johnson Brothers, will retire from the Board after 34 years' loyal and successful service with the Group.
Johnson Brothers will be repositioned in 1993 as one of several important new marketing initiatives.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S REVIEW — WATERFORD CRYSTAL
The management team: Chairman and Chief Executive Paddy Galvin (seated) with Directors (left to right) Brian Patterson (Chief Operating Officer), Redmond O'Donoghue (sales and marketing), John Fearson (finance) and Christopher McGillivary (chief executive, Waterford Crystal, U.S.A.)
Waterford Crystal recorded an operating profit in 1992 of IR£0.5 million compared with a loss of IR£1.2 million in 1991 and substantial losses in previous years.
This was the first operating profit since 1986 and was achieved in the face of continuing recession in our major markets and weaker exchange rates.
The past year was, we believe, a breakthrough in the turnaround of Waterford Crystal's fortunes.
A significant restructuring of the business has been achieved through substantial downsizing which has brought output and demand into line.
This has been achieved through a number of key actions including:
the successful launch of the Marquis brand
a vital cost improvement agreement with the workforce which reduces still further our manufacturing costs
the streamlining and reconfiguration of manufacturing operations
increased marketing resources and product development activity behind the Waterford brand, and
an established programme of outsourcing.
Sales in 1992 increased to IR£76.3 million, despite a generally hostile economic environment At constant exchange rates, sales increased by 9 per cent which benefited from a full year's contribution from the new Marquis brand.
In the short time since it was launched, in late 1991, Marquis has achieved acclaim from both retailers and consumers; it has already, we believe, reached the position of sixth best selling brand in the United States premium crystal market.
During 1992, Marquis was launched in other world markets and we look forward to additional sales from those markets as our new brand gains awareness and esteem.
During 1992, an extensive and continuing new product programme was initiated, with some 140 new products launched.
Using the improved cost position of our Waterford manufacturing facilities and an increased outsourcing programme, these products were positioned at competitive price points, at acceptable margins and respond to changing consumer tastes.
In the coming year, some 30 per cent of Waterford sales in the U.S. will come from new products introduced in the past two years.
With the support of increased marketing and sales activity, we see these new product programmes as key in gaining market share at profitable margins.
During the first half of 1992, a plan was developed to restore Waterford Crystal to acceptable profitability.
By year end this plan had been successfully implemented.
There are three inter-linked elements:
Manufacturing capacity has been scaled down to bring it into line with projected demand.
This was achieved through a carefully planned programme of voluntary redundancies and with no manufacturing disruption or imbalance to the skill mix.
In all, numbers employed in our Waterford operations are now 680 less than in 1991.
This has recently reduced short-time working which, for two years, had sapped morale at our factories.
In parallel, our manufacturing operations have been streamlined to improve product flows and efficiencies.
Low cost process improvements have been introduced in many areas.
A major new cost improvement programme was agreed in January 1993 after months of intensive discussion and negotiation.
This agreement includes pay reductions at all levels — a difficult but necessary measure — new pay systems, contracting out of non-core activities and a three year industrial peace clause.
These changes, which amount to a substantial achievement, are due to the courage and maturity of the Waterford workforce, who have demonstrated their determination to make sacrifices in order to preserve jobs and save manufacturing in Waterford.
The agreed cost reductions give us a more competitive position which will see us well placed to benefit from the expected upturn in our major markets.
We can now face the future with optimism.
The underlying improvement in operating performance and the restructuring implemented in 1992 have set us on the path to full recovery.
Management and employees at Waterford Crystal have tried long and hard to turn around a company in severe difficulties but everyone realises that the process will not be complete until we generate an adequate return on investment.
Our efforts will continue, to ensure that Waterford Crystal achieves acceptable and ever improving profits.
New products and increased marketing activity are key to Waterford Crystal gaining market share at profitable margins.
DIRECTORS AND OTHER INFORMATION
Group Board of Directors
Non-executive Directors
Donald P. Brennan was appointed to the Board on 22 May 1991 and to the board of Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc on 14 June 1991.
He was appointed Chairman of the Group on 19 June 1991.
He is a director of Morgan Stanley & Co.
Incorporated, and managing director of Morgan Stanley's Merchant Banking Division.
He is chairman of Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II.
Inc. and of Agricultural Minerals Corporation.
He is a director of 
David I. Dand has been a director of the Group since 5 July 1985.
He is chairman of Gilbeys of Ireland Group and a director of .
Gerald P. Dempsey joined the Group on 1 March 1986.
He is a director of .
Sonia Land was appointed to the Board on 25 March 1992.
She is chief executive of Sheil Land Associated Limited, executive chairman of Studio Editions Limited, chairman of Merlion Publishing Limited, and a director of other companies.
Kevin C. McGoran was appointed to the Board on 25 April 1990 and to the board of Waterford Crystal Limited on 19 March 1991.
He is deputy chairman and chief executive of .
Robert H. Niehaus was appointed to the Board on 25 April 1990 and to the board of Waterford Crystal Limited on 19 March 1991.
He is a managing director of .
Anthony J.F. O'Reilly was appointed to the Board on 25 April 1990.
He was appointed chairman of Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc on 19 June 1991.
He is chairman, president and chief executive of the .
He is a member of the Board of the New York Stock Exchange and a director of the Washington Post, Shuttleway and other companies.
F. Alan Wedgwood has been a director of the Group since 28 November 1986 and was appointed a director of Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc on 15 June 1991.
He is a department manager at Harwell Laboratory and has been a director of Wedgwood since 1966.
Board Committees:
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
The Directors submit their report to the shareholders, together with the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 1992.
Results
The financial statements for the year ended 31 December 1992 are set out in detail on pages 15 to 30.
A summary of the results is as follows:
Additionally, transfers from reserves and translation adjustments totally IR£7.235 million brought about a decrease in the Profit and Loss balance during the year of IR£26.267 million.
The Directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend.
Principal Activities
The Group operates two independent and autonomous businesses.
These comprise the Waterford Crystal business and the Wedgwood Group of companies.
The Waterford Crustal business comprises the manufacture, marketing, distribution and retailing of high quality crystal products including stemware and giftware.
The Wedgwood Group business comprises the manufacture, distribution and retailing of high quality bone china tableware and giftware by Wedgwood together with quality earthenware tableware by Johnson Brothers and the distribution of crystal products in world markets other than Ireland and the U.S.A. The Company's principal subsidiary companies as at 31 December 1992 are listed on the inside back cover.
Review of the Business
The Group's 1992 results and its manufacturing and trading activities in worldwide markets are summarised in the Chairman's Statement and the respective Chief Executive's Reviews of both the Wedgwood Group and the Waterford Crystal business on pages 4 to 9.
Events Since the Year End
A major cost improvement programme was agreed in the Waterford Crystal business in January 1993.
This agreement includes pay reductions at all levels, contracting out of non-core activities and a three year industrial peace clause.
The devaluation of the Irish pound in January 1993 will primarily benefit the Waterford Crystal business.
Due to the Group's currency hedging policy the benefits of currency movements will partially impact 1993 and will clearly be seen in 1994.
There have been no other significant events affecting the Group since the year end.
Future Developments
The Waterford Crustal business is examining a range of potential opportunities for selective brand extension.
It will continue to build on the success achieved with the Marquis brand by Waterford Crystal.
The Wedgwood Group's organisation has been restructured to provide greater focus on the key elements of the marketing mix.
Priority will be given to the development of a broader selection of premium casual products, to the repositioning of the Johnson Brothers' brand and to further strengthening Wedgwood's premium product offerings.
Strategies that ensure the modernisation of manufacturing, distribution and the minimisation of overhead costs will continue to be pursued vigorously.
Board of Directors
The Directors of the Company are as stated on page 10.
B.D. Patterson, who was appointed to the Board on 17 September 1992, now retires in accordance with the articles of association and, being eligible, will offer himself for election.
K.C. McGoran, P.R.
O'Donoghue, E.P.
Galvin and C.J.S. Johnson will retire from the Board by rotation, and being eligible, will offer themselves for re-election.
E.P.
Galvin, C.J.S. Johnson, P.R.
O'Donoghue and B.D. Patterson each have service contracts.
In the case of each contract the unexpired period is three years.
Directors' Interests
There have been no contracts or arrangements with the Company or any subsidiary at any time during the financial year, or  between 31 December 1992 and 30 March 1993, in which a Director of the Company was materially interested and which was significant in relation to the Company's business.
The interests of the Directors and of the Company Secretary in the shares of the Company at the dates shown (or from date of appointment if after 31 December 1991) together with particulars of their holdings and those of immediate families, were:
Non-Beneficial Interests
The undernoted Directors have a non-beneficial interest in the shares of the Company:
The interests of D.P. Brennan and R.H. Niehaus, disclosed pursuant to Section 54(5) (a) of the Companies Act 1990, are derived from the interest of Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II, LP in the shares of Shuttleway.
The shares,(3,000), in which D.I.
Dand had disclosed a non-beneficial interest at 31 December 1991, were disposed of before 31 December 1992.
Save in respect of the reported acquisition of 5,000 stock units by K.H. Ashwell on 27 January 1993, there has been no change in any of the above interests between 31 December 1993 and 30 March 1993.
Dungarvan Crystal Limited
Each of the Directors, G.P. Dempsey, E.P.
Galvin, P.R.
O'Donoghue and B.D. Patterson together with the Company Secretary had beneficial interests in the redeemable preference share capital (IR£1 shares) of Dungarvan Crystal Limited, a subsidiary company, during 1992 but all such interests ceased before 31 December 1992.
Options
Options are exercisable by the Directors and the Company Secretary over a total of 1,398,330 Ordinary Shares as set out above at prices ranging from IR59.25p to IR£1.28 and from 73pStg to £1.19Stg.
In the case of C.J.S. Johnson his options include options over 18,730 shares under the Wedgwood Savings Related Share Option Scheme.
These options have been granted at prices of 12.5pStg., 14.5pStg. and 29pStg. and are exercisable between December 1995 and May 1998.
Save in respect of a tranche of 5,800 options granted to C.J.S. Johnson in October 1992 under the Wedgwood Savings Related Share Option Scheme at an option price of 12.5pStg. no other options were granted to any other Director or to the Company Secretary in 1992.
Long Term Incentive Plan
During 1992 the Board approved the introduction of a Long Term Incentive Plan which will change the manner in which Executive Directors and Senior Executives in the Group are remunerated.
A significant element of remuneration will now be linked to long term performance measured as the growth in the value of the Company's stock units through the period to 31 December 1996.
Participation in the Plan and its extent, together with any award under the Plan, will be at the sole discretion of the Group Remuneration Committee.
No provision has been included in the 1992 financial statements in respect of any potential awards under the Plan as the criteria set out in the rules of the Plan to quality for any award in relation to performance in 1992 were not achieved.
The rules of the Plan will be available for inspection at the Annual General Meeting.
Share Capital
At 31 December 1992 the issued share capital of the Group was IR£42,553,000 comprising 708,840,126 Ordinary Shares in the Company and 670,359,429 Income Shares in Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc.
During the year the share capital issued was increased as follows:
i
74,726 Ordinary Shares were issued for cash as a result of the yearly exercise of options under the Rules of the Wedgwood Savings Related Share Option Scheme.
ii
1,500 Income Shares (Sterling 1p) in Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc were issued for cash in order to convert existing holdings of Ordinary Shares into Stock Units and
iii
16,315,227 Income Shares in Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc were issued during 1992 to form Stock Units under the procedures enacted to simplify trading in the Group's securities as approved at the Extraordinary General Meetings of the Company and Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc both held on 28 March 1990.
Authority to Allot Shares
Shareholders will be asked to renew the authority of the Directors to allot and issue the Ordinary Share capital in the Company and to renew, until the Annual General Meeting in 1994, the authority not to apply the strict statutory pre-emption provisions in the events of a Rights Issue or in any other issue up to an aggregate of 5 per cent of the issued Ordinary Share Capital as at 31 December 1992.
Substantial Ordinary Shareholders at 30 March 1993
The Company has been notified of the following interests in its share capital:
The Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II, L.P., The Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II, Inc.; MS/WW L.P.; and MS/ww Holdings Incorporated have notified an interest (14.95%) in the Company derived from their respective interests in the shares registered in the name of Shuttleway.
Fitzwilton Public Limited Company have similarly disclosed an interest (9.40%) in the Company.
Shapton Limited and Lombard Holdings Limited have each disclosed to the Company a notifiable interest in accordance with the Companies Act 1990 derived from their respective shares registered in the name of Shuttleway.
The Company has been notified of the following shareholders between 3 per cent and 5 per cent:
So far as the Board is aware there are no other holdings of 3 per cent or more of the share capital of the Company.
Research & Development
The Group maintains design and development departments in most of its manufacturing divisions.
Expenditure on design and development in 1992 amounted to IR£2.2 million and related mainly to the development of new product and patterns.
Waterford Crystal won approval on January 1993 for a grant of £536,000 under the E.C.
Industry Research and Development Initiative, representing 50 per cent of the estimated cost of a Process Automation and Furnace Management project directly related to crystal manufacturing.
Health & Safety
The Group pursues an active policy of providing safe systems of work and on-the-job safety training.
The Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 1989 imposed certain new obligations on employers.
The safety statements of relevant Group companies reflect these obligations and the continued successful implementation of the safety statement policies has been maintained through systematic review.
Auditors
The Auditors, Price Waterhouse, will continue in office in accordance with Section 160(2) of the Companies Act 1963.
Company Status
So far as the Directors are aware, the close company provisions of the Corporation Tax Act 1976 do not apply.
On behalf of the Board:, Chairman , Director
30 March 1993 
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS
To the Members of Waterford Wedgwood plc
We have audited the financial statements on pages 15 to 30 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group at 31 December 1992 and of the loss and cash flows of the Group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Acts 1963 to 1990.
In our opinion the information given in the Directors' report on pages 11 to 13 is consistent with the financial statements.
We have obtained all the information and explanations we consider necessary for the purposes of our audit.
In our opinion proper books of accounts have been kept by the Company.
The Company's balance sheet is in agreement with the books of account.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The significant accounting policies adopted by the Group are as follows:
Basis of Accounting and Consolidation
The financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention modified by the revaluation of properties and in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
The consolidated financial statements include those of the Company and all its subsidiaries made up to the end of the financial year.
Foreign Currencies
Assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated into Irish pounds at the year-end exchange rates.
Trading results of overseas subsidiaries are translated into Irish pounds at the average rates of exchange for the year.
Exchange differences arising from the restatement of opening balance sheets of overseas subsidiaries at year-end exchange rates and from the translation of the results of those subsidiaries at average exchange rates are dealt with through reserves, net of exchange differences on related currency borrowings.
Other exchange gains and losses are taken to the profit and loss account.
It is the Group's policy to protect income, where appropriate, by means of forward currency contracts entered into to fix the exchange rates applicable to estimated future currency receipts.
Profits or losses arising from these arrangements are accounted for in the financial year in which the contract matures.
Accordingly, no account is taken of unrealised profits or losses arising on such forward exchange contracts.
Tangible Assets and Depreciation
Tangible assets are stated at cost or valuation less accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation is calculated to write off the cost or valuation of tangible assets other than freehold land over their estimated useful lives.
Gains on property disposals are calculated by reference to historical net book value to the Group.
Stocks
Stocks are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
In the case of finished goods and work-in-progress manufactured by the Group, cost comprises the cost of labour and materials together with appropriate factory and other overheads.
In the case of other stocks, cost is ascertained by reference to purchase price plus duty where appropriate.
Net realisable value is the actual or estimated selling price (net of trade discounts) less all further costs to completion and less all costs to be incurred in marketing, selling and distribution.
Accounting for Acquisitions
The results of companies acquired are included from the effective date of acquisition.
The net assets of companies acquired are incorporated in the consolidated accounts at their fair values to the Group after making provisions for expected reorganisation costs and related gains and losses pending reorganisation.
In addition, adjustments are made to reflect the alignment of accounting policies where the accounting policies of acquired companies would otherwise be inconsistent with those of the Group.
Capital Grants
Capital grants are treated as deferred credits and are credited to the profit and loss account on the same basis as the related tangible assets are depreciated.
Taxation
Deferred taxation is accounted for to the extent that a liability or an asset is expected to crystallise.
No provision is made for any additional taxation which might arise should the retained reserves of overseas subsidiary companies be distributed.
Advance corporation tax not recoverable against the mainstream corporation tax liability for the current or previous years is written off to the profit and loss account unless its future recovery can be foreseen.
Research and Product Development
All expenditure on research and development including the cost of patents and trade marks is written off to the profit and loss account in the year in which it is incurred.
Pensions
The expected cost of providing pensions to employees is charged to the profit and loss account as incurred over the period of employment of pensionable employees.
The cost is calculated with the benefit of advice from independent actuaries at what is expected to be a reasonably stable proportion of pensionable pay.
Any surpluses or deficits in the pension schemes identified by periodic actuarial valuations are taken to the profit and loss account over the remainder of the expected service lives of current employees.
Leasing
An asset acquired under a lease that transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the Group (finance lease) is capitalised as a tangible asset and depreciated over the shorter of the lease term or its estimated useful life.
The corresponding obligations (net of finance charges) are included in creditors.
Finance charges are allocated to accounting periods over the primary period of the lease and represent a constant proportion of the balance of capital payments outstanding.
Operating lease rentals are charged in the profit and loss account in the year in which they arise.
CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
COMPANY BALANCE SHEET
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1.
Segment Information
The exchange rates used between the Irish pound and the principal foreign currencies in which the Group does business were as follows:
2.
Exceptional costs
Of the IR£16.5 million restructuring and rationalisation costs in 1992, IR£8.8 million relates to cost reduction initiatives at the manufacturing plants in Waterford and IR£7.7 million to the Wedgwood Group.
Of the restructuring and rationalisation costs in 1991, IR£2 million related to Waterford Crystal manufacturing facilities in Ireland and IR£3.3 million to the closure of three Wedgwood Group manufacturing facilities in the United Kingdom.
6.
Taxation
At 31 December 1992, the Group had Irish corporation taxation losses of approximately IR£97.5 million (1991: IR£91.6 million) and overseas taxation losses of IR£39.4 million (1991: IR£35.0 million)
7.
Loss per share
The calculation of loss per share is based on 708,790,691 shares for 1992 being the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year ended 31 December 1992 (1991: 708,759,748).
If all shares which may be issued under share option schemes were to be included, the loss per share would not be materially affected.
8.
Tangible assets
No depreciation is charged on freehold land with a book value of IR£6.9 million (1991: IR£5.7 million).
Valuations of the Group's Irish and United Kingdom land and buildings were carried out at 31 December 1992 by .
The properties were valued as follows:
Principal manufacturing plants in County Waterford, Ireland and at Barlaston, Stoke-on-Trent, England: depreciated replacement cost.
Other properties, open market value for the existing use, for properties not surplus to requirements and open market value for other properties.
Plant and equipment includes assets held under finance leases at IR£6.6 million (1991: IR£8.6 million).
Depreciation in respect of assets held under finance leases amounted to IR£1.5 million (1991: IR£1.6 million).
Land and buildings included at cost or valuation would have been stated on an historical cost basis at:
10.
Stocks
The estimated replacement cost of stocks is not materially different from the above amounts.
12.
Creditors
Pension commitments include IR£853,000 (1991: IR£750,000) in respect of former Directors.
13.
Borrowings
The Group continues to materialise secured bank borrowings to finance its working capital and capital expenditure.
Loan facilities of up to Stg£105 million are available to the Group until November 1994 under a refinancing agreement of 1 May 1991.
The Directors consider this to be adequate for the Group's foreseeable requirements.
The terms of the refinancing agreement include financial covenants for 1993 and 1994 which impose specific performance requirements on the individual Waterford Crystal and Wedgwood Group businesses, and allow modest headroom against the current projections.
The Directors believe that the Group will comply with these financial covenants.
15.
Share capital
A total of 20,773,950 Ordinary Shares have been made available to grant share options to Group executives under Executive Share Option Schemes.
As at 31 December 1992, options over 5,783,200 shares are exercisable at prices varying from IR20.5p to IR130p.
Under the Wedgwood Savings Related Share Option Scheme, options were outstanding over a total of 13,974,414 Ordinary Shares at a price of 14.5p Sterling, exercisable under normal circumstances within the period of six months from 14 December 1995; over 2,351,041 Ordinary Shares at a price of 29p Sterling, exercisable under normal circumstances within a period of six months from 1 January 1997 or 1 January 1999, depending on the savings period; and over 4,896,200 Ordinary Shares at a price of 12.5p Sterling, exercisable under normal circumstances within a period of six months from 1 November 1997 or 1 November 1999, depending on the savings period.
Income Shares in Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc, a subsidiary of Waterford Wedgwood plc incorporated in England, are non-voting 1p Sterling shares which entitle holders to elect to receive dividends with a U.K. taxation credit attached.
16.
Reserves
The revaluation reserve arises from the revaluation of land and buildings.
No provision has been made for any taxation liability that would arise is these assets were disposed of at their revalued amount.
As permitted by Section 3(2) of the Companies (Amendments) Act, 1986, the profit and loss account of the Company is not presented in these financial statements.
17.
Contingent liabilities
The Company has entered into guarantees with a syndicate of banks in respect of Group borrowings under a refinancing agreement (see Note 13).
20.
Pensions and similar financial commitments
The majority of the Group's employees participate in defined benefit pension schemes based on final pensionable pay.
The assets of all the schemes are invested separately from those of the Group in trustee administered funds.
The contributions to the schemes by the companies are charged to the profit and loss account so as to spread the cost of pensions incurred over employees working lives with the Group.
Contributions are determined by qualified actuaries on the basis of periodic valuations using the projected unit method.
The most recently completed actuarial valuations of the two major schemes were as at 31 December 1991 for Wedgwood Group United Kingdom employees and as at 1 January 1993 for Waterford Crystal factory employees.
The related actuarial reports are not available for public inspection.
On the basis of the actuarial valuation the market value of the scheme assets in the Wedgwood Group Pension Plan at 31 December 1991 was IR£71.4 million and this exceeded the benefits that had accrued to members based on service to and pensionable pay at the valuation date.
The level of funding was sufficient to cover 100 per cent of the benefits that had accrued to members after allowing for expected future pay increases.
The principal assumption in this valuation was that the investment return would exceed general salary inflation by 1.5 per cent.
On the basis of the actuarial valuation the market value of the scheme assets in the Waterford Crystal factory scheme at 1 January 1993 was IR£32.0 million and this exceeded 100 per cent of the benefits that have accrued to members based on service to, and pensionable pay at the valuation date.
The level of funding was 97.3 per cent after allowing for expected future pay increases.
These contributions will be charged over the average expected remaining service lives of employees as a fixed percentage of expected future pay.
The principal assumption in this valuation was that the investment return would be 3 per cent per annum compound higher than the rate of earnings increase.
The difference between the major assumptions adopted by the actuaries in respect of the two principal schemes reflects differences in historical and projected experience and differences in the scheme rules.
The pension cost charged to the profit and loss account in respect of defined benefit pension schemes was IR£5,292,000 (1991: IR£6,742,000).
The principal factors giving rise to the change are the reduction in the workforce and revised pension arrangements agreed with Waterford Crystal employees.
For certain Group employees outside Ireland and the United Kingdom, the pension entitlements are secured by defined contribution schemes, the cost of which amounted to IR£672,000 (1991: IR£873,000).
A provision of IR£512,000 is included in creditors at 31 December 1992 (31 December 1991: IR£426,000) being the excess of the accumulated pension cost over the amounts funded.
A prepayment of IR£212,000 is included in debtors at 31 December 1992 (31 December 1991: IR£107,000) being prepaid contributions.
Disability Fund
Waterford Crystal contributes to a disability scheme under which employees who become disabled have certain entitlements.
The amount of these entitlements has been actuarially assessed and is fully funded by assets held independently of the Group.
Under the latest agreement with Waterford Crystal employees, the Company's annual contribution to the scheme is IR£150,000.
21 Foreign currency hedging
The Group uses forward currency contracts in the normal course of business to hedge exchange risk on anticipated foreign currency transactions.
These transactions are converted at the contract rate upon expiry.
At 31 December the Group had the following forward sales commitments:
At 31 December 1992 the Group had forward purchase commitments amounting to Deutschmarks 9 million (1991: nil).
25 Approval of financial statements
The Directors approved the financial statements on 30 March 1993.
FIVE YEAR PERFORMANCE
Prior year consolidated profit and loss accounts have been restated to accord with current accounting practice.
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION FOR OVERSEAS INVESTORS
Waterford Wedgwood Stock Units are quoted on the Irish Stock Exchange, the London Stock Exchange and, in the United States, in the form of American Depository Shares (ADS's).
The Income Share, developed as part of the acquisition of Wedgwood, entitles its holder to elect to receive dividends from the Group's U.K. earnings, a facility beneficial to most U.K. and U.S. investors and certain Irish institutional shareholders.
Following the simplification of dealings within the Group's securities, it should be noted that holders of Ordinary Shares only, who wish to receive U.K. sourced dividends, must subscribe for Income Shares in Waterford Wedgwood U.K. plc and make a formal election to that effect in the ordinary way.
In the U.S., trading takes place over the counter on the basis of prices quoted on the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation (NASDAQ) system.
The ticker symbol is WATFZ.
The administration of the sponsored depository arrangements is handled by Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York.
U.S. legislation requires a number of filings to be made with the Securities and Exchange Commission including an annual report on Form 20-F.
These filings are available for public inspection.
Summary financial statements
To assist overseas investors the consolidated financial statements of Waterford Wedgwood plc are presented in summary form below, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the Republic of Ireland (‘Irish GAAP’) translated at the year end exchange rates of IR£1 = US$1.63 and Stg£1.07.
The Group prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with Irish GAAP.
The principles used are explained on page 15 and differ from generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the United States (‘U.S. GAAP’).
The effect in summary form on net income of such differences and an explanation of the principles are set out below:
The net loss and net tangible assets for ADS are based on the weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue during the year as shown in Note 7 on page 22.
Summary of principal differences between Irish and U.S. GAAP
The financial statements of the Group are prepared in accordance with Irish GAAP, which differ in certain significant respects from U.S. GAAP.
These differences relate principally to the following items:
a
Deferred taxation Under Irish GAAP, no provision is made for deferred taxation if there is reasonable evidence that such deferred taxation will not be payable in the foreseeable future.
Under U.S. GAAP, deferred taxation is provided on all timing differences using the liability method.
b
Revaluation of properties Under Irish GAAP, property values may be restated on the basis of appraised values in financial statements prepared in all other respects in accordance with the historical cost convention.
Such restatements are not generally permitted under U.S. GAAP.
c
Forward currency contracts The Group uses forward currency contracts to hedge foreign exchange exposure on anticipated foreign currency receipts.
Under Irish and U.S. GAAP, these transactions are converted into Irish pounds at the contract rate upon expiration.
However, under U.S. GAAP unrealized gains and losses on contracts yet to expire are measured at each balance sheet date and included in the results of operations for the period then ended.
d
Capital grants Under Irish GAAP, capital grants received prior to 1974 were credited directly to a capital grants reserve account included in other reserves.
Subsequent to 1974, and consistent with U.S. GAAP, such grants are credited to a capital grants deferred account and amortized to the income statement over the lives of the assets to which they relate.
e
Goodwill Under Irish GAAP, goodwill may be either written off immediately on completion of the acquisition against shareholders' equity or capitalized in the balance sheet and amortized through the income statement on a systematic basis over its useful economic life.
Under U.S. GAAP accounting for goodwill as an offset against shareholders' equity is not permitted; rather goodwill must be amortized over the period of its expected useful life, subject to a maximum write-off period of 40 years, through the income statement.
f
Pensions Under Irish GAAP, the expected cost of providing pensions to employees is charged to the profit and loss account as incurred over the period of employment of pensionable employees, with any surplus or deficit of plan obligations over plan assets amortized to the income statement over the expected future service lives of the active employees, at a fixed proportion of pensionable pay.
Under U.S. GAAP, such surplus or deficit is amortized to the income statement on a straight line basis over the average remaining service lives of active employees.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held at Hotel Conrad,, on 16 June 1993 at 11 a.m for the following purposes:
Ordinary Business
1
To receive and consider the Report of the Directors and Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 1992.
2
To re-elect the following Directors, who retire in accordance with the Articles of Association:
Retiring by rotation:
Appointed since the last Annual General Meeting:
3
To authorise the Directors to fix the remuneration of the auditors.
Special Business
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolutions of which A. will be proposed as an ordinary resolution and B. as a special resolution.
A. ‘That the Directors be and they are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot relevant securities (within the meaning of Section 20 of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1983) up to an amount equal to the authorised but as yet unissued share capital of the Company at the close of business on the date of the passing of this resolution.
The authority hereby conferred shall expire at the close of business on the date of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company after the date of the passing of this resolution, unless previously renewed, varied or revoked by the Company in general meeting, provided, however, that the Company may make an offer or agreement before the expiry date of this authority which would or might require relevant securities to be allotted after this authority has expired and the Directors may allot relevant securities in pursuance of any such offer or agreement.’
B. ‘That, subject to the passing of Resolution A, before this meeting, the Directors be and they are hereby empowered pursuant to Section 24 of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1983 to allot equity securities (as defined by section 23 of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1983) for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by such resolution as if sub-section (1) of the said Section 23 did not apply to any such allotment provided that this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities in connection with a rights issue in favour of shareholders and to the allotment (otherwise than pursuant to a rights issue as aforesaid) of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal value of IR£1,772,100.
This authority shall expire on the date on which the authority conferred by the preceding resolution before this meeting shall be revoked or shall expire unless such power be renewed in accordance with and subject to the  said Section 24.
The Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if the powers conferred thereby had not expired.’
NOTES:
1
A member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend, speak and vote on his behalf.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
2
Forms of proxy must reach the Company's Share Registrars, or the registered office of the Company, not less than 48 hours before the time appointed for the holding of the meeting.
3
The report and accounts are sent to all shareholders and loan stock holders of the Company, but only the holders of ordinary shares in the Company are entitled to attend or be represented at the above meeting.
4
Copies of contracts of service (unless expiring or determinable by the employing company without payment of compensation within one year) of any Director of the Company with the Company or any of its subsidiaries will be available for the inspection by members at the registered office of the Company during usual business hours on any week day (Saturday excepted) from the date of this notice until the date of the Annual General Meeting and on the day of the Meeting at Hotel Conrad  for 15 minutes prior to and until the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting.
5
Copies of the rules of the Long Term Incentive Plans for each of the Waterford Crystal and the Wedgwood Group businesses will be available for inspection on the day of the Annual General Meeting at Hotel Conrad  for 15 minutes prior to and until the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting.
PRINCIPAL SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Immediate subsidiaries of Waterford Wedgwood plc are marked *.
All subsidiary companies are 100 per cent owned.
All companies operate primarily in their country of incorporation with the exception of Waterford Wedgwood Australia Limited which operates in Australia.