

National award scooped for 25th successive year
GROUP employees have scooped a prestigious national health and safety award for the 25th year running.
The British Safety Council made the presentation at a glittering banquet honouring the stars of the safety scene.
London's largest ballroom at the Grosvenor House Hotel was packed to the rafters as Group representatives enjoyed a wonderful evening.
Imperial's George Whalley and Tuscan's Ken Cox, and their wives, met the director general of the BSC James Tye, and comedian and musician Roy Castle, who sent a special greetings message to everyone at Wedgwood.
During the ceremony, Mr Tye praised Wedgwood for having ‘a magnificent record in health and safety’.
In his speech which honoured 1,300 representatives of award winning companies, star of stage and screen Roy Castle said: ‘Safety is all about being aware of those around you — making sure that you protect each other.
‘I am here tonight to congratulate the National Safety Award winning companies — companies who have put the health and safety of their employees at the top of their agenda.’
Winning companies were presented with National Safety Awards for having an above average safety performance for their particular industry.
To qualify for the award, the companies submit their previous year's accident rate, which is based on a formula relating to the number of days lost through injuries and accidents at work to the total number of employees.
Prime Minister John Major also sent a congratulatory message to the awards ceremony.
He said: ‘Safer workplaces can be achieved only with the commitment and involvement of employees and management.
I am delighted therefore to add my congratulations to those honoured by the British Safety Council for the practical steps they have taken to create safer places of work.’
Developments and  opportunities give board significant confidence for the future
STRATEGY IS PAYING OFF
Group Chairman reports to AGM on positive impact
AT the Annual General Meeting of the company held on 16 June in Dublin, chairman Donald P Brennan said: ‘When we met last year I outlined the company's plans for rationalisation in both the crystal and ceramics businesses and for the restoration of Waterford and Wedgwood brands to profitability.
‘That plan has been put in place with considerable success.
‘As I mentioned in my annual report statement, 1992 was a watershed year.
A significant contribution was made by the turnaround that was achieved at Waterford Crystal.’
He went on to say that while Wedgwood remained profitable, it had experienced a difficult year.
Efficiencies
However, the programme of rationalisation, cost reduction and production efficiencies is beginning to have a positive impact on the company.
‘I am confident that Kneale Ashwell and his management team will continue to successfully execute our strategy.
‘Also, increased emphasis in marketing and new product development will enhance the company's ability to generate profits commensurate with the quality of its products and brands,’ he said.
It was reported that Johnson Brothers has been repackaged and relaunched with more innovative and modern designs which have been greeted with enthusiasm by the trade.
These developments, together with other exciting opportunities being investigated for the Wedgwood brand, give the Board significant confidence for the future.
Vigorously
The strategy outlined last year for the Group, of continued and intense emphasis on cost reduction in all aspects of both businesses, has been pursued vigorously and must continue to be so in these still uncertain economic times.
It was reported that more than IR£10 million has been permanently removed from the Group's total cost base in comparison with overheads in 1991/92.
Mr Brennan said: ‘Throughout, I and the Board have been sensitive to the toll on our workforce resultant from this process.
‘But it has been an unavoidable consequence that jobs have been lost; not just on the factory floor but throughout the business; not just at Waterford but at Wedgwood too.
‘One can only speculate what would have happened had this not been done but I seriously doubt if we would be meeting here today had not the capital infusion been made in 1990 and this plan put into place and well executed.
‘The good news is that as a result of those measures, and despite the hostile trading environment throughout the world, the Group is in a better position today than many believed possible a year ago.
The Board is determined, therefore, that these endeavours will be at the forefront of the Group's strategy for the year ahead.
Turnaround
‘On a personal note, in 1991 when the Board nominated me and the shareholders elected me to the chairmanship, I indicated that I would serve in this capacity for two years and oversee the rationalisation and turnaround of the Waterford and Wedgwood businesses.
‘This programme is soundly in place at Waterford and is in the process of being implemented in Wedgwood with the expectation that it, too, will be fully in place by year-end or early next year — at which time, having done what I came to do, the chairmanship will be assumed by Dr O'Reilly.
Dr O'Reilly has exceptional marketing experience and talents which when brought to bear on the solid foundations of these businesses should help create a new level of profitability.’
Night of Magic music tribute
A tribute to Freddie Mercury and Queen has been arranged to take place on Friday 24 September in the canteen at Barlaston from 7pm.
Top of the bill will be rock band GAGA, who will be supported by a full light and stage show and will play mainly Queen hits for an evening billed as a Night of Magic.
There will be a comedian, bar, free raffle, and another raffle from which the proceeds will be donated to an AIDS awareness charity.
Money taken at the door will go to the Sports and Social Club.
Tickets
Around 350 tickets are available for the concert.
Contact either organiser Dave Davies () or Sharron Jesson () or buy direct from the Sports and Social Club.
Group employees should contact their own personnel departments for tickets.
Hopping to it for Peter Rabbit
WEDGWOOD Rooms staff hopped into action to promote the centenary of Peter Rabbit and the new items specially introduced to the Wedgwood range.
Dingles at Exeter staged a fun event with staff dressing as rabbits to give away badges, sweets, pencil sets, a Peter Rabbit video and even carrot cake.
Manager Jean Cundy and her assistant Cherrie Elliott took the plunge and dressed as rabbits for the day, which was hailed as a great success.
New appointments at Johnson Bros
FOLLOWING the re-organisation and integration of Johnson Brothers, Wedgwood U.K. sales director Paul Hutchinson takes over full sales responsibility for Johnson Brothers.
Director of trade marketing for Wedgwood U.K., Nicholas Frankish, assumes responsibility for customer service and trade marketing for Johnson Brothers.
Meanwhile, Michael Trotter will take over as Johnson Brothers U.K. sales manager following the planned retirement of Tom Bloor later this year.
Theme days on canteen menu
EXCITING theme days have been arranged to spice up eating in the Barlaston canteen.
The calendar for the rest of the year is as follows:
Surprise award for top retailers
A surprise luxury weekend at one of London's top hotels was the reward for five regional retailers who notched up major sales increases.
The five visited Barlaston to be presented with prizes by Wedgwood UK Director of Sales Paul Hutchinson.
But they did not know they were to be presented with tickets to whisk two people off to Claridge's.
Each of the five Wedgwood Rooms had scored the biggest percentage sales increase in their region for the first quarter of 1992.
WEDGWOOD GROUP Heartwatch
Leaflet campaign to promote health
THOUSANDS of leaflets are to be distributed among employees across the Group to raise the profile of the Heartwatch scheme.
The literature is aimed at reinforcing the company's health message and encouraging employees who have not taken advantage of the project to come forward.
Heartwatch offers an assessment of a person's risk from heart disease and general health and fitness checks.
Blood pressure, cholesterol levels, height and weight, exercise and lifestyle all come under close scrutiny.
Since its inception, almost 4,000 employees have taken part in the scheme and Heartwatch co-ordinator Andrew Smart said that he was pleased that the project had proved so popular.
He added: ‘The numbers of people who are using Heartwatch is a testament to the fact that the novelty has not worn off.
‘We are very encouraged by the success of the scheme which can be measured in terms of throughput and effectiveness.
If we can assist just one employee in every hundred to make a change to his or her lifestyle then we are having the desired impact.’
Employees who first went through the Heartwatch programme around two and a half years ago will soon be recalled for another assessment.
A dream offer for brides
HUNDREDS of couples have taken part in a dream Wedgwood offer to mark their marriages.
Newlyweds whose wedding present list notched up more that £600 in sales of Wedgwood tableware were presented with a pair of free air tickets to Paris.
The promotion — drawn up to strengthen the Group's position as market leaders in bridal tableware —ran in all UK Waterford Wedgwood rooms and in almost 300 specialist Wedgwood bridal stockists.
Popular
The Angela, Jade and Chartley patterns proved to be amongst the most popular choices, and early signs indicate that the Group has increased its share of the lucrative bridal market by achieving more and more registrations for its tableware designs.
The Wedgwood bridal service is a sensible way to organise gifts ensuring that couples receive the items of their choice.
Trade marketing manager Michael Coward said: ‘Our long-term customer loyalty is of paramount importance to us — that is why we have added high quality value for our consumers in this promotion.
It has secured sales and has certainly proved a successful campaign.
Alex plan a big night out as Group's largest charity could help raise £10,000
THE Group's biggest ever charity night is being staged to help Alexandra Pottery raise £10,000 for Children In Need.
While the nation raises funds for the annual appeal, Group employees could become stars and feature live on television.
Ticket bookings are already being taken for the charity concert night of fun and fundraising which will be staged at the King's Hall, Stoke.
An open invitation to Group employees — who have first refusal on the tickets — has been sent out.
BBC Radio Stoke have pledged their support, and it is hoped that television cameras will come along to broadcast the Wedgwood Group's efforts live to the nation.
Climax
Five months before the appeal reaches its climax, Alex have already topped the £1,000 mark, and organisers say the sky is the limit.
Events for Children In Need 1993 include:
A games evening at the Cockney Club — won by Alex casting department.
A sponsored bed push between Alexandra Pottery and Barlaston.
A quiz night to be staged at the Mitchell's Club, Tunstall.
But the piece de resistance will be the gala night at the King's Hall.
Among the performers will be Alex's very own Dave Spruce — whose sixties band Kick Back will take to the stage.
A charity auction of the first limited edition Children In Need mug made at Alexandra — with the Pudsey logo and a Wedgwood limited edition mark — will also take place on the night.
Dave Sargeant, of the Alex planning department, said: ‘The events which have taken place so far have been a credit to everyone who has taken part.
‘They were Group-wide events which showed just what can be achieved and if we have the same support for the other planned events then we are confident we can hit our target of £10,000.
‘Tickets for the concert evening at the King's Hall will be going on sale soon and we can expect them to go like hot cakes.
Sale
‘But Group employees will have first chance to buy them — at £5 a time — before they go on general sale.’
Entries for the quiz night on 28 July.
or advance ticket bookings for the gala night, can be made by calling Dave at Alexandra on .
Dutch scoop coveted fine dining awards
FINE dining awards from Wedgwood have recognised the best in British and Continental cuisine.
Chief Executive Kneale Ashwell attended a ceremony in Holland to present awards to two of the country's top restaurants.
The British Consul General Dennis Doble made the presentation of Wedgwood plaques to recipients Kaatje bij de Sluis of Blokzijl an de Hoefslag in Bosch en Duin.
Speaking after the presentation, Mr Ashwell said the Wedgwood Fine Dining Awards were coveted by restaurants around the world and appreciated by those who had received them over the years.
Export
‘A particularly heartening statistic when I checked the figures before I came to the Netherlands was that this market — with a relatively small population of only 15 million inhabitants — continues to be the biggest export market for Wedgwood in Continental Europe,’ he said.
Mr Ashwell went on to present an inscribed plate as a token of gratitude to the hosts of the ceremony — the Hotel Management School at Leeuwarden.
Meanwhile, a West Midlands restaurant became the seventh establishment to be honoured with the award.
The New Hall Country House Hotel and Restaurant, Sutton Coldfield, was presented with the Wedgwood Fine Dining Award for recognition of serving the finest cuisine in the most elegant of surroundings.
Moated
General managers Ian and Caroline Parkes received their award from Barry Cox, Director of Special Markets.
New Hall dates back to the 12th century and is reputed to be the oldest fully moated manor house in England.
Fine English foods are carefully prepared by chef Glen Purcell, who has won recognition as one of the most talented chefs in the country.
The Fine Dining Award Scheme was first introduced in 1990 and recipients are presented with a specially designed gold inscribed plaque created in Black Jasper.
NVQs set to extend across the Group
Recognition for skills and ability
NATIONAL Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) designed to introduce standards-based working practices throughout all areas of industry and commerce are set to be available for thousands of Group employees.
The qualifications are awarded by established examining bodies like City & Guilds and the Royal Society of Arts (RSA) and now jointly by City & Guilds and the Association of Ceramic Training Development (ACTD).
The National Council for Vocational Qualifications was set up by the Government.
What the framework aims to do is to enable industry, for example, to set its own standards of qualifications.
This provides people with a national recognition for their competencies and ability at work and clearer paths for progression and development.
Knowledge
Group Training Manager Andrew Noonan said: ‘One objective of achieving an NVQ qualification is to facilitate entry or progression in current employment.
‘Another and I think more important objective is to credit people for skill and knowledge they currently have and by doing so we will be helping to update the system of qualifications in this country.’
NVQs cover every occupation.
There is no pass or fail.
People only accumulate competencies by continuous assessment of skills they do in their day to day job.
There is no set length of time in which to achieve these either — each individual is allowed to work at their own pace, they are assessed when they are ready.
From the mill and sliphouse, through to the decorating department, experts in their own field of work have worked with others from different companies to establish the craft standards for the ceramic industry.
Andrew added: ‘Eventually all employees will be able to achieve an NVQ recognising their skill and knowledge.
Competent
‘A key feature of this process is that the assessment will be carried out in the work place by competent trainers/assessors nominated by the managers.’
The end results will not only create a higher standard of competence within the company directly related to each person's individual role but also an enhancement and enrichment of that person's own development and personal qualification.
Wedgwood's involvement in the NVQ programme has lead the Group to be filmed by the BBC for a BBC Select service programme.
Andrew Noonan and two production managers were interviewed for the programme.
The Group was also featured in the Staffordshire Training and Enterprise Council's annual video, which highlighted the Group's work with NVQ's and how the programme is being implemented.
Mason's printing department supervisor Dorothy Mountford was invited to the Houses of Parliament photocall to join Secretary of State for Employment Gillian Shepherd in a national campaign to highlight NVQs.
Degrees to honour careers
AMONG the first to receive honorary degrees awarded by Staffordshire University are Sir Arthur Bryan and Susie Cooper.
Both are awarded Honorary Doctor of Letters degrees, which are to be presented during the university's awards ceremonies this summer.
Sir Arthur's award is in recognition of his long standing support for the university and Miss Cooper's for her unique contribution to design in the ceramic industry.
Talented
After 40 years' service with the Wedgwood Group, Sir Arthur retired in 1986 as chairman and managing director, a post he held for nearly 20 years.
He recently retired from his appointment as Lord Lieutenant of Staffordshire after 25 years.
Susie Cooper's career as a talented designer goes back more than 60 years, during which she has won international acclaim.
She is now 90 years of age and still actively creative at her home in the Isle of Man.
Colleagues rally round to help Ann
KIND-HEARTED fundraisers pulled out all the stops to donate more than £1,500 to a very ill colleague.
Within a week of the sad news, they had organised whip-rounds and even staged a charity rock concert at a local club.
The money has been donated to Mason's sponger Ann Dyche who has been diagnosed as having cancer.
An initial collection at Mason's which raised £1,400 was followed by another at Alex, and a Sixties gig by Dave Spruce's Kick Back at the Mitchell's Club, Tunstall.
New commissionaires appointed at Barlaston
NEW commissionaires have been appointed to work at the Barlaston Lodges.
Peter Ball, 31, who previously worked for British Coal and Michael Scott, 37, previously with Securicor, will report to chief commissionaire John Harris.
They join a 10-strong team who provide 24-hour security services to the Barlaston HQ.
Visitor centre set for bumper season
STAFF at the Wedgwood visitor centre are bracing themselves for a bumper summer season.
Overall figures for the start of the year are up by six per cent against 1992 — with the busiest months of June, July and August still to come.
Visitor centre manager Michael Peddar said: ‘We are extremely pleased at the figures — particularly the number of overseas visitors, which has been quite remarkable considering the current economic climate.
What the statistics show is that the centre is offering visitors what they want to see.’
After a particularly busy Easter period, staff are still confident that the best is yet to come.
Tours and reception manager Lorraine Keeling added: ‘The centre is designed to accommodate the needs of all visitors and can cater for large or small groups.
‘A visit has the added advantage of people being able to buy ware from the visitor centre shop or our ‘seconds’ shop which has a selection of Wedgwood Group products for sale at reduced prices.’
Warm welcome to the fold
WELCOME into the fold…retailers from America learned some decorative napkin skills when they visited Barlaston.
The week long trip took in Dublin, Barlaston and Waterford.
Among the party were retailers from as far afield as Atlanta, Boston, and Lancaster, Pennsylvania, as well as Group staff from New York and New Jersey.
Our picture shows the display department's project controller Pam Griffith, centre, giving some of the retailers a lesson in the art of table decoration during their visit to shopfitting and exhibition services.
Athletics event honour gives Gail pen-pal bonus
When Waterford Wedgwood Canada's Gail Lilly volunteered to help out in a major international athletics event, she never dreamed she would find a pen-pal who would write to her from the other side of the world.
Accounts receivable manager Gail, carried the name plaque for the People's Republic of China during a parade in front of 40,000 spectators.
During her three days working in the Toronto Skydome she made friends with an athlete who now writes to her in Chinese.
As a member of the Advanced Volunteer Foundation, Gail was one of 750 Canadians who helped out at the fourth annual International Amateur Athletic Foundation indoor track and field meeting.
She marched in the parade of nations during the opening and closing ceremonies of the event which attracted around 700 amateur athletics from 104 countries.
Gail said: ‘I would love to do it again — I had a good time and met lots of interesting people including great athletes such as Britain's Colin Jackson.
But the best thing was gaining a pen-pal who writes to me in Chinese.
History of picnicking exhibition
THE history of picnicking is the subject of a special exhibition which will open next month at the Barlaston visitor centre.
Called ‘Summer Living’, the show will include sets of picnic scenes through the ages and Wedgwood ware associated with these periods.
Literary extracts and picnic recipes will be on display, complementing, for example, country scenes and classical pictures of Ascot and Henley.
Product manager (special editions) Madeleine McMullin said: ‘We hope the exhibition follows in the footsteps of the Peter Rabbit show which was so successful.’
House and Garden magazine — which is arranging some of the sets — will also be featuring the exhibition in its July edition.
Collector's plate presented to mark historic dambusters raid
A Coalport collector's plate has been presented to a historic Air Force squadron to mark the 50th anniversary of one of the most daring air raids of all time.
The Dambusters of 617 squadron used Barnes Wallis's amazing bouncing bomb to breach the water supplies of industrial Germany and score a major victory for the allies.
Fifty years on their magnificent achievement is marked by a Coalport plate.
Copies were presented to the hotel which was the squadron Officers' Mess during the Second World War and to the chairman of the 617 Squadron Association John Langston CBE.
The latter, aptly plate number 617, was handed on to the squadron's current commanding officer Wing Commander Jonathon Dickinson.
Our picture shows international brand director David Butler, left, presenting the limited edition plate to John Langston CBE, right with Wing Commander Jonathon Dickinson centre.
Vital need for customer service if Group is to retain the leading edge over competition
TALKS TO INTRODUCE KEY BRAND STRATEGIES
NEW strategies for marketing the Group's key brands were introduced to employees at a series of meetings on 5 and 6 May.
Marketing director Robin Ritchie made a fast-moving slide presentation — based on earlier presentations to the chairman and directors.
The talks focussed on the strengths and weaknesses, the opportunities and the threats for each brand and the state of the business in the major markets, as well as explaining the structure of the new marketing organisation.
At the meetings, held at Barlaston, Johnson Brothers and Royal Tuscan, Robin introduced brand directors Mark van Dyck (Wedgwood) and Robin Jamieson (Johnson Brothers) who, together with David Butler (Coalport, Mason's Ironstone, Waterford and Peter Rabbit) are responsible for co-ordinating the marketing, advertising and product development of our brands and product ranges worldwide.
Robin stressed the vital need for customer service — for end users, trade customers and for our internal customers, our colleagues — if the company is to gain and retain the leading edge over competition.
He praised the beneficial effects of initiatives like TNT, QC and TQM which are now being transferred into administration departments following their success in Group factories.
Questions raised following the presentations included:
Q; Why don't we advertise more, so that when people are thinking of buying a gift, the first thing that comes to mind is Wedgwood?
A: We have a new advertising campaign in the UK which will promote Wedgwood products as gifts.
Also a new scheme, Intergift, will allow customers to order Wedgwood gifts for next day delivery to family and friends in the UK.
As the economy improves we hope to spend significantly more on advertising.
Q: Why aren't more females involved in selecting designs?
A: Most of our designers are female and about half our marketing department.
We conduct extensive consumer research in which a large number of women are interviewed about their preferences.
While our senior sales and marketing staff tend to be men, in the USA and Australia, for example, such senior positions are held by women.
Q: Are we going to be able to  regain the  business which has declined in the Japanese market?
A: In terms of the number of pieces sold in Japan, this has stayed virtually the same as last year, and we remain the leader in this important market.
However, like the rest of the world, as recession hits Japan, they have begun to buy lower priced products, so that the value of orders, and therefore profits in the Japanese markets, have declined.
We are reviewing the business in this important market but we are confident that, in the long term, this will come back.
Q: What is the future for Wedgwood hotelware?
A: Competition in the banqueting and airline businesses is intense.
Our salesmen are still selling hotelware around the world.
In the USA a new manager has been appointed specifically for this and for corporate business.
Like all areas of our business, hotelware is being examined at present and until a plan for the future has been determined we will continue to maintain our activity in hotelware.
Q: If Johnson Brothers moves upmarket, will it not encroach on Wedgwood mid-priced markets?
A: There is still a big gap between Wedgwood and Johnson Brothers' products.
There is plenty of scope in the middle markets for us to reduce the gap through both products without damaging each other 's business.
Q: Why did we close a Johnson Brothers factory last year if the brand is so important?
A: The number of pieces of ware needed from the Johnson Brothers factories has decreased considerably over recent years.
In order to maintain efficiency, we have had to close the surplus production capacity.
Q: We can't sell Coalport figurines in the USA because the Americans don't like glazed figurines and our prices are too high.
Aren't we missing an opportunity?
A: Historically, our sales in the USA have been mainly tableware, very little giftware.
Coalport figurines are very English and the vast majority sell in the UK.
We are making progress with giftware sales in the USA with some of the newer, larger items in patterns such as Clio and Humming Birds.
Also, we are looking at the figurine market in the USA — new style figurines, for example, in porcelain, might be of interest in the future.
Q: Is the lead legislation in the USA affecting our sales?
A: California's Proposition 65 is extremely severe legislation regarding lead levels in many products.
Wedgwood is at the forefront in new technology and colours so that all Johnson Brothers' products and the majority of Wedgwood products sold in California meet these very strict standards.
Incidentally, all our products meet the international requirements of 32 different standards around the world.
Q: We may be improving customer service for our end users by faster delivery of ware, but what about the employee shop — we still have to wait 3–4 months sometimes for ware.
Why?
A: Speedier delivery is an important part of customer service.
Customers are no longer prepared to wait for several months for their chosen pattern.
We have made great progress in our planning systems and in production efficiencies.
But we still have some way to go.
You should see an improvement in the coming months.
Feedback from around the Group after the meetings was very positive.
Employees said that they would like further presentations and an opportunity to talk to the directors of other departments in the future.
Let us know who you would like to talk to at future sessions and the subjects you would like to know more about.
Royal Tuscan charity appeal for the air ambulance takes off
ROYAL Tuscan hope to raise thousands of pounds for the air ambulance after their charity appeal for the year took off in style.
A first raffle raised £140 which was promptly handed over following a talk and filmshow on the vital flying arm of the emergency service.
A second raffle is expected to notch up about the same total.
Bob Lee, from the Staffordshire Ambulance service, received the cheque and helped one employee start her own charity effort.
He officiated at an official weigh-in which launched biscuit backstamper Pat Bennett's slimathon to shed three stones before the August Potters' Holiday.
Tuscan personnel manager Liz Tait, who is acting chairman of the works committee which adopted the air ambulance as an annual charity, said: ‘We just hope to raise as much money as possible and are planning at least one event a month.’
Many colleagues have supported Pat Bennett's sponsored slim.
Another solo fundraising effort will be a sponsored swim by Karon Mills at Fenton Pool.
Anyone who wants to help with sponsorship should contact Liz Tait.
Countdown for carnival show
ROLL UP, Roll up.
A fun packed day has been organised for visitors to the Group's carnival day on Sunday 1 August at the Barlaston sports ground.
Billed as the Wedgwood Group Carnival Day 1993 and It's A Knockout, one of the main attractions will include a pottery antiques roadshow with valuations by expert Peter Williams, author of ‘Wedgwood — A Collector's Guide’.
Employees and friends are invited to take along their pots as the Wedgwood Museum staff will also be on hand to date and identify pieces.
Bungee jumping, a fun fair, car boot, craft and charity stalls will be the order of the day.
Children can enjoy a special treasure hunt, a bouncy castle and Punch and Judy shows.
There will also be a palmist, falconry, classic car and traction engine displays and a show by the Trentham Dog School.
A commentary of the day's activities will be broadcast live across North Staffordshire by Hospital Radio.
Car booters
All proceeds raised on the day will be donated towards keeping the Staffordshire Air Ambulance flying.
Car booters can reserve space by calling  .
Employee Announcements
Personnel changes in Group
ROBIN Sumnall has been appointed personnel manager for the Barlaston factory.
Robin has been with the Group for 25 years, including service at Enoch Wedgwood, Barlaston and Coalport.
Meanwhile, Brian Roper takes the personnel manager role at Coalport.
Brian, who has spent 24 years with the Group, has held positions in work study and the Personnel Departments at Mason's Ironstone and Barlaston.
Total Quality
Agenda set for QC leaders' conference
THE annual Quality Circle Leaders' Conference takes  place at the New Victoria Theatre, Newcastle-under-Lyme, on 21 July.
Workshops at the conference will include:
NVQs — Standards-based approach for training and assessment, by Andrew Noonan.
Developing Yourself, by Sandra Wootton.
How many F's are there in quality? by Jane Johnson and Ann George.
Team Exercise, by Terry Hackney.
How to make presentations, by Lynne Oliver and Sandra Shaw.
There will be a special presentation by the National Society of Quality Through Teamwork team of the year, who were sponsored by Wedgwood, who this year come from Wiston Hospital, Prescott on Merseyside.
Significant
Meanwhile, the society's national conference takes place from 30 September to 1 October at the Moat House Hotel, Etruria.
This is the first time the conference has been held in Stoke-on-Trent and is especially significant to Wedgwood since the Moat House incorporates Etruria Hall, the home of Josiah I. A Wedgwood stand and demonstrator will be on display at the conference.
Group chief QC facilitator Graham Finney is the organising chairman.
He said: ‘The conference is not only open to Quality Circle members but anybody interested in team participation.
Please contact me at Barlaston  for further details.’
Circle solution means benefits for everyone
CUSTOMER services has been boosted by a new system to allocate loose bases and covers.
Faxfinders — the first Barlaston admin. circle to make a presentation — came up with the solution to the complex problem after months of hard work.
New the warehousing and distribution system for those odd orders of a base here and a lid there is being introduced in all factories.
Barlaston QC Facilitator Margaret Scott explained: ‘The problem was that there was simply no system to allocate these orders.
‘They were coming in and going round and round in the system.
‘Faxfinders’ work means that a computer print out of all outstanding orders of odd lids and bases is produced and sent out to production areas.
Location
‘There is a new stock location in the warehouse from which these orders can be sent out.
‘Surplus stock is now being used to clear any backlogs in the orders, and the circle are working with the legal department to incorporate their solution into a company policy on the problem.’
Benefits of the new system are that orders are processed quicker, improving cashflow; company stock figures are up to date and correct, instead of being hypothetical; surplus stock is being used up; a system has been created where  there was no system, and the scheme has boosted customer satisfaction.
New facilitators line-up
The new line-up of Quality Circle facilitators around the Group is as follows:
Congratulations to 22 pupils after factory link-up
TWENTY two high school pupils made successful Quality Circle presentations after a link-up with factory teams from Alexandra.
Production director Mike Lockett saw the work of students from James Brindley High School, Stoke-on-Trent.
The presentations marked the culmination of nine hour sessions between factory and school on three work related themes.
Three teams, each with seven or eight pupils, looked at areas of metal marks on biscuit ware, ware leaning from casters and untidy storerooms.
Projects were chosen by factory managers and QC leaders  guided the pupils through the work.
All the students who took part were congratulated on their work and presented with certificates which indicated the particular skills covered in the scheme.
Production up and losses down after QA project
PRODUCTION up…losses down — Good news from an action improvement team in the flatshop at Imperial Pottery.
Departmental manager Peter Gibson said: ‘The flatware makers instigated a new specification recording system with the aim of improving production efficiency.
‘The result of the action improvement team's work is that all items are now identified and detailed for line weight, rung bungs, pieces in a bung, bungs per board, height and tilt.
Credit
‘This also reduces time in resetting machines.’
The new system means that each item of ware is made on the most suitable machine and also that anyone new to the department is quickly able to produce correctly.
‘All credit must go the makers,’ Peter added.
‘Their enthusiasm has seen the project through.
The AIT team —— are now working to meet every element of TNT, maximising output to create a more efficient production flow.
Clear out at former Hanley Pottery leads to discovery of war-time artefacts
Memories of Dad's Army
CAPTAIN Mainwaring and his Dad's Army would be well-equipped with a haul of memorabilia discovered during the clear out at Hanley Pottery.
Second World War gas masks, tin helmets and posters on treating burns and what to do with incendiary bombs were left over from the days when each factory had a fire watch and some even had a home guard.
Most of the fascinating equipment will be placed in the Wedgwood Museum's reserve collection for future use, but some will go on display immediately.
Chronicle
The equipment — in perfect condition after lying hidden for 50 years — will chronicle a time when each factory had its own firefighting force specially trained to deal with the Luftwaffe's terrifying weaponry.
Most of the Group's production was centred around the Etruria Works and in Hanley.
Because of their proximity to the giant Shelton Steelworks these were obviously at risk.
The prestigious Wedgwood name also made them a propaganda target for Hitler's forces.
In fact Etruria was hit by incendiaries several times, but thankfully survived without extensive damage.
Spade
Museum research assistant Sharon Gater said: ‘One Etruria fire-fighter, who has since died, told me of fighting an incendiary device with a special long handled spade.
‘He picked up the burning bomb, which promptly blazed its way through the handle, so the only way to put it out was by throwing on his great coat.
‘Another device fell onto a huge pile of clay, and was only extinguished after it had fired the clay solid.’
The giant Barlaston complex was under construction during the war years, and great measures were taken to protect the factory, parts of which were used to make aircraft rivets for Hawker Siddeley.
Architect Keith Murray called on friends who were high ranking in the Air Ministry to advise on camouflage and black-out techniques.
And certain industrial processes, which relied on electrical machines had to be carried out at night when the supply was available, but in darkness to comply with blackout regulations.
Sharon said: ‘The company's war history is fascinating and many of our retired employees will remember it first hand.’
Adversity
For those who were born since the war, the Barlaston Museum exhibition is a living reminder of the efforts taken by the company to ensure the Wedgwood name continued in times of the greatest adversity.
The museum staff are still keen to recover certain items from the factory.
They are especially interested in any old pattern books or sales ledgers.
If you can help please call  on .
Saggar-maker Bill (almost 90) recalls the day a bomb just missed his factory
AN eye witness to a near-miss bombing incident during the early war years at the Etruria factory was saggar-maker Bill Evans who was on fire picket duty at the time.
‘I was on night fire-watching when there was a terrific explosion which wrecked part of the railway line between the factory and the steelworks,’ recounted Bill, who is now nearly 90.
‘It was too close for comfort, but fortunately for us it missed the works.’
From Bill Evans' early days at the end of the first world war, across the years to Bill Evans junior of the 1990's, the family has so far recorded a combined total of 143 years' service with Wedgwood.
Bill senior, who will celebrate his 90th birthday on 25 August, has the unique place in the company's history of being the last employee to continue working at the old Etruria factory.
‘I was making saggars there for a good number of years after the move to Barlaston, where they were used in firing,’ re recalled.
He retired in 1968 after 50 years' service.
His son, Bill, works in the glost ovens department at Barlaston and has notched up 48 years with the company.
Two daughters also worked in the ovens department — Mary Ward for 31 years and Nellie Smith for 14 years.
NEWS EXTRA
Great end to civic year
NO mayoral year in North Staffordshire would be complete without a trip to the Barlaston factory.
Stoke-on-Trent's former Lord Mayor Alan Jones, and Lady Mayoress, his wife Sylvia, made the visit close to the end of their term of office.
The civic visitors were given an extensive tour of the showroom, factory, visitor centre and museum.
Mrs Jones is pictured ornamenting a Jasper sweet dish — watched by the former Lord Mayor and ornamenter Paul Harper.
Scheme to recycle waste cardboard
CARDBOARD recycling is one of the company's green initiatives which is part of a continuing commitment to enhance and protect the environment.
Storage cages have been provided at the majority of Wedgwood Group sites.
Although cardboard accounts for only a small fraction of waste produced by the company, it has the advantage of being easily recycled.
Group environmental manager Jon Lawrence said: ‘Due to increasing legislation, the management of waste is coming under stricter control with pressure being borne directly on waste producers to get their house in order.
Quality
‘We should take every opportunity to recycle our waste cardboard so that we reduce the quantity of our waste which goes to landfill or is incinerated.’
The only requirements are that cardboard boxes are flattened before being placed into cages and that only cardboard is deposited, unless otherwise specified.’
In addition, the company is now considering a scheme to recycle all vending machine cups.
See the next edition of Newsline for an update.
Sponsored walk raised £300 for Epilepsy group
MORE than £300 has been raised by a group of Barlaston employees and friends in a sponsored walk for the British Epilepsy Association.
The 21 walkers covered six miles in a picturesque route on Barlaston Downs.
The walk was part of a national campaign to raise £900,000 to help 90,000 people beat epilepsy through the provision of information and advice.
Sport
Golf Society's drive to attract new members
Extra event in busy season's programme
WEDGWOOD Golf Society's go-getting committee is driving forward this season with a new secretary, a new venue and a major push to attract more members.
The committee, which comprises representatives from each factory, has unveiled a busy programme which contains an extra event and a visit to a new course.
New secretary Paul Birks of Mason's Ironstone, who has taken over from Peter Masheter, said: ‘Golf is no longer seen as a rich man's sport and is accessible to all ages and pockets.
‘Thus our membership varies from a 17-year-old to a retired company director and we want to attract even more employees to join our ranks.’
Winners of the society's competitions so far this season are Mark Speed who scooped the Mason's Ironstone Cup, while Carl Roberts took the Doug Lowndes Trophy.
Jason Smith won the William Adams Shield while Rob Lowndes and Andy Yeomans won the Wedgwood Bowl.
Invitation
The club's remaining fixtures for the year include an invitation day at Wolstanton Golf Club on 21 July.
On 9 August, for their first visit to Leek Westwood Golf Club, members will contest the Johnson Brothers Club and Precision Studios Trophy.
At a date to be fixed in September at the Little Lakes Club, Bewdley, there is an invitation challenge match while individual knockout matches for the Coalport Vase will be played throughout the season.
For more information telephone  .
Hosts for Aussie cricketers
WEDGWOOD will be hosts to Australian cricketers and their supporters in an under 15s match on 12 July.
The New South Wales visitors will play one of two matches against the Blythe Valley League at the Wedgwood Cricket Club's ground, Barlaston.
The club's honorary secretary, Chris Mountain, said: ‘It is an honour fir us to stage the game.
I am sure it will be a highlight in their series of matches in the North of England.’
Bowlers strike victory
PRECISION super bowlers struck out to scoop at £200 cash prize and prestigious trophy after wiping the floor with the opposition in a local contest.
They won all stages but one in a seven month tournament making them overall leaders by 135 points.
Teams from Wedgwood, Alton Towers, PMT and Staffordshire University could only stand and watch as the Precision maestros scuttled the skittles and took the trophy.
As well as the cash and the cup they were treated to an executive night out at the scene of their triumphs, the Superbowl at Stoke-on-Trent's Festival Park.
The team, pictured above, are, back left to right,.
Fresh from their success they have thrown down the gauntlet to the rest of the Group.
Anyone who fancies taking up the challenge should contact Jim McCartney at Precision Studios.
Trio fly the flag in style with impressive marathon times
A trio of marathon runners flew the flag for the Wedgwood Group in Britain's premier long-distance road race.
Paul Johnson and Mark Williamson from Barlaston and Terry Parton from Eagle Pottery all clocked up impressive times in the London Marathon.
Paul, from the work study potting office, finished first of the threesome at 595th in two hours 46 minutes in his 17th marathon.
He said: ‘I was very pleased at the way I ran because despite the fact that my training did not go so well I was only five minutes behind my best ever time.
‘I am now looking forward to the Potteries Marathon which is my favourite race because there is so much local support to spur you on.’
Terry, a biscuit kiln fireman, shaved a remarkable 12 minutes off his best ever time to finish in three hours five minutes.
Rewarding
He said: ‘I enjoyed the race immensely because I was better trained than I have been previously and, of course, it is always rewarding when you better your personal best.
‘I am now running more than 40 miles a week to keep in peak fitness ready for the Potteries Marathon.’
Mark came in with a very respectable time of three and a half hours in his first marathon.
He said: ‘I was happy about my time but I have to admit that I walked the last two or three miles after I hit what they call ‘the wall’.
For the fifth year Wedgwood are producing commemorative plates which will be presented to all finishers.
Alexandra the great
New name appears on trophy as a penalty is hit so hard — it caused the goal to collapse…
A new name appeared on the inter-departmental five-a-side soccer trophy after Alex A beat White China 2–0 in a hard fought final.
Eighteen teams competed in the annual tournament over three nights at Barlaston.
Two preliminary rounds were staged on a league basis to sort out the semi finalists.
Last year's winners Imperial were put out after extra time and penalties by five times previous holders White China.
The second final place was contested between Alex A — who had played the first round a player short — and Mason's packing house.
Converted
The Mason's side will rue the day one of their players entered their own penalty area, as the resulting converted spot kick separated the two sides on the final whistle.
In the final between Alex A and White China Alex took the lead with a goal from Kevin Bell of the biscuit kilns.
Then up stepped Paul Simpson, to put the game beyond doubt with a blistering penalty.
Paul, of the glost warehouse at Alex, modestly said: ‘I hit the penalty so hard the goals collapsed.
‘The best team certainly won on the night.
We were consistent throughout the competition and only conceded one goal in spite of playing a man short in the qualifying rounds.
‘It was great to win, and we hope to repeat our victory next season.
Rumours
‘But it might be difficult to keep the side together, as there are rumours that John Rudge and Lou Macari were scouting during the finals.’
Organiser John Mason, of the Barlaston sliphouse, thanked Group technical and manufacturing director Chris Johnson for presenting the trophy, and paid tribute to referees Paul Nixon (Mason's) and Paul McDonagh (Barlaston joiner).
John said: ‘It was a great tournament with tremendous weather for the final.
We were particularly impressed with the players’ good behaviour.’
Cricket team hit rivals for six in blistering start to season
WEDGWOOD Cricket Club have hit their rivals for six by getting their season off to a blistering start.
After drawing their first two matches, the team won the next four games to claim third spot in the Stone and District Cricket League — just 11 points adrift of the leaders.
Club honorary secretary Chris Mountain said that it was the best start to a season he had seen the team make.
He said: ‘We were relegated last season and are battling to bounce straight back with promotion to the North Staffs and District Cricket League.’
Popular contest for lads
FORTY-EIGHT teams took part in the Wedgwood Ladsandads six-a-side football competition at the Barlaston sports ground.
Sixteen teams of nine and 11-year-olds, 20 teams of 12 and 13-year-olds and a dozen teams of 14 and 15-year-olds competed for junior, intermediate and senior section trophies.
The competitions were arranged throughout the day and in the senior section, a Wedgwood connection came good.
Barlaston Jasper jollyer Fred Leighton's Panthers team beat the Royals 1–0 in extra time to avenge a final defeat last year.
In the intermediate section, the Giants, a team from Blurton Ladsandads beat Goldenhill in a thrilling penalty shoot-out.
Meanwhile, two Panthers A and B teams, also from Blurton met in the junior final — with the A side running out winners.
Event organiser John Mason said: ‘We were thrilled with the attendance of around 500 people which was a reflection of the popularity of the competition.’
Trophy presentations were made by George Stonier, director of human resources.