

SCOTVEC EUROPEAN UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 21 MARCH 1991
SCOTVEC AND 1992
It is difficult not to fall into the cliche trap when writing about 1992 and the Single European Market (SEM).
So much has been written about this single epic without any clear view of the potential impact emerging.
Despite, or perhaps because of, the large amount of information available it can be difficult to obtain key details which we need.
The single market is, of course, designed to lower and eventually eliminate barriers to the movement of goods, services and people.
SCOTVEC's main concern is with the latter of these.
This interest is shared with many in Scotland — employers, employees, those about to enter the labour market, providers of education and training, professional bodies, local authorities and so on.
It is salutary to reflect on the fact that decisions taken and qualifications awarded now could affect the mobility of people well into the twenty first century.
This issue of Update aims to bring together various aspects of the SEM related to vocation education and training and to provide a focus for debate and future developments.
It is of particular concern to SCOTVEC to ensure that our awards, at all levels, are recognised in Europe and beyond.
We have therefore included an article which covers the ‘Comparability of Vocational Qualifications’ and ‘Mutual Recognition’.
These is a degree of confusion about this complex and rapidly changing area and the scope of these two quite distinct developments and we hope that the information provided will contribute towards clarification.
Ensuring that our provision is responsive to the needs of 1992 and beyond is a key issue for us.
Four separate, but related, areas can be identified:
language skills
delivery and assessment in a language other than English
information about Europe
practical projects relating to Europe
Each of these is examined in some depth in articles on pages 3 and 4.
We recognise the increasing importance of Europe in a number of other ways.
Since the SCOTVEC Record of Education and Training (RET) may well be presented to employers in other countries in the future, we have taken the step of printing the following statement on the folder issued with each RET into the major European languages:
‘The Scottish Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC) is the national body in Scotland with responsibility for awarding vocational qualifications.
SCOTVEC's certificates and diplomas are recognised throughout the United Kingdom for entry to, and progression within, a wide range of occupations.’
We have translated our SCOTVEC Profile publication ‘Setting the Standard in Scotland’ into French, German, Spanish and Italian.
New publicity leaflets on Languages and Europe in the Curriculum are presently being prepared.
Finally, we realise that we are only at the beginning of what may prove to be one of the most significant developments of the twentieth century.
Many unpredictable issues may emerge which are difficult to plan for at this stage.
SCOTVEC, as a central body, can, and will, take forward certain initiatives such as Comparability and Mutual Recognition.
Nevertheless we recognise that many aspects of the potential impact — both threats and opportunities — may become apparent to others, employers and providers in particular, before SCOTVEC.
We would therefore warmly welcome views on issues such as:
additional provision which might be put in place
how existing provision is being used to cater for the demands that 1992 will place on vocational education and training
possible certification mechanisms for student placements in Europe, exchanges and courses being run overseas
ways of encouraging employers and providers to think about the European dimension when planning training and development
The publication of the report ‘The Implications of the Single European Market for Scottish Vocational Education’, funded by the Scottish Office Education Department, and undertaken by Alan McGregor and Graham Thom of Glasgow University occurs at a very opportune time.
It clearly indicates that need for greater coordination and pooling of resources among institutions and organisations involved in vocational education and training in Scotland.
The dissemination of relevant information about the SEM within Scotland and about the Scottish system to other member states was also seen as a key issue.
The information and recommendations contained in the report provide an excellent basis for building the flexible and responsive approach in relation to Europe which will be required over the next few years.
EC INITIATIVES ON VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
1992 and the creation of the ‘Single European Market’ means that barriers are being progressively removed to encourage freedom of movement of goods, services, capital and labour.
At an early stage it was realised that one factor which can inhibit labour mobility is a lack of mutual understanding of qualification systems between member states.
To encourage mobility, two separate initiatives, both covered by EC Directives, have been developed over the last few years.
COMPARABILITY OF VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
The work on comparability derives from an EC decision in July 1985 to:
‘Expedite common action by member states to establish the comparability of Vocational Qualifications in the Community’
The aim is to encourage people to make better use of their qualifications for the purpose of obtaining access to employment in other member states and to help employers to make more informed comparisons between qualifications.
How it Works
The work is coordinated and administered by CEDEFOP, the EC's vocational education and training development centre in Berlin.
Each member state has designated a particular body to take responsibility for the comparability work.
In the United Kingdom this is the Employment Department, with John Fuller of the Qualifications and Standards Branch as Coordinator.
To assist with the consultation process a United Kingdom Working Group has been established.
Its membership includes both the CBI and the TUC, with SCOTVEC represented by Margery Burdon.
The practical work of establishing comparability is undertaken by groups of experts from each member state.
They attend a series of meetings in Europe to agree basic job descriptions, these comprising only those elements of the job which are common to all member states.
Subsequently qualifications which indicate the holder's ability to carry out the elements defined in the job description are identified.
It is important to emphasise that comparability does not establish precise equivalences between qualifications across Europe, instead it provides indicative information which, in the form of a table, matches qualifications to job descriptions.
Ultimately it is intended to cover all vocational qualifications, but, for the present, work is restricted to the skilled worker level.
Progress to Date
The work is complex and getting agreement across all member states is often difficult.
As a result of work to date, a series of Information Sheets has been produced and published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, covering occupations in:
Hotel and catering
Motor vehicle repairs
Construction
Electrical/electronic industries
Agriculture
These contain the agreed job descriptions and the qualifications generally applicable to them in each country.
Work is underway in other occupational areas and further Information Sheets are in preparation.
The Employment Department has responsibility for the dissemination of information on the comparability exercise in the United Kingdom.
An explanatory leaflet and the Information Sheets mentioned, together with further information, can be obtained from   
MUTUAL RECOGNITION
Mutual recognition, unlike comparability, is a LEGALLY BASED concept which is encapsulated in EC Directives.
The overall aim of this initiative is to enable people to secure recognition of their qualifications and so provide services throughout the Community.
Initially mutual recognition has been targeted at the professions and holders of higher level qualifications.
Sectoral Directives
Since 1975 a number of sector-specific EC Directives have made it easier for professionals to practice elsewhere in the Community.
These Directives incorporated agreements on the harmonisation of training and other requirements for specific professional activities such as doctors, dentists, nurses, midwives, pharmacists and architects.
The process has, however, proved complex and slow and, in order to facilitate more rapid action, the EC adopted the first Mutual Recognition General Directive on December 1988.
First General Directive
The First General Directive came into force in January 1991.
The overall aim is to confer the right on professionals to have their qualifications recognised in all member states.
It applies to any profession regulated in some way by the state (or by chartered professional associations, as is the case with many in the UK) for which at least three years' education and training at university or equivalent level are required.
The Directive is legally binding and all professionals whose qualifications fall within its scope will have the right to have their qualifications recognised.
Where the education and training they have received is substantially the same as that in the member states to which they wish to move, their qualifications will be recognised as equivalent.
If the education and training differs substantially from that required by the same profession in the ‘host’ member state, an aptitude test or a period of supervised practice may be necessary.
Lawyers, accountants, engineers, physiotherapists and many others come within the scope of this Directive.
In some instances SCOTVEC qualifications may be included.
For example, it has recently been agreed that Incorporated Engineers will be listed in the Implementing Regulations; SCOTVEC HNCs and HNDs are recognised as meeting the educational requirements for registration as Incorporated Engineer.
Second General Directive
The EC wishes to extend the concept of mutual recognition beyond the coverage of the First Directive.
It has therefore drafted a Second General Directive, similar in principle, but much wider in scope than the First.
It relates to diplomas, certificates, qualifications or other evidence of successful completion of higher education and post-secondary courses of less than three years duration.
Like the First Directive, its application will be to occupations or occupation activity regulated in some way by, or on behalf of, the state.
The draft Directive was circulated for consultation late in 1990.
The overall aims of the proposed Second Directive have been generally welcomed.
However a number of concerns have been expressed.
For example the moves in the EC towards competence-based systems of qualifications where ‘time-serving’ is not an element means that the time taken to acquire qualifications becomes irrelevant.
The UK has an open and flexible labour market with little governmental regulation of the occupations at this level and this has certain benefits to the UK economy.
These are some of the problems and it may be that early agreement and consequent implementation of the Second Directive are difficult to achieve.
The view has been expressed in some quarters that experience gained in implementation of the First Directive would be very valuable in carrying out detailed work on the Second.
Since the First Directive has only been in operation for a matter of weeks, much has still to be learned about its full impact.
The Department of Trade and Industry has published a very useful document on mutual recognition ‘Europe Open for Professionals’ which can be obtained free of charge by telephoning .
SCOTVEC's PROVISION IN MODERN LANGUAGES
Many people in Britain feel at a disadvantage when called upon to conduct business in a language other than English.
This is the message that emerges time after time from surveys on Britain's ability to cope with the demands of Europe post-1992.
This finding is not surprising, given the facts:
The average knowledge of foreign languages in Britain is lower than in other member states.
However this should be seen as an opportunity, rather than a fait accompli.
There is no reason to believe that the British are intrinsically poor linguists.
Although most people have some background training in languages, it appears to be too little and, or, of the wrong type.
Many people have studied languages in the past in school or elsewhere and this knowledge can be built upon.
More exposure together with more focussed teaching and learning would help the situation.
People tend to think about languages as a single entity, rather than identifying their own priorities within the four elements: speaking, reading, writing and listening.
As with all learning, motivation is the key to success.
It must be based on the student's own targets and requires a flexible system of accreditation.
National Certificate
The National Certificate provision in modern languages aims to provide a framework for learning which is responsive to the needs of a wide range of learners.
The modules are structured into five levels, from Module 1 which is designed for complete beginners through to Module 5, in which students attain a level of competence some way above that required for a pass at SEB Higher Grade.
In all cases the module descriptors are free-standing with clear indications of entry level.
However, each represents a recognisable stage of achievement, so that the student can build progressively towards a range of demanding and useful competences.
The module descriptors are designed to cover the process of language acquisition and should thus be applicable to any language.
The range of languages which can be accredited by SCOTVEC is now very wide and can be extended at any time to meet demand.
Almost all the main EC languages are already available.
The descriptor is not specific to any language.
It provides extensive guidance on learning and teaching, but it remains for the tutor to apply the descriptor to the language being taught, and to provide the necessary content.
This can be negotiated with the learners to meet their requirements and help them achieve their own goals.
Such an approach would apply wither to individuals or to groups.
The modules will allow almost any context to be used and are appropriate both for vocational and other specialist interests.
Vocational elements can be introduced as early as Module 1, but will become more pronounced as the learners progress through the five levels.
At levels 1 to 3 there are 12 languages available:
At levels 4 and 5 there are six languages available:
This pattern of provision is determined mainly by the current level of demand and it would be straightforward to extend into other languages should market forces be favourable.
Of the major languages within the EC only Danish is not currently available.
This, however, can be remedied easily and rapidly should an identified need emerge.
The language competence accredited at each level can be described as follows:
Module 1 deals with exchanging personal information, obtaining goods and services and understanding simple written tests.
Module 2 requires the learner for the first time to write in the language.
Module 3 is mainly differentiated by outcomes which demand more advanced skills in self expression and the use of more elaborate grammatical structures.
Module 4 demands more specialised or focused activities and the learner is called upon to act as an intermediary for the first time.
Module 5 extends and deepens the student's exposure to the language and encourages the skills of independent study.
Whilst the modules at all levels are designed to allow use in vocational contexts, Module 5 puts more emphasis on this area, but still within a series of skills of very general relevance.
Advanced Courses
Within SCOTVEC's new advanced provision, a number of centrally developed units in languages have been produced.
The needs of the hospitality industry are met by specialist units in, French German, Italian and Spanish.
Second Language for Business units in French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish are available at three levels (beginners, intermediate and advanced).
It is anticipated that more work will be undertaken in this area, resulting in a national framework of units suitable for use at advanced level.
Languages have already featured in a number of HNCs and HNDs developed as part of the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
Industry Lead Body in Languages
SCOTVEC is a member of the newly formed Lead Body in Languages which will be considering competences in language use and language teaching in relation to the needs of different occupations.
The standards produced by this Lead Body, which should be available by the end of 1992, will be applicable to a range of SVQs.
DELIVERY AND ASSESSMENT OF NATIONAL CERTIFICATE MODULES IN A LANGUAGE OTHER THAN ENGLISH
During 1990 SCOTVEC received a number of requests regarding the possibility of certification of National Certificate Modules where students are taught and assessed in a language other than English.
SCOTVEC's Policy Committee agreed in November 1990 that such certification could be introduced provided that:
SCOTVEC is notified in advance of the intention to use an alternative language so that appropriate quality assurance and certification processes can be put in place;
an endorsement appears on the certificate to indicate the nature of the agreed arrangements;
the centre meets the full cost of any necessary quality assurance requirements which are additional to those normally applied to the module.
Endorsement of this type has the potential of providing a useful service in areas such as student exchanges.
In addition colleges which are marketing training abroad will now be able to offer SCOTVEC certification in the language of the country as part of the package.
English speaking students may wish to be assessed in another European language as an aid to employment in the European labour market.
Residents in Scotland whose first language is not English may welcome the opportunity to be assessed in their native language as a useful first step prior to undertaking training delivered and assessed in English.
will be pleased to respond to any enquiries on this area.
EUROPE IN THE CURRICULUM
SCOTVEC's remit to develop, award and accredit vocational education and training means that the Council has a responsibility to ensure that its provision is responsive to changes in the economic environment.
There is little doubt that the Single European Market will have a significant impact on the Scottish economy, although its precise effects are difficult to define and quantify.
SCOTVEC has therefore sought to put in place provision which can be used in a flexible way to meet the needs of all who will be affected: young people about to take up employment, those seeking to update their skills and employers who wish to ensure that their workforce is well trained to respond to the opportunities and threats of 1992.
For planning purposes, SCOTVEC provision in relation to Europe is divided into two areas: ‘Information about Europe’ and ‘Practical Projects Relating to Europe’.
A wide range of certification is available under each of these headings.
However if a significant gap emerges, SCOTVEC is ready, as always, to respond rapidly and to develop new units and modules to meet identified needs.
Information about Europe
A number of National Certificate Modules and Higher National Units are available to enable an understanding of a broad range of issues in relation to Europe and the Single European Market.
These units and modules can be used either on a stand alone basis, as a framework for short courses, or to introduce a European dimension into more extended programmes.
National Certificate Module 92512 — Basic European Community Processes, originally proposed by Dundee College of FE, is designed to allow students to develop an understanding of the institutions and functions of the EC and their effects on government, legislation, industry and commerce in the UK.
It is suitable for those already employed in both the public and private sectors, as well as students on full time courses.
Currently this module is being offered to students in Dundee undertaking programmes in business studies and for medical secretaries.
The suite of National Certificate Modules listed below provides a means of studying European issues within a sociological, political, historical and geographical context:
Within the Personal and Social Development section of the National Certificate Catalogue, there are three modules on Investigating Europe.
These are designed to allow students to undertake investigations with a European theme, a particular emphasis being the encouragement of team work.
Contemporary Issues 1 to 3 may also be used in a European context.
A number of Higher National Units with relevance to Europe have been developed centrally.
These include:
Marketing in Europe which aims to enable students to differentiate between the European marketing environment and the domestic or international situation.
Activities undertaken include devising a strategy for marketing in Europe, creating a European product/service strategy and the selection of European channels of distribution.
The Organisation and its International Economic Environment focuses on applying economic principles to the decision making processes of an organisation and reporting on the effects of international economic events on the operation of British organisations.
An evaluation of a development in the EC and its potential impact in the UK forms part of the work of the unit.
A Higher National Unit analogous to ‘Basic European Community Processes’, mentioned above, is currently being developed as part of the new HNC in Public Administration.
It will also be available for incorporation into any HNC or HND programme, particularly in Business Administration, or may be used as the basis for short course provision.
The new HNC/HND in Communication Studies will include units such as:
‘Introduction to European Media’
‘Basic Communication in a Foreign Language’ and
‘Basic Foreign Skills for Business’
Further national initiatives relating to the development of competences in European contexts at HN levels are planned for this year.
Practical Projects relating to Europe
Many students and trainees now undertake practical projects — which include work in Europe.
Such training can be certificated by Work Experience modules.
A suite of three modules on Experiencing Europe has also been developed.
These aim to foster planning and organising skills, to encourage cooperative working relationships and to enable students to evaluate what they have learned in relation to a residential experience in Europe.
Planning Ahead
In order to evaluate current provision and possible future developments, SCOTVEC is planning to discuss existing provision in relation to Europe with a number of centres and other relevant organisations.
The outcomes of this study will provide a basis for future planning and development.
EURO DESK
Eurodesk Scotland has been established as a two-way contact point between Brussels and Scottish authorities and agencies.
It acts as an information and guidance centre in relation to European developments and policies and keeps a collection of relevant periodicals and publications.
It also  fulfils a role as a vehicle for enabling Scottish views to be channelled back to the decision makers in Europe.
Eurodesk is supported by  and is located within the offices of the Scottish Community Educational Council in Edinburgh.
SCOTVEC is cooperating closely with Eurodesk with a view to sharing information and resources.
Translations of SCOTVEC Profile
Vocational education and training and methods of certification vary widely in different countries and currently there is little uniformity among member states.
The Scottish system has some very distinctive features which are not always easy to explain to those whose first language is not English.
As an aid to understanding, the SCOTVEC Profile publication ‘Setting the Standard in Scotland’ has been translated into French, German, Italian and Spanish.
Copies of these translations (and the English original) may be obtained free of charge from the Publications Unit ().
If the need arises, the Profile will be translated into other languages.
In addition, consideration will be given to translating other SCOTVEC literature, as appropriate.
SCOTVEC EUROPEAN UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 29 MAY 1992
SCOTVEC — OPERATING IN EUROPE
Midnight on 31 December 1992 will see the completion of the Single European Market.
This will signal the end of the European Commission's efforts to prepare the groundwork for the free movement of goods, services and people within the European Community.
However, much work still remains for those involved in education and training if we are to make the idea of the Single Market a reality.
SCOTVEC has become increasingly involved in European vocational education and training.
This second issue of European Update looks at some of out recent initiatives.
We want to provide accessible and flexible qualifications which prepare people for work in the Europe of 1992, and to ensure that these qualifications are recognised and valued throughout Europe and beyond.
Our progress to date is as follows:
Our ever-increasing provision of vocational qualifications includes a wide range of languages and units with a European theme.
We have active involvement in the European Community's work on the comparability and mutual recognition of vocational qualifications.
SCOTVEC awards are now published in the official journal of the European Community, and our corporate literature is currently available in French, German, Italian, Spanish and Russian.
We are also able to certificate any module where the training and assessment has been carried out in a language other than English.
The appointment of a specialist European development officer, Moira McKerracher, enables us to link with centres and offer them support, and to participate in European projects.
Moira also provides a focus for European activities within SCOTVEC.
She can be contacted on .
As our reputation in Europe grows, so does the flow of overseas visitors to our headquarters and we continue to host meetings and organise study visits for them.
More details of these activities are contained elsewhere in this issue of Update.
As 1993 approaches we are conscious that factors like the expansion of the European Community, the emergence of the Eastern European democracies and the break up of the Soviet Union, not to mention events nearer home, will present us with new challenges and opportunities.
Far from reaching the end of the road, we are only just beginning!
European Community strategy for vocational qualifications after 1992
Objectives:
Free access to vocational training across member states
Acquisition of qualifications with a ‘community dimension’
Certification of qualifications
Recognition of qualifications regardless of where they are acquired
‘Transparency’(clear understanding) of qualifications.
SCOTVEC'S EUROPEAN QUALIFICATIONS
A summary of SCOTVEC's European language provision is now available in our leaflet Languages for Europe.
Our National Certificate Modules in language offer 12 languages at five levels.
Level 1 is for complete beginners, while level 5 covers competence some way above Higher Grade.
All 12 languages are available at levels 1 to 3, and six can be taken up to level 5.
Language units have also been developed as part of Higher National Certificates (HNCs) and Higher National Diplomas (HNDs) and these may be offered as free-standing courses as well as contributing to other courses such as business studies and hospitality management.
SCOTVEC's leaflet, Qualified for Europe, highlights the wide variety of units and courses available which relate to European issues.
These range from single units certificating work experience to full time courses which emphasise the European context throughout.
National Certificate Modules such as‘Basic European community processes’, ‘Investigating Europe’ and the ‘People and…’series have been designed to allow students to study European issues in a context which meets their particular needs.
All these modules can be taken individually or as part of more extensive programmes.
Three modules on ‘Experiencing Europe’ aim to allow students to develop planning and organising skills, to encourage cooperation and to evaluate the experience gained.
In addition, a number of HNC and HND courses now incorporate European units.
Examples of such units are ‘Introduction to European Media’ and ‘Basic foreign language skills for business’.
Copies of these leaflets are available from SCOTVEC's Publications Unit,.
Support material for European and language modules
SCOTVEC has been involved in two projects designed to produce back-up resources for modules:
Europe in the Round
Europe in the Round is a computer software package.
It offers an interconnected system of over 10,000 screens providing information on study and work in the 12 European Community member states, all controlled by a simple point-and-click system.
Strathclyde Regional Council is helping to develop support materials based on Europe in the Round for the following SCOTVEC modules:
The project started in December 1991 and will run to January 1993.
It will involve the piloting of materials and a workshop for participating teachers and lecturers.
Participating students will register for SCOTVEC modules from August 1992 for completion by December 1992.
Publication of the support materials is scheduled for Spring 1993.
TVEI modern languages project
The Technical and Vocational Education Initiative's modern languages project in Scotland has produced support materials for use with SCOTVEC modules in Spanish (levels 1 and 2) and German (levels 3 and 4).
Strathclyde Regional Council is currently using the model developed by the project to produce similar material in French (levels 1–4) and German (levels 1 and 2).
The material takes the form of supported self-study packages, so a student can work through most of the material alone while maintaining regular contact with a tutor.
It will make provision for mixed-ability groups much easier to organise, and encourage independent study.
More details of the project are available from   .
European projects
Certificating European projects
Growing numbers of schools, colleges, community groups and other training providers are becoming involved in European projects.
Often, this happens through European Community programmes such as PETRA (for initial vocational training), LINGUA (for language learning), or the Young Workers Exchange Programme (for promotion of quality exchanges between young people).
These projects can involve exchanges between students of member states or periods of work experience in another European country.
Increasingly, the organisers of these projects are keen to seek certification for those participation.
There are a number of reasons for this:
certification of vocational training is in line with EC strategy and can enhance the prospects of obtaining Community funding or a project
working towards a certificate can provide a structure for an exchange visit or work experience programme
certification can improve the motivation of participants and offers the prospect of a tangible reward for their efforts
participating students (and trainers) from other member states are impressed by the fact that they can gain a nationally-recognised certificate from Scotland.
This is an effective way of marketing our education and training system abroad.
SCOTVEC's role
More and more, SCOTVEC finds itself working in partnership with organisations embarking on European projects.
These projects have an important part to play in achieving European Community objectives for vocational training after 1992.
They complement centrally-devised initiatives, such as work on the comparability and mutual recognition of qualifications.
The flexibility of SCOTVEC's provision lends itself well to European projects in many ways:
A module is an ideal vehicle for certificating learning during short exchanges or periods of work experience.
Scottish training providers are already aware of this and those in other member states are showing increasing interest.
Work towards modules can be done abroad as long as appropriate assessment evidence is produced and students are registered with an approved SCOTVEC centre; this is useful for students on exchange visits.
SCOTVEC can certificate any module where training and assessment has been carried out in a language other than English; an endorsement appears on the Learning Outcomes Statement accompanying the Record of Education and Training indicating the language used.
This facility enables students from other European countries to take SCOTVEC modules in their own language and English-speaking students have the opportunity to be assessed in another European language as an aid to employment in the European labour market.
A more recent development has been SCOTVEC's work with colleges involved in the EUROFORM and FORCE programmes.
These programmes are concerned with new course development and improving access to continuing vocational training (see article below and on opposite page).
Areas of interest to SCOTVEC include the validation of new courses, quality assurance issues which arise when SCOTVEC courses are offered outside Scotland and gaining recognition of our courses in the European Community through liaison with similar bodies in other member states.
Using SCOTVEC modules in European projects
A number of SCOTVEC modules have already been used to certificate European exchanges and work placements (see article on page 4).
From the wide range of modules available it is possible to put together many combinations to suit individual programmes.
A possible outline for an exchange or work experience placement might be:
a language
Experience has shown that a grasp of a foreign language, even at a very basic level, is of great benefit both an a practical level and as a boost to confidence to those participating in visits abroad.
Level 1 language modules cover basic and general communication skills such as exchanging information, obtaining goods and services and understanding simple written material.
background study
Useful preparatory study can be done by using social subject modules like ‘People and the past’, ‘People and society’, ‘People and politics’ and ‘People and the environment’in the European/EC society context.
‘Investigating Europe’ looks at the processes involved in a group investigation of a topic related to the European Community or to a single country or region.
Other modules like ‘History of art’, ‘Media studies’ and ‘Tourism’already have or can take on a European context.
a visit or work placement
Meaningful structure can be given to a visit or placement by using it to work towards a SCOTVEC module like ‘Experiencing Europe’.
This module is available at three levels according to the degree of independence required from the student and the complexity of the tasks undertaken.
In addition, modules such as ‘Work experience’ and ‘Enterprise activity’(each also certificated at three levels and concerning process skills) have been used in European projects.
a vocational skill
Vocational modules can be taken at home or abroad by both Scottish students and their European Community partners in an exchange project.
Foreign students can be assessed in all SCOTVEC modules in their mother tongue.
Equally, Scottish students can undertake modules — for example in the secretarial field — in a foreign language.
Enquiries about certification for European projects should be directed to  .
Anniesland College — FORCE project
A Scottish consortium has secured funding for a transnational pilot project to develop training for work-based coaches, assessors and verifiers.
The funding has been awarded by FORCE, the European programme dealing with continuing training.
The consortium, which will work with European partners, includes .
The project will pilot the delivery of training programmes and develop training materials.
The first stage of the project involves a series of exchange visits between the Scottish consortium and their project partners from Italy, France and Germany.
This has been funded by Scottish Enterprise through the Glasgow Development Agency.
The French and Italians have already spent a week in Scotland looking at developments in work-based learning here, and visits to France, Germany and Italy will follow shortly.
The next stage of the project involves delivering training for coaches, assessors and verifiers, based on agreed standards of competence.
The objectives of the project are:
To share experience in workplace coaching, assessing and verifying.
To work towards a transnational framework of standards and qualifications in this area.
To produce flexible learning materials for the training of workplace coaches, assessors and verifiers.
To make these materials available for dissemination throughout Europe.
The Tayside/La Charente young worker exchange
A recent exchange between young Scottish and French women has demonstrated how adaptable SCOTVEC modules can be to European projects.
Using an integrated programme of modules, the programme achieved outstanding results in language teaching.
The exchange, between 12 young women from Tayside (eight of whom were unemployed) and 12 young women from La Charente (all unemployed), took place in October and November 1991.
The project was initiated and led by the Educational Development Service.
Other partners included Dundee College of Further Education and the Community Education Service.
It lasted for six weeks.
Both the French and Scottish groups undertook two weeks' work experience and a week of language and social activity abroad.
The Tayside participants prepared for their visit to France while the French group were in Scotland and then both groups travelled to La Charente together.
Funding for the exchange was provided by the Young Workers Exchange Programme (now part of the PETRA II programme), which was involved in promoting quality exchanges between young people aged 18 to 28.
Additional funding came from Scottish Enterprise Tayside and the Matthew Trust, a local charity.
Both French and Scottish students took SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules as part of the programme.
Copies of module descriptors and a French translation of the SCOTVEC booklet, Setting the standard in Scotland were sent to La Charente in advance to aid preparation.
Both sets of students took ‘Work experience (2)’ and ‘Investigating Europe (3)’modules.
The Scots also took French language modules at varying levels from 2 to 5.
Delivering the three modules in an integrated way was found to be a very useful method of assisting language learning.
For instance, the work experience module included activities such as writing CVs in French.
This could then be used to provide evidence towards the French language modules.
Nine of the Scottish women chose to do their work experience module in French, and six completed ‘Investigating Europe’ in French.
(All the French women completed both modules in English.)
It was found that some of the Scottish women made outstanding progress in French language as a result of this approach.
The work experience module was felt to assist preparation, monitoring and review of the work placements.
‘Investigating Europe’ provided a structure and a challenge for those undertaking projects as part of the programme.
Fife Regional Council — Euroform project
Fife Regional Council has been awarded EUROFORM funding to develop an HND in Community and Local Economic Development,
The EUROFORM programme promotes the new occupational qualifications, skills and employment opportunities resulting from the Single Market and technological exchange.
The new course will be made up of HN Units and related teaching and learning materials.
These will be developed jointly by three transnational partners: Fife Regional Council with Lauder College plus Associate in Loco of Portugal and St Patrick's College, Maynooth, Ireland.
Fife Regional Council is responsible for the overall management of the project.
The Council has sub-contracted the development of the HN Units in Scotland to Lauder College.
The programme for the first year was drawn up by the three partners during a week-long visit to Fife.
Subsequent meetings in Scotland, Ireland and Portugal will monitor the progress of the project.
These contacts will also allow partners to share expertise and to improve their knowledge of the education and training systems of other member states, as well as learning more about their partners' local communities.
SCOTVEC is represented on the steering group managing the project.
Our interest is in the validation of the new course and in the quality assurance issues which will arise if partners wish to offer the course in Ireland or Portugal.
The project also presents the opportunity for all involved to make new contacts in Europe and to promote Scottish education and training abroad.
Comparability and mutual recognition
The first issue of European Update explained how the European Community is encouraging the free movement of labour through recognition of qualifications.
As work continues it becomes more and more obvious how difficult and complex a task this is.
Not only do the qualification systems of member states diverge significantly but the ways in which work functions are structured are also very different.
Two separate European Community initiatives are designed to facilitate labour mobility: work on the comparability of vocational qualifications, and mutual recognition.
Comparability
Work on the comparability of vocational qualifications aims to:
help employers make more informed comparisons between vocational qualifications in use in the European Community, and
encourage employees to make better use of their qualifications to gain access to employment or further training in another member state.
The work is carried out through a rolling programme, and the results are published in the official journal of the European Community.
At present the work focuses on developing comparative lists of qualifications and job descriptions for occupations at the skilled worker level.
The current position is detailed in the table below:
During 1991, the Employment Department carried out a detailed evaluation of the work undertaken to date and suggested ways that it might be developed after the current round has been completed.
Mutual recognition
The second strand of the work to help people to move across the European Community is the mutual recognition of qualifications.
An important step towards making such movement possible was taken at the Internal Market Council in December 1991.
At that time, member states reached broad agreement on a second draft Directive concerning a general system for recognising professional education and training.
When implemented this will complete the initiatives introduced by the first General Directive.
Together, these directives give every citizen of the European Community certain rights to have the qualifications and experience recognised, or taken into account, in other member states where entry to particular jobs is regulated on the basis of specific national qualifications.
The first General Directive related to the recognition of qualifications awarded after at least three years of higher education.
The proposed second Directive extends the system and procedures for recognition to include:
qualifications — including Scottish Vocational Qualifications — achieved on completion of post-secondary courses of 1–3 years.
These are defined in European terms as ‘diplomas’.
awards made on completion of a course following a minimum school-leaving age qualification.
These are defined as ‘certificates’.
work experience.
The new draft Directive means that for the first time, EC legislation formally recognises Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
Holders of SVQs will now receive full recognition for their knowledge and skills.
The draft Directive fully reflects the differing traditions, practices and approaches of member states.
It takes account of the UK policy that qualifications should be based on competence and so reflect what people can do.
A common position on the draft Directive is likely to be agreed at the Internal Market Council in the near future.
It will then go to the European Parliament for the second reading.
Formal adoption seems likely to take place during the Portuguese presidency.
Member states will have two years after adoption in which to implement the Directive.
The future
SCOTVEC Provision
The next few years should see the following developments in SCOTVEC's provision:
increased provision covering European Community languages
the addition of more Eastern European languages
the creation of basic language and culture modules for use in the tourism and hospitality industries
new modules relating to law and business in the European Community
further work on the application of some of the personal and social development modules to a European context
more work in the Higher National area and in the occupational use of language as defined by the languages lead body.
Clustering modules
SCOTVEC is currently working on a new initiative to offer ‘clusters’ of three modules.
Aimed principally at upper school pupils of all abilities, the new clusters will group together existing SCOTVEC modules, and will be compatible with Standard Grades, Highers and the new general Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
The initiative is being undertaken jointly with the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum.
One of the first clusters to be developed will be European studies.
Students will be able to select from a menu of language modules and modules with a European theme.
It is expected that support materials for the first clusters will be available in summer 1992.
Guidelines on certificating European projects
In November 1991, SCOTVEC hosted a meeting for over 60 European co-ordinators from regions and Further Education colleges.
Certification in European projects was one of several topics discussed.
It was agreed that this is an area where SCOTVEC should develop its policy.
Consequently we have invited a number of European co-ordinators to a meeting in March 1992 to advise us on what needs to be done and to participate in policy development.
One possible outcome of this would be a working group to look at producing guidelines for certification.
These would be incorporated into SCOTVEC's Guide to Procedures.
FE Euro unit for Scotland
At present there are 12 Further Education Euro Units elsewhere in the UK but none in Scotland.
The Scottish Further Education Unit (SFEU) and Eurodesk currently work together as the Scottish associate of the FE Euro Unit network.
They are now seeking financial support to establish a Euro Unit in Scotland.
The purpose of a Scottish Euro Unit would be to:
provide further education (and perhaps others in education and training) with information
link with other Euro Units to form a network
promote further education in the European context
support curriculum development
disseminate good practice.
New national centre for information on language learning
In February 1992 the Scottish Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research (SCILT) opened at Stirling University under the directorship of Richard Johnstone.
The centre is a partnership between the University of Stirling and CILT (London), and has project funding from the Scottish Office Education Department for an initial period of three years.
Its main focus is foreign languages: teaching, learning, research and policy.
It provides a resource and information service for anyone involved or interested in language teaching from schools, further and higher education, teacher education, industry and the community in general.
PICKUP EUROPE in Scotland
A new PICKUP Scotland EUROPE unit has now been guaranteed three years' funding from Scottish Enterprise.
It will aim to provide a focus in Scotland for European links with further and higher education and industry by providing:
a network of main centres in Scotland
focussed market research
training products and services
quality assurance
ways of marketing PICKUP Scotland in Europe
ways of attracting European interest in Scotland
networks of European contacts
The PICKUP Scotland EUROPE unit will form the final link in the chain of PICKUP EUROPE units in the UK.
SCOTVEC EUROPEAN UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 36 JUNE 1993
EUROPE — post 1992
The Single European Market is now open for business, but 1993 should also herald a new agreement between the 12 member states of the European Community and the seven member countries of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
This agreement will create the European Economic Area (EEA).
The EEA effectively extends the single market to Austria, Finland, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
The seven EFTA countries will embrace community legislation covering the freedom of movement of goods, services, capital and people.
This has implications for those working in education and training in this country.
The EEA Agreement will make it easier for UK nationals to live and work in the EFTA countries.
It will also provide for the mutual recognition of diplomas and other professional qualifications throughout the EEA.
By the end of 1993, the European market will extend to 19 countries and have a population of 375 million.
The challenge is to promote mutual trust and understanding of the education and training systems in each country while respecting the diversity of their cultures.
SCOTVEC — European developments
We continue to liaise with, and support centres, involved in European projects through our European Development Officer, Moira McKerracher.
The centre pages of this Update provide some examples of European projects with SCOTVEC involvement.
The single market poses new challenges for those in education and training.
SCOTVEC has been addressing a number of issues including:
the promotion of SCOTVEC awards in Europe
the development of new modules and units with a European theme
the certification of European exchanges and work placements
the delivery of SCOTVEC provision abroad via open learning and outreach centres
the delivery and assessment of modules in a language other than English.
We have also increased our stock of translated materials.
We now hold a selection of SCOTVEC publications in all the major European languages including Russian.
For more details contact the Publications Section on .
In addition, we continue to be proactive by:
forging links with our sister bodies in Europe
representing the Scottish viewpoint in European Community initiatives such as mutual recognition and comparability of vocational qualifications
initiating and participating in major research projects in the European Community.
If your centre is embarking on a European project, or if you have an enquiry where SCOTVEC could help, Moira McKerracher, European Development Officer will be pleased to hear from you.
You can contact Moira on .
New National Certificate Cluster in European studies
SCOTVEC has introduced a new kind of award, in partnership with the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum (SCCC), called National Certificate Clusters.
Made up of three National Certificate Modules, each cluster is designed to encourage students, especially those in schools, to take coherent groups of modules rather than choosing at random.
One of the first clusters to be launched is in European studies.
Clusters will be available at three levels:
Level I is suitable for students beginning their studies.
Level II offers a free standing course at a level beyond SCE Standard Grade.
For some students it can form a bridge between Standard Grades and Highers.
Level III takes students into advanced studies.
In the area of European Studies, students select a European language module plus another two from a menu of modules with a European theme.
For example, at level I, a selection might comprise:
German 2
Investigating Foreign Culture 1
Experiencing Europe 1.
The cluster in European studies provides a flexible means of introducing a European dimension to the school or college curriculum for a wide ability range.
For those students or trainees participating in a European exchange of work placement, it offers a useful programme of preparation and a means of certificating their period abroad.
Some centres intend piloting the cluster in European projects in 1993.
Full supporting documentation for clusters is being produced by the SCCC,.
More information about the new awards can be obtained from  .
The European dimension at Telford College
Since 1991, a European strategy has been incorporated into the college development plan.
This strategy has produced the following results:
The college now has close links with 65 institutions across 16 countries.
It has achieved remarkable success in winning money from the European funding programmes.
Telford students are  benefiting from a built-in European element to the curriculum.
Staff and students have access to the college's European Guidance and Resource Centre.
In achieving these results, the college acknowledges the benefits of working in partnership with several external agencies.
The college has attracted funding from programmes such as:
LINGUA ACTION IV
LINGUA is an action programme to support the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the European Community.
Funding contributed towards a vocational exchange between Telford students and German carpentry and joinery students.
Open learning materials were prepared and the German students undertook SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules in communication.
The exchanges involved in-college tuition and work placements with local companies.
Assessment of the German students took place during their visit to Telford College.
PETRA
PETRA is a European Community Action Programme for the vocational training of young people and their preparation for adult and working life.
Funding has been obtained for a vocational exchange between catering students from Telford and Lyon in France.
The placements will be of four weeks duration: part college, part work placement.
French students will be taking SCOTVEC modules.
TEMPUS
TEMPUS aims to promote the mobility and exchange of teachers and students within Central and Eastern European countries.
Under this programme, students from Lublin in Poland have taken National Certificate Modules in Business Studies (in English) via open learning.
In addition, a group of 10 Polish students visited Telford in March 1993.
During their stay, they were assessed for the module Experiencing Europe 2.
The students have been preparing for the assessments using open learning materials developed by Telford College.
EUROFORM
The EUROFORM programme aims to promote a European dimension for vocational training and employment projects.
It is funded via the European Social Fund.
The college has been funded to develop support materials which will incorporate a European dimension into National Certificate Modules in Customer Care and Marketing.
These modules will be suitable for students employed within the travel and tourism industry, especially if they intend working abroad.
EUROFORM also funded Telford to write support materials for the Experiencing Europe modules.
All students involved in this year's programme of transnational exchanges will be taking the Experiencing Europe module.
The college's future plans include reinforcing links with EFTA countries, particularly Norway and Iceland, which have expressed interest in modular provision.
Telford is also seeking European funding to investigate the application of new technology in the delivery of modules in English as a Foreign Language.
Assistant Principal, Joe Mooney sees enormous potential for the open learning format with foreign students.
He commented, ‘SCOTVEC provision with its flexibility of delivery and assessment goes down particularly well with our European partners.
They appreciate the fact that their students can access national qualifications and enjoy the kudos this brings.
It is a pity that Scottish students cannot so easily access national qualifications from other member states in the European Community’.
Lauder College EUROFORM childcare project
The Caring Section of the college has won substantial funding from the EUROFORM Programme to develop training packages for their two-year, full-time nursing programme.
These packages will introduce both a European dimension and language learning to the existing course.
Material will be written and piloted by Lauder College and their partners in Germany and Portugal.
Lauder will be offering SCOTVEC language modules, initially at level 1, to incorporate the language element into the course.
As part of their studies, Scottish students will also have the opportunity to participate in a work placement in Germany or Portugal.
Elmwood College — training trainers in Russia
Elmwood Business Training at Elmwood College is currently preparing material for the SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules on Training Methods and Assessing Trainee Performance for delivery to Russian staff at the new Ramenskoe International Training School in Moscow.
Elmwood Business Training is acting in partnership with Grainfax Ltd, Dundee, and is funded through the UK Government's Know How Fund.
Once the trainers have completed this training programme, they will be delivering a range of SCOTVEC modules to students at the school in Russia.
In January 1993, representatives from the Moscow school undertook a study tour in Scotland.
The tour included a visit to the SCOTVEC offices where they were given an overview of SCOTVEC's role and functions.
The Know How Fund exists to help provide advice and expertise to support the transition of Central and Eastern European countries towards market economies.
Angus College — LINGUA project
In December 1992, a group of 14 students from the 1st Technical Lykeio of Corfu were guests of the Angus College of Further Education.
The purpose of the trip, funded through the LINGUA programme, was the comparison of the different cultures and economies.
The students stayed with local families and visited local schools, companies and the local authorities.
As a result of the trip, the Corfiot students now have the opportunity of achieving the SCOTVEC National Certificate Module, Experiencing Europe.
The return visit by Angus College students took place at the end of February.
Borders Training Services — Horizon project
HORIZON is the European programme to promote the integration of disadvantaged and disabled people into the labour market.
It is funded via the European Social Fund.
SCOTVEC was invited to participate in this transnational project by Borders Training Services (part of the Continuing Education Department of Borders Regional Council) which has previously made successful bids to the PETRA and LINGUA programmes.
The aim of the project is to produce a common evaluation tool which assesses the personal and social development of young people on work experience placements abroad.
Members of the transnational network include training providers and awarding bodies from France, Italy, Germany and Scotland.
Their objective is to have the evaluation tool certificated in each of the partner countries.
Borders Training Services intend to pilot SCOTVEC's new National Certificate Cluster in European Studies via the project.
James Watt College — European initiatives
The European dimension is firmly at the centre of college activities, and funding generated for projects now stands at over £1 million.
Working partnerships forged at home have provided a good springboard for launching several initiatives with partners abroad.
Close co-operation with Local Enterprise Companies, Strathclyde Regional Council, local businesses, the local Member of European Parliament and SCOTVEC has enabled the college to build links with European organisations, win European funding and design new courses with the single market in mind.
The European dimension has grown to such a level that a dedicated European unit is being established.
Some of the college's major initiatives include:
HNC in European Studies with Marketing
The first of its kind in Scotland, this course incorporates a strong German language element and has been developed in partnership with Industry.
Members of the College Industry Committee and local Member of European Parliament, Hugh McMahon, contribute to the course.
Team teaching methods are employed to promote language learning through delivery of some media units in German.
All students on the course will have the opportunity to visit the European Parliament and to take part in a work placement in Europe.
The college is now working to develop a HND in European Studies with Marketing.
Trainer training for disadvantaged young people
Renfrewshire Enterprise has successfully bid for PETRA funding and will work together with James Watt College, SCOTVEC and partners in Germany and Ireland to develop new National Certificate Modules in trainer training.
The modules will be designed to provide additional skills for those responsible for the training of disadvantaged young people.
LINGUA Action IV Projects
The college made successful bids for LINGUA money to fund preparatory visits for staff and student exchanges with four colleges in Liege, Belgium.
James Watt students from a variety of vocational areas will take part in exchange visits and joint projects with Belgian students.
The college intends to use appropriate SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules to certificate these exchanges.
As a result of the Belgian links, the college has been asked to become a third partner in a TEMPUS project.
Motherwell College — PETRA project
Recently the college played host to ten motor vehicle students from a college in West France.
The French students won PETRA funding to visit Scotland for two weeks, spending one week in college and one week on a work placement.
During their visit, the students also completed a National Certificate Module in Engine Diagnostics.
Motherwell College hopes to secure funding to reciprocate the visit.
European initiatives in vocational qualifications
Transparency of qualifications — EC initiatives
In order to facilitate labour mobility across Europe, a number of initiatives have been instigated by the European Community.
The aim of these initiatives is to promote mutual trust and understanding (transparency) of the different qualification systems across the member states.
The following summarises the current progress in each initiative.
Mutual recognition of qualifications
General Directive I
This is designed to make it easier for professionals to work in other member states.
It confers on professionals the right to have their qualifications recognised in all member states.
The Directive covers some 80 professions regulated in some way by the state, or by chartered professional associations and which demand at least three years of education at university or equivalent level.
The Directive came into force in January 1991.
To date, it has been implemented by Ireland, the UK, Denmark, Portugal, Spain and Italy.
When the European Economic Area agreement is finalised, the Directive will apply reciprocally in the EFTA countries too.
For more detailed information on General Directive 1, consult the Department of Trade and Industry's free publications, Europe open for professions available from the DTI by telephoning .
General Directive II
This was recently adopted by member states and is due to be implemented by June 1994.
The second Directive extends the systems and procedures for recognition to include:
‘diplomas’— defined as qualifications — included Scottish Vocational Qualifications — achieved on completion of post secondary courses of one to three years
‘certificates’— defined as awards made on completion of courses following a minimum school-leaving age qualification
work experience
EC legislation now formally recognised Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
It takes account of UK policy that qualifications should be based on competences and so reflect what people can do.
Holders of SVQs will receive full recognition for their knowledge and skills.
The second Directive covers over 450 occupations.
It is anticipated that it will, in the future, extend to cover the EFTA countries following the EEA agreement.
From April 1993, it will be subject to a period of consultation prior to implementation in the UK.
Work on Directive II is being led by the Employment Department.
Comparability of vocational qualifications
This initiative is administered by the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (CEDEFOP) on behalf of the European Commission.
It focuses on developing comparative lists of qualifications and job descriptions for occupations at the skilled worker level across all EC member states.
The work has been carried out through a rolling programme covering 19 occupational areas and the results are published in the official journal of the EC.
It is aimed at:
employers who wish to make more informed comparisons of current vocational qualifications in the EC and
individuals who seek to use their qualifications to gain access to employment or training in another member states.
SCOTVEC awards are included in the comparative tables which have been produced.
The programme of work is now all but completed and the future of this initiative is under review.
In the UK, the initiative is co-ordinated by the Employment Department.
Other initiatives
A number of other centrally instigated initiatives are underway or under consideration.
These have the aim of facilitating the movement of labour in the EC.
Euroqualifications is a new three-year programme involving all 12 member states.
Its aim is to introduce a European dimension to existing training programmes in 12 vocational sectors.
One feature of the project will be transnational exchanges of trainers and trainees.
The UK is responsible for developing Euroqualifications in the area of commerce.
The co-ordinating body for work in the UK is DALI (Developments at London Institute).
Networking: pilot work is underway to look at creating European databases of information on vocational qualifications.
These would be based on existing work, for example the System for Accessing Modular Information (SAMI) which was developed in Scotland by the Scottish Further Education Unit (SFEU).
European Record of Achievement: speaking during the UK presidency of the EC, Employment Secretary, Gillian Shephard said,
‘We would like the Community to work towards a simple document — a European Record of Achievement — which would set out an individual jobseeker's qualifications and experience in a way which could be recognised easily by employers in other countries.’
SCOTVEC and language developments
Developments in languages
In November 1992, the Languages Lead Body submitted to SCOTVEC and NCVQ the national standards for general language learning purposes.
These standards have now been recognised for inclusion in SVQs and NVQs.
In addition, SCOTVEC is reviewing its National Certificate and Higher National provision in languages to incorporate national standards.
National Certificate provision in languages
Following consultation with all centres and the publication of national standards, National Certificate Modules have been reviewed and will be revised.
Revisions will not be dramatic, although presentation will be in a new format in line with SCOTVEC's policy to standardise unit specifications, or descriptors, for National Certificate, Higher National and Workplace Assessed Units.
Standards developed by the Languages Lead Body will be incorporated into National Certificate Modules, which will continue to be offered at five levels of difficulty.
Revised modules will be issued to centres in January 1994 and can be used from August 1994 onwards.
Higher National provision in languages
Centrally-devised Higher National Units will incorporate lead body standards at an appropriate level.
These will be generic and therefore suitable for a wide range of vocational purposes, either as part of Higher National programmes, or as free-standing units which could be used to meet the particular needs of client groups.
A guidance document will be produced giving examples of how to apply the skills to specific vocational areas.
Workplace Assessed Units
SCOTVEC is producing a suite of Workplace Assessed Units based directly on those of the Languages Lead Body.
The units are separated into the following areas:
listening
speaking
reading
writing
Thus, the new national standards for language learning will be incorporated, not only for SVQs, but across the board in SCOTVEC's provision.
One major implication of this is the facilitation of credit transfer throughout the UK, as other UK awarding bodies prepare to do likewise.
CEDEFOP study visit
Second from the left in the middle row of the photograph is Christine Fraczek, a Quality Auditor with SCOTVEC.
Christine is pictured with other European colleagues participating in a study visit to Denmark organised by CEDEFOP, European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training.
The Danish colleges visited by Christine as part of her tour expressed an interest in linking with colleges in Scotland.
Anyone interested in forming partnerships in Denmark can contact Christine,.
PICKUP Scotland EUROPE
Maida Grant has been appointed as Director of the PICKUP Scotland EUROPE unit.
The aim of the unit is to provide information, training and consultancy services to integrate Scotland with Europe.
Maida will be based at Scottish Enterprise, as well as having accommodation at the Scottish Further Education Unit,.
SCOTVEC New Products UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 27 April 1992
THE WORK OF OUR PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT UNIT
Welcome!
This is the first issue of Update devoted entirely to new vocational qualifications being developed by SCOTVEC.
As well as highlighting specific areas such as prison works and geology, we have also included information on general issues such as care skills and special needs.
In producing this new version of Update, we have three main groups of people in mind:
teaching staff who deliver SCOTVEC courses
senior management who need an overview of current developments to assist with strategic planning
marketing staff who may be able to identify new opportunities.
Over the last four years or so, SCOTVEC's provision has undergone considerable reshaping.
Four years ago, the National Certificate was still in its infancy and centres were in the process of adapting to the new system.
In 1987 we published a consultative paper on proposed changes to HNCs and HNDs.
Later that year development work began in the light of responses to that paper.
Today the new system is almost fully in place.
A wide range of new courses has emerged, due largely to the unitised nature of the new HNCs and HNDs, and to the fact that responsibility for aspects of quality assurance is devolved to centres.
These new courses have been devised to meet the needs of local employers and students.
Uptake has increased substantially.
In late 1989 Ian Lang, then Minister for Education in the Scottish Office, announced that SCOTVEC was to take responsibility for the accreditation of Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
This means that SCOTVEC now has a unique role, both accrediting and awarding vocational qualifications.
In the rest of the UK, these functions are carried out separately by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) and a variety of awarding bodies.
To date over 200 SVQs have been accredited, with a further 500 expected by early 1993.
A further milestone in the SCOTVEC system was reached in May 1991 when the White Paper Access and opportunity was published.
This invited SCOTVEC to develop general SVQs within the SVQ framework, initially at levels II and III.
General SVQs are broadly-based qualifications which provide clear progression routes to further qualifications including occupational SVQs and higher education.
Initial work has focused on general SVQs at levels II and III in the areas of business administration, care, hospitality, leisure and tourism, and technology.
Full details of these general SVQs were announced in early April.
Centres wishing to participate will be able to pilot them from August 1992.
In addition, we also announced a general SVQ at level I and awards to facilitate access to the SVQ/general SVQ frameworks for those for whom mainstream training is not appropriate, including those with special needs.
As well as developing these national awards we have been working with a number of employers and other organisations to develop awards which are tailored to their individual needs.
We hope that you find this edition of Update both informative and helpful.
We would welcome your comments and ideas for future editions.
CORE SKILLS
Core skills have played a part in all recent major developments in Scottish education and training, although not necessarily under that name.
In the school system, aspects of core skills were present in the Munn curriculum, introduced in the late 1970s.
Eventually, these evolved into guidelines produced by the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum a decade later.
The guidelines emphasised process skills which were expected to permeate the school curriculum.
Key transferable skills were an important aspect of National Certificate Modules from the mid-1980s onwards.
Core skills were incorporated as an integral part of many modules in a wide range of subject areas.
But in addition, the bold step was taken of creating specialist modules in areas like communication and personal and social development.
These were then built into a wide range of vocational programmes, including the major government training schemes.
Parallel work was undertaken south of the border, but tended to be overshadowed by the work of industry lead bodies involved in developing standards of occupational competence.
Now, however, with the Government, the CBI, the STUC and the TUC all looking to see core skills in educational and training programmes, SCOTVEC is making them a mandatory element of general SVQs.
The SCOTVEC framework for core skills is largely based upon existing modules which are already well-established in centres.
Close account has also been taken of a Scottish Office Education Department report, Core skills by design, and of work in the rest of the UK.
The nature of core skills
The core skills included in SCOTVEC's framework are fundamental to effective practice and continued learning.
They are:
Communication: the ability to write and talk appropriately for a particular purpose and audience, and to understand and interpret information through reading and listening.
Numeracy: the ability to use a range of arithmetical and basic statistical techniques to reach conclusions in practical situations.
Information technology: the ability to use computers to sort, process and retrieve information and to present information in forms appropriate to a particular purpose and audience.
Problem solving: the ability to identify and evaluate problems and to devise approaches to address them; to plan, implement and evaluate the effectiveness of problem-solving approaches.
Personal and interpersonal skills: the ability to work independently and cooperatively with others and to use self-awareness and social awareness to guide action.
Each of these five core skills will be available at four stages in the SCOTVEC framework.
Core skills are not intended to be the subject of academic studies, although they may relate to academic subjects such as English, mathematics, computing, science and social studies.
The role of core skills
Core skills:
offer common terms to describe significant aspects of performance
help in identifying strengths and weaknesses which underlie the achievement of competence
can be used in designing programmes of training and education
may provide a basis for selecting people for further education and training
can form a central aspect of personal development planning.
In many instances, core skills can be delivered and assessed as part of the delivery of particular vocational modules.
So, for instance, some general SVQs may include problem solving and personal and interpersonal skills by specifying appropriate vocational modules.
Core skills profiles
All general SVQs at levels I to III contain all five core skills, at least at stage 1, as mandatory elements.
However, the needs of each occupation were taken into consideration in deciding the precise degree of each core skill required.
For example awards in care require highly-developed skills in communication, and personal and interpersonal skills, but lower levels of numeracy.
All core skills will be certificated on the Record of Education and Training, as well as a statement of the overall core skills ‘profile’ achieved by candidates.
Languages
Proficiency in a second language is a sixth area of competence commonly associated with core skills.
SCOTVEC already has well-developed series of modules in European, Asian and Oriental languages and is currently undertaking a review of Gaidhlig provision.
Language modules have been incorporated into some general SVQs as optional elements.
They may also be taken as valuable additions to courses which do not specifically include them.
When the work of the language lead body is completed, SCOTVEC will begin to look at ways of incorporating the occupational standards produced into existing modules and units.
Improving the National Certificate catalogue
The new National Certificate catalogue for 1992–93 was sent out to centres in early January.
The updated catalogue includes new and revised modules developed over the past year.
Until recently, the catalogue was published every April.
The new publication date of January, which will now become the norm, is the result of widespread demand from centres.
Earlier publication will make timetabling easier, and reduce the pressure on staff who need to review and develop teaching materials.
Changing the publication date will have an impact on the work of development groups involved in revising existing modules and developing new ones.
Report letter
A report letter containing supplementary information was sent to centres at the same time as the new catalogue.
This letter has a different format from that used in previous years — again, the result of widespread consultation with centres.
The new format will make it easier for the person receiving it to pass on relevant information to members of staff with particular subject interests.
Details of changes to modules, together with lists of the new modules which will be available for introduction next session, are provided in annexes to this report letter.
More letters giving further information about module developments will be sent out later in the year.
These will give details on programmes of work and on the progress of developments.
These letters will now go out at Easter and in the autumn.
New module developments
Vehicle maintenance and repair
New modules have been developed to link with the requirements of the Road Transport Industry Training Board.
Revisions have also been carried out to make modules more suitable for use by both light and heavy vehicle mechanics.
Floristry
SVQs in floristry have been accredited at levels I and II.
They are made up of modules in areas such as flower design and arrangement, care and identification of plants, stock control and selling skills, customer contact and payment.
Electronic music
Four new modules have been developed.
These relate to electronic systems, sound synthesis, circuits, and transducers and amplifiers.
Photography
Three new modules have been developed in mono and  colour processing and close-up photography.
Theatre and drama
Last year several modules in small-scale production were developed.
Eight existing modules are being revised and two new ones are being developed in video production and role play.
History of art
Two existing modules covering a very broad time-span have now been revised to cover seven shorter historical periods, allowing in-depth investigations by students.
Philosophy
Modules have been developed to introduce students to the major philosophical problems.
They are available at three levels and are aimed primarily at those seeking entry to higher education.
Psychology
Seven modules have been introduced covering areas such as cognitive, occupational, developmental and clinical psychology, and providing the skills and knowledge likely to be required at a basic level in higher education.
Personal and social development
Two projects in the area of personal and social development have been completed within the last year:
Social and vocational skills
The Scottish Office Education Department and the Scottish Examination Board asked SCOTVEC to develop modules which would provide progression from Standard Grade social and vocational skills.
Three themes — work, home and community — were developed.
The project led to the production of two new modules:
The new modules have been developed for two groups of students: those returning to S5 for a limited period of time, and those who intend to complete a full year's programme of study in S5 or S6.
For the first group, progression can be achieved by undertaking one of:
For the second group, a possible progression route lies in undertaking: along with one module from:
Understanding Industry
Understanding Industry is a body which brings professionals from a variety of business backgrounds into the classroom.
It runs courses for young people to enable them to become familiar with a range of occupations.
SCOTVEC has been working in partnership with Understanding Industry to develop a module entitled ‘Understanding industry’.
Awards for excavation and reinstatement on the roads
Ten qualifications in excavation and reinstatement on the roads have been developed to meet the needs of the new Roads and Street Works 1991 Act.
Five awards have been designed for operatives and five for supervisors.
SCOTVEC has been appointed by the Department of Transport as the awarding body for these qualifications in Scotland.
In addition SCOTVEC will compile and maintain the register of qualified personnel for the entire UK.
Assessment centres will be approved to offer the awards from April.
Consortium developments in civil engineering
A group of colleges have been working together to develop a new HNC in Civil Engineering.
The proposed course will proceed to validation in the spring and, if this is successful, will be offered from August 1992.
The new course has been developed to meet the Engineering Council's requirements for incorporated engineer status and it is hoped that all of the colleges involved will be accredited by the Engineering Council.
Geology
Three National Certificate modules in geology are being developed and should be completed by June 1992.
The first, ‘Introduction to geology’ is designed to develop practical and analytical skills.
The processes which shape the landscape, and practical investigation skills, provide the themes of ‘Physical landscape of Scotland’.
The third module focuses on ‘Environmental geology’.
At Thurso College these modules will form part of a course in environmental studies which may be used to provide access to further studies at Aberdeen University.
Developments in science
One of the largest consultative exercises ever undertaken by SCOTVEC has resulted in a new framework for science study.
The framework is as follows:
stage 1 modules which provide for basic competences
stage 2 modules which form the basis of learning in specific sciences
stage 3 modules which provide for a wider range of opportunities for science specialisation.
A review of the provision at stages 2 and 3 in physical sciences is now being finalised.
Seven revised modules will be published in May 1992 for use next session.
Future work will include the development of further specialist modules.
The review of the stage 3 chemical sciences provision is nearing completion.
Four revised modules will be published in April 1992 for use next session.
Work is also underway to develop more specialist modules to support and link with forthcoming SVQs.
In biological sciences, review of stage 2 modules will result in the publication of three new modules in April 1992, with further modules being available from 1993 onwards.
Work in generic science has also been taking place.
Modules in ‘The work environment’ and ‘Science and technology in society’will be published in April 1992.
It is likely that group awards in sciences will be developed for introduction in 1993 using the new framework of modules.
Many students will wish to use these modules for entry to higher education, and negotiations on this important area are currently taking place.
National Certificate in Prison Works Management
National Certificate for prison works officers has been developed by SCOTVEC in collaboration with the Scottish Prison Service.
This will replace the previous Certificate in Prison Works.
The new award differs from its predecessor in that it includes management studies and also a module in ‘Control and care of prisoners’.
HNC in social sciences
A consortium of colleges is working to develop an HNC in Social Sciences.
This is being designed to articulate with university degree courses, and to provide a suitable qualification for a number of employment areas.
The proposed award includes Higher National Units in sociology, psychology, philosophy, history, geography, politics, economics and research methods in the social sciences.
It contains a framework of core and optional units from which the colleges will plan courses which are tailored to meet the needs of students and end-users in their own local areas.
Business administration and management
The introduction of SVQs in business administration at levels I and II has been one of the most significant recent developments in this sector.
These awards, which can be achieved through either a workplace or a National Certificate route, are based on the standards developed by the Administration Lead Body.
For situations where assessment of these SVQs is taking place under simulated conditions, SCOTVEC is publishing extensive guidance, as well as advice on developing employer partnerships.
The level III SVQ in administration is for senior secretaries.
It is available only through a workplace route, although colleges which can assess to lead body requirements can be approved to offer this qualification.
General SVQs in business administration, more suitable for full-time students, will be introduced from August 1992, and will complement and facilitate access to the SVQs.
As well as allowing progression to various HNCs and HNDs, the general SVQs will also link with recently-accredited SVQs in banking and insurance.
The level II SVQ in banking is jointly certificated by SCOTVEC and the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland.
The level II SVQs in insurance are awarded in partnership with the Insurance Industry Training Company and the Chartered Insurance Institute.
Together with the level II SVQ in financial services (building societies) and the SVQ in pensions administration at level IV, these SVQs form a coherent group for this sector.
In the area of management, uptake of the HNC in Management continues to grow.
The joint SCOTVEC/Management Charter Initiative Certificate in Management is a level IV SVQ, and SVQs at levels III and V are under development.
In the final phase of our advanced courses development programme, the Diploma in Public Administration will change its name to the Diploma in Public Services Management.
A post graduate/post experience Certificate in Public Services Management is to be introduced in addition to the HNC in Public Administration.
An HNC and an HND in Legal Services will replace the former legal studies courses.
The HNC in Management Services will be phased out.
The introduction of an SVQ at level IV in accounting will mean that there is no need for a revised HNC in Accounting Technician Studies.
Finally, a new work-based Certificate in Business Counselling, created in partnership with Scottish Business in the Community, has recently been launched.
This is the only award of its type in the UK.
Basic skills initiatives — numeracy and literacy
In 1989 the BBC introduced a new series of programmes in basic skills.
At the same time, the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit was commissioned by the former Training Agency to identify competences in the areas of literacy and numeracy which would link to the BBC programmes.
SCOTVEC has now adapted these competences to bring them in line with National Certificate Modules.
The following numeracy Modules have recently been published:
In literacy, modules are being developed and should be published in April 1992.
Although the modules have been developed primarily for those in adult basic education, they are suited to a wide range of client groups.
The modules are Scottish awards, associated with the BBC's programmes, which will match similar certificates being developed in England and Wales.
Scottish Wider Access Programme
Launched in 1988, the Scottish Wider Access Programme (SWAP) aims to increase participation rates in higher education.
Access to teacher training, and training in technology, nursing, and other areas is provided through one-year courses.
These courses, run by further education colleges, are all based on National Certificate Modules.
The aim is to open up higher education to under-represented groups through provision which offers enhanced support plus guaranteed further training at the end of one year.
SCOTVEC's role
SCOTVEC is heavily involved in the SWAP initiative.
In some areas new modules have been written to meet the needs of students seeking entry to higher education.
Developments in the service industries
The development of SVQs has formed a major part of our work in this sector over the last year.
The existing framework of qualifications in the retail sector was augmented by new awards at levels III and IV.
A joint certification agreement with the Hairdressing Training Council added SVQs at levels II and III to the framework.
At level II, Workplace Assessed Units replace National Certificate Modules.
Colleges can continue to offer the SVQ, however, provided that the working environment matches the requirements of the lead body.
Beauty therapy SVQs at levels I, II and III are also under development.
One of our largest developments has been the completion of a suite of 24 catering and hospitality SVQs.
These are at levels I to IV and include general as well as occupational SVQs.
An SVQ in security guarding at level II has also been introduced in collaboration with the Securities Industries Training Organisation.
SVQs in cleaning, sport and recreation, laundry and dry cleaning, and dairy trades will be introduced over the next few months.
A range of general SVQs in the service sector will be piloted next session.
All general SVQs at levels I to III consist of appropriate groupings of National Certificate Modules.
Initially awards are available in business administration, hospitality, and leisure and tourism.
General SVQs will provide education and training for those who wish to go directly into employment, or for those who are seeking higher levels of qualifications, whether further general SVQs, occupational SVQs, or through higher education.
HNCs and HNDs in areas such as hospitality management, hospitality operations, food and beverage management and other more specialised areas are now available.
Many colleges have developed HNCs and HNDs for the service sector.
These include:
tourism
retail supervisory management
distribution studies
sports development and coaching
leisure management
arts administration
Finally, a work-based Certificate in Funeral Directing has been introduced this year.
Special needs
SCOTVEC has recently introduced special qualifications for students and trainees with learning difficulties.
This work is the result of a review of existing National Certificate provision for candidates with learning difficulties, undertaken by SCOTVEC's Special Education/Training Needs Sub-Committee.
This development has taken place as part of our work on general SVQs.
Awards have been designed which will provide progression to SVQs and general SVQs.
For National Certificate modules it has been possible for some time to approve alternative outcomes, under certain circumstances, for students with special needs of all kinds.
The number of approaches from centres wishing to use this facility is on the increase, and the sub-committee is considering how this type of arrangement should be used in future.
A consultative group on provision for deaf people and those with impaired hearing has also been established.
So far, discussions have centred on certification for British Sign Language interpreters.
Informal discussions regarding the needs of blind and visually-impaired people have also taken place.
Standards for assessors and verifiers
The availability of trained assessors and verifiers in the workplace, in colleges and schools, and in training institutions will be a key requirement for the successful delivery of vocational qualifications.
The need for national qualifications for those carrying out the main functions in the assessment process has become increasingly pressing.
During 1990–1991, national standards for assessors and verifiers were drafted by a working group of representatives from SCOTVEC and NCVQ, supported by the major English awarding bodies.
The resulting standards have been endorsed by the TDLB and form section D3 of its standards framework.
On the basis of these standards, SCOTVEC is creating a new series of awards in training and assessing, each consisting of a single unit.
In view of the importance of the competences concerned, we will issue separate certificates for the units.
The awards are as follows:.
These single-unit certificates do not make up an SVQ, nor is there any intention, at present, to have SVQs in assessment.
Their main use will be as independent units, to be acquired by those carrying out assessment functions.
We look forward to working with centres towards the early introduction of the new awards.
Caring
Seven new SVQs in child care and education were launched on 26 February, to coincide with the launch of equivalent NVQs in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The new qualifications at levels II and III are based on Workplace Assessed Units:
Child care and education providers, and colleges working in partnership with such providers are now being invited to come forward to SCOTVEC for approval to offer the new SVQs.
Work is now nearing completion on the integration of health care and social care SVQs.
It is envisaged that the new integrated SVQs will gradually replace the existing SVQs in health care and in social care.
Nevertheless, the Care Sector Consortium, the industry lead body for the sector, has emphasised that the existing awards will retain parity of esteem with the new SVQs.
The new integrated SVQs, probably at levels II and III, are expected to be available in early autumn 1992.
The existing HNC in Social Care is being revised to take account of the integration of health and social care SVQs.
The revised HNC will be available in spring 1992.
In response to demand SCOTVEC has set up a working group of employer and college representatives to develop a new HND in Social Care Management.
Twelve of the 30 units making up the new HND in Social Care.
Candidates with the revised HNC will thus be able to progress to the new HND on taking the necessary number of extra units.
This new HND will be available in summer 1992.
Finally, a new HNC in Child Care and Education is to be produced on the basis of the recently-developed child care and education standards (see above).
This new award will provide an alternative to the existing HNC in Working with Children in Their Early Years.
Engineering Developments
A new HNC is being developed to meet the need for technician engineers with skills in electronics, computing and mechanical engineering, in other words, in the new interdisciplinary approach to engineering called mechatronics.
This new course, which is expected to be validated during 1992–93, will include core units in engineering systems, microelectronics, computing, communication, plus a major integrative project.
New awards in engineering practice are being developed to provide clear progression routes from the relevant national awards in engineering practice.
The courses include the skills required at advanced craft level across engineering disciplines.
Two separate types of award are being proposed.
The first is a group of Certificates in Advanced Engineering Practice which will be awarded on completion of six HN Units.
A further six HN Units will go to make up awards in the second group, HNCs.
The national framework for HNDs in engineering disciplines aims to facilitate progression from HNCs, and is common to all engineering disciplines.
The core subject areas for the HNDs are:
principles
design
engineering applications
engineering project
mathematics
communication
organisational and quality issues
computing.
A new framework of national awards in engineering has been developed over the last few years.
The awards consist of National Certificate Modules and have been designed with credit transfer to new SVQs in mind.
There will also be clear progression routes, with credit transfer, from the new general SVQs in technology which will be introduced later in 1992.
The new national awards provide two types of qualification.
Engineering practice awards will directly support the application of practical skills in particular disciplines.
Engineering awards, while broadly supporting particular disciplines, will also meet agreed criteria for progression to higher education and recognition at engineering technician level by the Engineering Council.
There will be clear routes of progression to enable movement between awards in both categories.
A consortium of colleges have proposed a unitised version of the Certificate in Quality Assurance.
The proposed new course will consist of one double-credit, nationally-developed unit, ‘Quality assurance management’, plus additional options to the value of a further two credits.
The nationally-developed unit has been produced with the assistance of the Institute of Quality Assurance.
The unit is based on the six major areas covered in section A3 of the Institute's syllabus, and candidates who have achieved the unit will gain exemption from this section of the syllabus.
SCOTVEC is currently discussing formal recognition of the unit with the IQA.
There are around 80 industry lead bodies with an interest in engineering activities.
The Engineering Occupations Standards Group (EOSG) has been set up to co-ordinate standards development.
Its main focus is standards and qualifications at higher and professional levels (levels IV and V).
However, it is also charged with ensuring coherence at levels I to III.
Finally, it is envisaged that a number of new SVQs will be accredited in the near future.
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT TEAM
Within SCOTVEC, responsibility for developing and updating vocational qualifications lies with five Assistant Directors, each of whom leads a team of staff.
Four of these teams specialise in particular sectors, such as engineering and manufacture, service industries, or community services.
The fifth team deals with cross-sectoral and other issues.
The following detailed breakdown is designed to help those wanting to fund out more about awards available in a particular sector.
SCOTVEC New Products UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 33 JANUARY 1993
New qualifications from SCOTVEC
This issue is the result of the enthusiastic response to our first New Products Update, published last April.
Staff in colleges, schools, and other training centres clearly welcome advance information about the new vocational qualifications being developed by SCOTVEC, and we shall be producing further information of this kind on a regular basis.
A very important aspect of our work over the last nine months has been the development of the new general SVQs.
Eleven new qualifications are now being piloted, and a further 10 are currently under development.
More information about these qualifications will be included in a forthcoming issue of Update, to be published in February.
The continuing development of SVQs is another major part of the work of our Product Development Unit.
Details of new SVQs in training and development, catering and hospitality, sport and recreation, and other areas, can be found in a special SVQs Update, published this month.
One development that will be of interest to all those offering SCOTVEC qualifications is the phasing in of a standardised unit specification for National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units, and Workplace Assessed Units.
You will find information about the new specification on page 2 of this issue.
Good news for the National Certificate comes in the form of an endorsement by employers of a range of module groupings which have been recognised as alternatives to SCE awards for general recruitment purposes.
A full listing of recognised alternatives is now being maintained by SCOTVEC, and updated listings will be regularly sent to centres.
Further details are on page 2.
Another important National Certificate development is the introduction of a new kind of award: National Certificate Clusters.
Clusters have been designed in response to requests from secondary schools, which felt they needed help in guiding students to make coherent choices from the National Certificate catalogue.
The first clusters, in European studies, information technology, and home economics are now available.
Further clusters are currently being developed.
In another new development, SCOTVEC's extensive range of postgraduate/post-experience awards has recently been reviewed, and a new classification system introduced.
These qualifications are now called Professional Development Awards.
A four-tier system of Advanced Diplomas, Diplomas, Advanced Certificates, and Certificates is now in place.
Further information about the new system is provided on page 2.
Details of new Professional Development Awards in engineering practice and in building are given on page 3.
The last nine months have also seen continuing development in the National Certificate and in our advanced courses provision.
On pages 3 and 4 we provide a summary of some of the major new qualifications recently introduced or under development in the following areas:
care
quality assurance
mechatronics and engineering practice
built environment
sport and recreation
bakery
greenkeeping and golf course management
Finally, on page 4 you will find details of new and revised National Certificate Modules in the following areas:
artificial intelligence
drystone dyking
fabrication and welding
economic and environmental geology
We hope that you will find this issue of New Products Update as helpful and informative as the last.
Once again, we would welcome your comments, and ideas for future issues.
The new unit specification
SCOTVEC's units are the heart of our vocational education system.
All SCOTVEC qualifications are made up of different combinations of:
National Certificate Modules
Higher National Units
Workplace Assessed Units
In the past, each kind of unit has been expressed in a rather different way, by means of a different type of unit specification, or module descriptor.
And aspects of the quality assurance for each kind of unit also differed.
For some time, SCOTVEC has been working to harmonise both the quality assurance systems associated with these different kinds of unit, and the unit specifications.
Further information about the Quality Development Programme can be found in two special Updates, issue numbers 23 and 26, which were sent to centres in June 1991 and April 1992 respectively.
The new unit specification for all SCOTVEC units is in three sections:
general and administrative information
the standards against which candidates must be assessed
guidance for teachers and trainers
The phasing in of a standardised unit specification will have implications both for centres delivering SCOTVEC units, and for those involved in writing their own units.
The new unit specification is being introduced as follows:
Since August 1992, all Workplace Assessed Units have been in the new format.
All new National Certificate Modules, and centrally-devised Higher National Units with the session date 1993–94, will be in the new format.
Centres writing their own Higher National Units are invited to adopt the new format for 1993–94, though there is no obligation to do so; however, all such units with the session date 1994–95 must be in the new format.
A letter containing information about the new unit specification was sent to heads of centres in November.
Further details are provided in the National Certificate Modules: catalogue of module descriptors (1993/4), published this month.
Recognition for module groupings
A number of employers have already given their seal of approval to a range of SCOTVEC module groupings, and more recognitions are in the pipeline.
Over the years, a number of groupings of National Certificate Modules have gained recognition as alternatives to SCE awards for candidates seeking employment or admission to further and higher education.
In July 1992, SCOTVEC published its first comprehensive listing of these recognised groupings.
The listing was distributed to all schools, colleges and central institutions, regional careers officers, directors of education, university admission officers, and to major employers.
As a result, a number of employing organisations have already agreed to put their names to the document as users or intending users of the groupings, and more employers were coming forward as we went to press.
Extra copies of Recognised and recommended groupings for National Certificate Modules are available from our Publications Section,.
It is intended to update this listing on a regular basis.
National Certificate Clusters launched
This month, SCOTVEC is introducing a new kind of award: National Certificate Clusters.
Made up of three National Certificate Modules, each cluster is designed to encourage students, especially those in schools, to take coherent groups of modules, rather than choosing them at random.
At present, clusters are available in three vocational areas:
European studies
information technology
home economics
Development work on new clusters is currently taking place in several areas, including:
design
business and administration.
Within each area, clusters will be available at three levels:
The first level is suitable for students beginning their studies in a particular area.
The second level can be taken as an alternative to a Higher course for some students.
For others, it can form a bridge between Standard Grades and Highers.
The third level takes students into advanced studies.
Designed jointly by SCOTVEC and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum (SCCC), clusters articulate with SEB provision, and provide progression to Highers.
In the future, credit transfer to general SVQs may be possible.
Introducing Professional Development Awards
SCOTVEC recently took the decision to rationalise its wide and varied range of postgraduate/post-experience awards.
In future, these qualifications will be referred to as Professional Development Awards, and four types of award will be available:
Advanced Diplomas are intended for those who already have an HND or equivalent in the same discipline.
Candidates who successfully complete this qualification can often gain direct access to a master's degree.
Each award consists of more than 12 Higher National Unit credits.
The Diploma is pitched at HNC or HND level, and designed for those who already have a diploma, degree or equivalent qualification in another discipline.
It consists of 10 or more Higher National Unit credits.
Advanced Certificates are designed to develop competences already achieved through National Certificate programmes, and to provide a bridge to HNCs and HNDs.
They are made up of between six and 12 Higher National Unit credits.
The last kind of Professional Development Award is the Certificate, which can be made up of varying numbers of National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units, or Workplace Assessed Units.
New Developments
The following summary details some of the major new qualifications recently introduced or under development included National Certificate, advanced courses and Professional Development Awards.
Detailed information about new SVQs and general SVQs will be provided in forthcoming issues of Update, available shortly.
Care
Two new advanced courses have been developed: an HNC in Social Care, and an HNC in Health Care.
Both have been designed to incorporate SVQs in care at level III.
The qualifications are designed for those already working in the field as well as new entrants, and the new HNC in Social Care has been endorsed by the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work.
A review of the qualifications framework in childcare and education is currently underway.
This will examine the relationship between SVQs at levels II and III in this area and National Certificate and Higher National provision.
The aim is to design an integrated framework which will gain the support and approval of employers, professional bodies, and those delivering the awards.
Quality assurance
The Institute of Quality Assurance has recently confirmed that holders of the new Higher National Unit, Quality Assurance Management will be exempt from Section A3 of the Institute's syllabus.
It is hoped that a double credit unit currently being developed, Introduction to Quality Assurance, will give similar exemption from Section A4 of the syllabus.
A new National Certificate Module entitled Introduction to Quality is now being piloted at Castlehead High School.
SCOTVEC's quality provision now spans the spectrum from individual modules to complete quality assurance courses.
Available qualifications include the Certificate in Quality Assurance, an HNC in Quality Assurance, and an HNC and HND in Quality Management and Technology.
Training and development
National Certificate Modules and Higher National Units in the training of trainers are currently being revised to provide a pre-vocational qualification for those considering a career in training.
The possibility of credit transfer from these modules and units to general SVQs at levels III and IV is under consideration.
Mechatronics and engineering practice
A new HNC in mechatronics is due for validation this month, and will be available for delivery in session 1993–94.
Developed by a consortium of seven centres, the award is designed to meet industry's need for technician engineers with interdisciplinary skills.
The HNC covers electronics, computing, and mechanical engineering, and includes specialist options in design, manufacture, and maintenance.
It takes a strongly integrative approach to assessment, incorporating case studies, assignments, and a major mechatronics project.
Three new Advanced Certificates in Engineering Practice were validated in May 1992, and are currently being delivered in 19 centres across Scotland.
These Professional Development Awards have been developed to offer further qualifications to those who have achieved relevant national awards in engineering practice.
Each Advanced Certificates is made up of six Higher National Unit credits, covering engineering principles, advanced technology, and applied technology.
By taking a further six Higher National Unit credits, candidates can gain the new HNC in Engineering Practice.
This HNC is due for validation this month, and will be available for session 1993–94.
The six extra units, covering first line supervisory skills, quality assurance, and technology, have been recently developed in consultation with industry, and take account of both guidance from the National Economic Development Council and lead body standards.
Built environment
Work is underway on a suite of centrally-developed Higher National Units for the building sector.
It is hoped to publish the new units in April 1993.
They will be based on existing units devised by centres for HNCs and HNDs in areas like building, quantity surveying, and architectural technology.
The new units will also take account of an earlier SCOTVEC project to look at the competences required in the building industry.
An Advanced Certificate in Stonemasonry has been developed by SCOTVEC in collaboration with Glasgow College of Building and Printing, and Telford College.
This Professional Development Award forms a bridge between National Certificate provision and HNCs and HNDs.
Due to demand from other colleges, and after consultation with industry, SCOTVEC is now undertaking work on five further Advanced Certificates in carpentry and joinery, bricklaying, plastering, painting and decorating, and roof slating and tiling.
It is expected that these qualifications will be available from August 1993.
Sport and recreation
An existing HNC and HND in Leisure Management are currently being revised by a consortium of colleges.
This is to take account of the new SVQs now available in sport and recreation.
Consideration is being given to the relationship between the HNC and general SVQs at level IV.
HNCs in Sports Development and Coaching are also currently under review.
Bakery
A National Certificate Group Award in Craft Baking Technology is currently under development.
It is designed to provide a further qualification for those who have achieved the National Certificate in Craft Baking.
It incorporates National Certificate Modules in aeration and flour technology, as well as advanced cake decoration.
The new qualification will augment existing provision in the area of craft baking and baking technology.
This existing provision includes the National Certificate Group Award in Craft Baking, designed to articulate with the SVQ in Craft Baking at level II, and the HNC in Bakery Supervisory Management which is offered by Telford and Inverness Colleges.
Greenkeeping and golf course management
A new qualification, the National Certificate in Greenkeeping, is now available.
The award has been developed by the Scottish Industrial Liaison Committee for Greenkeeper Training.
Mandatory modules cover the fundamental competences required of a greenkeeper, while optional modules provide the opportunity to develop specialist areas.
There are a number of candidates who will be able to attain this qualification retrospectively, having already achieved the required modules.
The award carries the endorsement of the British and International Golf Greenkeepers Association, and the Greenkeeper Training Committee.
It is also strongly supported by the Scottish Golf Union.
A new HNC in Golf Course Management was validated in the summer of 1992, and will be offered by four colleges in session 1993–94.
The new National Certificate in Greenkeeping will be recognised for entry to this HNC.
New modules
Opportunities for Scottish students to learn about artificial intelligence are about to be augmented by the development of a new family of modules in AI.
The new modules will cover natural language processing, search based problem solving, and expert systems.
Each module assumes only a basic familiarity with computers.
The new modules, taken together with a revised Prolog module, will form an option within the new information technology general SVQ at level III.
An existing module in drystone dyking has now been revised to bring it into line with current industrial practices.
The new module covers the basic skills and knowledge required to build, maintain, and repair drystone dykes.
The module will be of interest to a wide range of industries, from agriculture to conservation and hard landscaping.
A further, more advanced, module may be developed later.
A major review of existing modules in the fabrication and welding area is now underway.
These modules will be updated in line with recently-published lead body standards, new European directives, and the requirements of the Welding Institute.
Finally, a new module in economic and environmental geology is currently being developed.
It will investigate the impact of geological factors on health, safety and welfare, and stress the importance of careful use of resources and sensitive treatment of the environment.
This module will supplement two recently-published geology modules.
These three modules will form part of a course in environmental studies being offered by Thurso College, which provides access to further studies at Aberdeen University.
New publications
A number of new publications will shortly be available to support the work carried out by our Product Development Unit, including the following:
National Certificate RECENT DEVELOPMENTS UPDATE
issue number 5 March 1989
SCOTVEC to introduce ‘Named Awards’
There was surprise in some quarters at the decision taken by SCOTVEC's Education Policy Committee to agree in principle to the introduction of ‘named awards’ involving National Certificate and other modules.
Wasn't this turning the clock back to the days of the old non-advanced courses?
Not a bit of it!
SCOTVEC's decision is a forward step, designed to reflect the changing picture in vocational education and training.
John McFadden, Assistant Director, is secretary of a group looking at ‘named awards’.
‘The concept is different to the old courses’, he says.
‘The new awards will not determine fixed courses of study — they actually reflect the recognition which some programmes of modules have gained.
Suppose, for example, that a particular group of 10 modules is recognised by the industry body as the requirement for competence in marine plumbing.
SCOTVEC should be able to issue a ‘Certificate of Marine Plumbing’, giving credit for those specific, relevant and recognised occupational skills.
And, of course, the candidate will still get his National Certificate, showing those modules and any others achieved outwith the marine plumbing group.’
He also pointed out that other named awards might be possible for specific purposes such as certification of access courses.
The idea, then, is to build on the emerging role of lead industry bodies in vocational education and training by providing certification which recognises the achievement of the competences identified by these bodies.
This will provide qualifications which are compatible with the National Vocational Qualifications available in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The next step is for SCOTVEC to agree criteria to decide whether a particular group of modules should become a ‘named award’.
The criteria will ensure that the National Certificate's flexibility, which is such a strength of the system, is not lost and will establish the ground-rules for negotiations with industry bodies.
SCOTVEC is now looking forward to the possibility of the first ‘named awards’ being available next session.
Further ahead, might we see a widening of the concept to include named awards made up of Higher National Units and workplace modules as well as National Certificate modules?
National Certificate Prizes
National Certificate prizes?
Isn't National Certificate criterion-referenced?
For some years, SCOTVEC has had an Awards Ceremony at which students received prizes as, for example, the best student in Scotland in a particular HNC or HND course.
Many of the prizes are sponsored by industry and commerce.
In traditionally examined courses such as the current HNC or HND, the criterion for award of prizes may simply be that the winner has obtained the top mark when all students across the length and breadth of the country are compared.
For the first time at the 1987/8 Awards Ceremony, prizes were awarded to National Certificate students.
But the National Certificate is not norm-referenced and no national comparison of marks is therefore possible.
If students are not compared against one another and their achievement is measured against fixed performance criteria, how can a system of prizes be justifiable?
Can prizes be awarded without compromising the very foundation on which National Certificate assessment is built?
Like other examining and awarding bodies, however, SCOTVEC is in the business of recognising achievement; any holder of a SCOTVEC certificate, be it a National Certificate, an HNC or an HND, has an award of which he or she can be proud.
An awards system which recognises only HNC and HND achievement would be one which ignored the majority of SCOTVEC's candidates — there are almost ten National Certificate candidates for every one in Advanced Courses.
The answer to this dilemma was simple yet effective and combined the desire to recognise exceptional achievement with the maintenance of the National Certificate's philosophy.
In the selection of prizewinners, the criterion applied would not require comparison of one student against another but rather would require the comparison of one student's achievement against previous expectations.
Since centres would be the best judged to make this kind of judgement, colleges were asked to nominate potential prizewinners.
For example, a student chosen might have had to overcome some specific learning difficulty to gain success in modules; another might have achieved success despite little previous exposure to formal further education.
A panel made up of a small group of SCOTVEC's senior committee members was brought together to sift through the many college's nominees.
After much debate and fascinating reading, the panel drew up its final list of the first set of National Certificate prizewinners.
The group chosen received their prizes at the 1987/8 Awards Ceremony on 2 November 1988 in the Mitchell Theatre, Glasgow, and are pictured above.
SED sets up the Osler Committee
Until recently, the only short courses available to schools and colleges which carried national certification were the National Certificate modules.
But early in 1988, the Scottish Examination Board indicated that it was ready to issue and certificate short courses.
These were to be based on a descriptor with learning outcomes and performance criteria, would be internally assessed, and would be of nominal 40-hour length — just like SCOTVEC modules.
But schools and colleges using SEB short courses would make entries to SEB in Dalkeith, the system of moderation would be different to that operated by SCOTVEC, and the short courses would appear on the Scottish Certificate of Education as issued by SEB.
The parallel operation of two systems of short courses/modules raised important issues, both practical (in terms of centres' administrative systems) and educational (in terms of design of curriculum, articulation and comparability).
These issues were being raised in the deliberations of a SCOTVEC review group which included representatives of SED, SEB and SCCC and which had been set up to look at the acceptability of non-vocational modules in National Certificate.
There was a feeling that the wider issues needed to be looked at in a national forum.
Tom McCool, SCOTVEC's Chief Executive, had already written to ask SED to convene a meeting to consider the implications of having both SCOTVEC and SEB modules/short courses available in schools and colleges.
SCOTVEC therefore welcomed the decision of SED to set up a small committee to look at the module/short course issues, particularly in the context of schools' S3/4 stages.
The group's membership includes SCOTVEC, SEB and SCCC and is chaired by HMCI Douglas Osler.
SCOTVEC is represented by Iain Anderson, Depute Director (Curriculum).
‘So far’, Iain Anderson reports, ‘the group has been concentrating on gathering information on the courses available in the SCOTVEC and SEB systems to attempt to produce clear advice to teachers and pupils on the ‘pathways’ through the various options.
Next we're turning our attention to the more difficult issue of whether any common approach can be adopted.
At the end of the day, this might not be possible, but it's important that we explore all the avenues.’
Work on the National Certificate Catalogue
The National Certificate Catalogue has become one of the most familiar publications in schools and colleges.
Within its modest covers is contained a list of the huge number of modules now available to pupils and students all over the country.
Many people still remember — perhaps less painfully in hindsight — the hectic days leading up to the publication of the first list of modules.
In the first year of National Certificate, around 700 modules were available; now, it's closer to 2,500.
As with any catalogue, it's not enough just to add new items to attract new customers — the items already there have to be reviewed and updated to make sure that they continue to meet today's needs and standards.
How is this done?
Proposals for additions to the Catalogue come in steadily from National Certificate centres.
These ‘centre-devised’ modules are sent out to specialist advisers for comment and then checked by a small committee, the Catalogue sub-committee, to see whether it makes sense to have the proposal developed for inclusion in the Catalogue.
Any new module needs to have a distinct identity and market — SCOTVEC feels that it would be confusing to employers to have a proliferation of modules and titles and so the Catalogue sub-committee will not accept a new proposal if it thinks that the same outcomes can be achieved by suitable fleshing-out of an existing module.
Also, of course, the Catalogue sub-committee will not accept a module if it is technically poorly prepared.
The Catalogue sub-committee also looks regularly at the Catalogue and decides on areas of work where either new modules need to be developed centrally or existing modules need to be updated to take account of modern developments, changes in standards, work of Lead Industry Bodies etc.
This review is done every year and leads to the publication of a Programme of Work and to the setting up of module development groups made up of industrial, commercial and education representatives.
SCOTVEC sends a letter to all centres in August to let teachers and lecturers know the general areas for review.
Later in the session, early warning is given of any significant changes to the Programme of Work.
And then the Catalogue itself is published and distributed to all centres in April — it contains the list of modules to be used in the following session.
Copies of any new module descriptors are also distributed.
For example, the 1987/88 Programme of Work included a major review of the modules in Personal and Social Development (PSD); the fruits of this review appeared in the catalogue last April and the new and revised modules are being used for the first time this session.
The 29 PSD modules follow related patterns of learning outcomes and performance criteria and are grouped in four broad categories — Guidance, Experimental, Investigation and Life Skills.
This development is one expression of SCOTVEC's commitment to the value of including aspects of personal and social development in the National Certificate modular courses.
Are there any similar developments in the Programme of Work for this session which you can expect to see in the Catalogue for 1989/90?
Apart from the review and revision of around 300 module descriptors, two particular areas will be of interest.
John Hart, Assistant Director (Curriculum) comments: ‘Aspects of two major areas of review will be completed in time for the next Catalogue.
SCOTVEC and CAST held a conference for teachers and lecturers which helped focus attention on the Communication modules; a review of these modules is now under way.
The other major task is to look again at the ‘learning difficulties’ modules — not only the modules themselves but also the way in which they are grouped in the Catalogue.
The initial results of these reviews will be evident in April.’
The current ‘learning difficulties’ modules offers outcomes and criteria at a relatively simple level in a range of areas — basic numeracy, for example.
But their classification for a particular group of students — those with learning difficulties — was against the general principle of open access.
It's now been agreed that while modules with less demanding outcomes should exist in many areas of the catalogue, these modules should not be separately listed or be labelled in a way which implies restricted use.
So work has started to spread the ‘learning difficulties’ modules throughout the catalogue to ensure that they are placed firmly in the appropriate cognate group.
This will make clear the lines of progression and articulation with other modules in that subject area.
However advice on module choice will still be available for students with learning difficulties.
On a more general note, John Hart commented.
‘SCOTVEC is very grateful for the feedback we get from teachers and lecturers by way of the Module Comment Form.
It's especially valuable to get comments on the modules which are in the Programme of Work for that year or the coming year because then we can feed comments from practitioners straight to the Module Development Group.
Of course, not every comment can be acted on — sometimes two Comment Forms contain directly opposite views — but all comments are considered by the review groups and provide an important reference point for the work.’
The National Certificate in 1987/88
SCOTVEC's Annual Report for 1987/88 is now available and has been sent to all centres and to other bodies with an interest in vocational education and training.
The Report, as well as meeting the statutory obligations of a company like SCOTVEC, also describes the main events of the year, such as the official opening of Hanover House by the Secretary of State, and summarises the progress made by SCOTVEC in its various fields of activity.
One part of the Report which has been expanded from previous years is the section summarising the statistics of entries and results for National Certificate and Advanced Courses.
What do the statistics show for National Certificate?
First of all, continued growth!
The number of students enrolling for one or more modules in 1987/88 was just over 154,000 — up 46% on the previous year.
An increase  occurred in FE and in schools; in FE there were over 20,000 more candidates (a rise of 24%) while in schools, the increase was 26,000 (a rise of over 15%).
So 1987/88 showed a significant shift in the balance of National Certificate entries.
In previous years, school pupils have made up around 15% of the candidates — but last season, school entries made up just under 28%.
The chart shows the number of modules for which each student registered last session.
School pupils mostly take only one or two modules in a session, reflecting the modules' use in schools as taster courses, curriculum inserts or extension work.
In FE, where the modules make up the bulk of the non-advanced curriculum, each student, on average, undertakes six modules.
What about the subject areas covered?
The biggest proportion of module registrations are in the Interdisciplinary Studies section of the Catalogue, with Business Administration and Engineering some way behind.
The table below gives the full picture.
And which modules appeared in SCOTVEC's top twenty for last session?
The most popular modules for schools and FE are shown in the tables.
Of course, not every student who starts a module succeeds in every learning outcome and gets a certificate — although the National Certificate system does give credit for a candidate who achieved some, but not all, of the outcomes.
In 1987/88, 80% of all modules were completed with full success — and 75% of the candidates successfully completed at least one module and therefore received a National Certificate.
By any standards, the growth in the National Certificate has been remarkable.
In 1987/88, the number of certificates issued in a session topped the 100,000 mark for the first time — almost 115,000 were issued.
This brings the total number of National Certificates awarded, after only five years of operation, to over 300,000.
Dr Peter Clarke, SCOTVEC's Chairman, expressed his pleasure at the continued growth in National Certificate in typical style at a recent conference.
‘If the number of candidates keeps rising at the present rate’, he said, ‘then by the year 2010 the entire population of the world will have a SCOTVEC National Certificate!’
Despite Dr Clarke's global scenario, the low birth-rate in Scotland in the early 1970's is working its way through the system and will lead to significantly fewer potential National Certificate clients in the 16–19 year old age range in the coming years.
The Results Deadline
The word ‘deadline’ entered the National Certificate results vocabulary for the first time at the end of last session.
The decision was taken to introduce a closing date for the sending in of results.
Why?
Assistant Director Jim Kennedy explains.
‘In the early years of National Certificate, we tried to allow centres the maximum flexibility by avoiding laying down too many fixed dates.
But in recent years we noticed that some candidates were writing to us — or their employers were writing — to say that certificates hadn't been received for modules completed one or more years previously.
We hadn't issued a certificate because the school or college hadn't told SCOTVEC of the outcome of the module by filling in a Form NC6.’
SCOTVEC aims to certificate students as soon as possible after the completion of the programme of modules because students may need their certificates as evidence when applying for jobs or for another college.
But a certificate can only be produced when the results have been received from presenting centres.
An analysis showed that by January 1988, there were literally thousands of results outstanding from the previous sessions.
So the decision was taken, in the interest of candidates, to introduced a fixed date by which all module results would have to be submitted.
The deadline date was set at October 31st, allowing centres almost two months, after students return for the new session, to clear up all outstanding results for the previous session or to request an extension to the finish date to allow the student to complete the module.
So how did the deadline work?
Colin Urie, Education Officer responsible for National Certificate Procedures Section, describes the outcome.
‘Most centres had no difficulty meeting the deadline.
There were problems in a few centres, perhaps because the idea of a closing date was new or perhaps because local computer systems caused delays.
But generally, the deadline achieved its purpose and we were able to despatch certificates to students much more quickly than in the past.’
Colin Urie also points out that his section offers a range of facilities to help centres use SCOTVEC's procedures.
His section has all National Certificate data on computer: on it, all enquiries from candidates, letters from SCOTVEC and replies from centres are logged.
If centre staff have any problems, they can telephone the section; staff will be happy to try to sort out the problems.
Information sessions on the workings of National Certificate procedures have also been run, both in Hanover House and in centres; these can be arranged through the local External Moderator.
SCOTVEC meets with the EIS
Any responsive and responsible organisation should be interested in receiving feedback from groups involved in using its services or products — and SCOTVEC is no exception.
One interesting source of feedback arose from the EIS survey of its members in Further Education on the operation of the National Certificate: the survey was conducted during November and December 1987.
The results of the survey were published in the spring of 1988: the views expressed in it naturally reflected the fact that the Action Plan's implementation had been done at almost breakneck speed and had required much effort on the part of FE lecturers.
But the survey also reflected the perceptions of a proportion of the union's membership on such areas as administration, staff development, deployment of subject assessors and resourcing of the National Certificate.
Tom McCool, SCOTVEC's Chief Executive, therefore arranged a meeting between his senior staff and EIS representatives to exchange views on the survey and its implications.
‘Although it's always difficult to know whether such a survey is representative of all staff involved in National Certificate delivery, nevertheless the EIS survey does represent the views of a substantial number of lecturers,’ he said.
‘It's therefore important that we meet the EIS to seek further details, inform the union of changes which SCOTVEC had made since the survey was done, and to explore whether its results can indicate areas which need to be reviewed in future.’
At the meeting, Tom McCool was accompanied by Dennis Gunning, Depute Director (Assessment) and by Jim Kennedy, Assistant Director (National Certificate Assessment).
The EIS were represented by Jack Dale, Assistant Secretary (FE) and Hugh Pollock, a member of the Executive Committee.
The meeting was very constructive.
SCOTVEC members described recent improvements in training and deployment of subject assessors, in opportunities for centres to enter National Certificate data via electronic media and in procedures for certificating students.
Jack Dale provided useful background on the EIS survey and gave further details on specific aspects of the analysis of the questionnaires.
It was agreed that some of the concerns raised in the survey were matters for education authorities to address — for example in terms of resourcing, staffing and staff development.
In other aspects SCOTVEC had already introduced improvements to its procedures.
SCOTVEC representatives gave an assurance that the results of the survey would be taken into account in considering areas where further improvements can be made to National Certificate procedures and practices.
Data Transfer
Would you like to reduce the paperwork involved in National Certificate procedures?
SCOTVEC can accept NC4, NC5 and NC6 information on tape or diskette if your National Certificate system is computerised.
If it's not, SCOTVEC may be able to help you with a specification and programs to allow you to computerise.
The advantages of transferring data electronically are clear, according to Craig Robertson, Assistant Director of Computer Services.
‘The sheer speed and increased accuracy of electronic data transfer allows us and centres to make better use of time — and reduces errors.
If a centre wants to find out about compatibility of their computer system and SCOTVEC's or wants information on specifications to set up a system, contact myself or my colleague Fraser MacFarlane.
We're very keen to help centres move to electronic data transfer.’
National Certificate Private Centres
The notion that SCOTVEC could validate private centres such as industrial training centres or trade associations to deliver National Certificate modules was greeted originally with some opposition from the teachers' unions.
There was a fear that as such centres were validated, local colleges would see a reduction in the number of students which they would otherwise have expected to attract.
In the early days, SCOTVEC and the unions discussed their difference of views on this issue and an agreement was reached on the way in which the validation criteria would be interpreted.
The unions would also be able to nominate a member of the validation team to visit prospective centres and could attend SCOTVEC's Validation Committee and Board to make representations on whether the centre should be validated.
In early 1988, SCOTVEC published an Occasional Paper which looked in detail at the validation of private centres and at the candidate and module registrations made by them.
The paper showed that in session 1986/87 these centres made up much less than one percent of both candidate enrolments and module registrations.
In January 1989, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities convened a meeting of a group set up to look at the effect of these centres on authority centres.
The group had representatives of COSLA, SCOTVEC and the teaching unions and was chaired by Dr Malcolm Green, convenor of the COSLA Education Committee.
Dennis Gunning, SCOTVEC's Depute Director (Assessment), prepared a paper for the meeting in which the entry data for the 1987/88 was analysed.
This showed that there are now just over 600 centres offering National Certificate modules and, of these, 31 are so-called ‘private’ centres.
These 31 centres accounted in 1987/88 for 1.3% of candidates and 0.8% of modules for National Certificate.
Schools and colleges continue to provide the vast majority of candidates; there were nearly twice as many candidates from local authorities' community education centres than from the private centres.
An analysis was also done of the outcome of validation for the private centres.
Validation looks at the general ability of the centre to support a National Certificate programme as well as the ability to deliver each module requested.
The criteria used to judge the centre's readiness are the same ones applied, under devolved responsibility from SCOTVEC, by Directors of Education to assess authority centres.
Up to the end of 1987/88, 31 private centres had been validated and 6 had been turned down.
In these private centres, applications had been made to run a total of almost 700 individual modules.
SCOTVEC's Validation Committee, with the help of the report of the validation teams, had approved on 30% of these modules.
Of the rest, 38% had approval withheld until certain conditions had been met and 32% had been turned down altogether.
Taking account of modules where the conditions leading to withholding approval have now been met, there are now around 380 modules being offered in the 31 centres — a successful validation rate of just over 55%.
The figures should give an indication of the importance which SCOTVEC places on ensuring that centres are properly equipped to tackle the demands of delivering and assessing National Certificate modules: such careful validation of centres — whether by a SCOTVEC team in the case of private centres or by the Director of Education in the case of authority centres — is an important element of the National Certificate's quality assurance system.
National Certificate RECENT DEVELOPMENTS UPDATE
issue number 7 May 1989
The Local Faces of SCOTVEC — A New Title
SCOTVEC is a body with a national remit and plays an important role in the educational life of Scotland.
Because of the devolved nature of SCOTVEC's provision, it is important to make sure that schools and colleges have a local point of contact with whom to discuss the wide range of issues which can arise — like
arranging SCOTVEC participation in an in-service training event;
following up a subject assessor visit, perhaps where problems have been found with a module and remedies are being discussed;
finding out more about SCOTVEC's Advanced Courses Development Programme.
The local points of contact on these and all other SCOTVEC matters are the team of nine Field Officers, each of whom works in a defined geographical area.
Your Field Officer will either provide you with direct advice and support or will put you in touch with someone who can help.
SCOTVEC's Board has agreed that the local officers should now be known as Field Officers, rather than their former title of External Moderator, because the new title reflects much more faithfully the way in which their jobs have evolved over the five years of National Certificate's life.
STOP PRESS — Staff Changes
In an internal reorganisation Jim Kennedy has moved from the National Certificate Unit to take charge of assessment of Advanced Courses.
He has been replaced by Muriel Dunbar as Acting Assistant Director (National Certificate Unit).
An appointment will be made soon to fill Muriel's previous post as Field Officer for Argyll & Bute, Central and Fife.
Subject Assessor Visits — the Outcome
SCOTVEC staff are often asked, ‘What happens after a subject assessor has visited a centre?
Is certification of modules ever refused?’
To look at the answers, we have to consider the scale of subject assessor activity.
Last session, subject assessors carried out around 4000 visits to centres offering National Certificate modules.
Of these, almost 20% were arranged to provide support for staff development activities organised by the centre or the Region.
SCOTVEC sees the support of National Certificate-related staff development as an important part of the dissemination of standards and of good practice.
But what about the outcome of the usual monitoring visits — which still make up 80% of the subject assessor's time?
Andrew Burt, Education Officer responsible for Subject Assessment, explains.
‘Each and every time a subject assessor visits a centre, he or she submits a report of the outcome to SCOTVEC.
We keep a note of any problems and arrange follow-up if necessary, especially where a module has been refused certification.’
But how often are modules turned down in this way?
‘Well, you would expect the majority of modules to be certificated successfully because they are being run by professional staff in centres which have been validated — in other words the centre's resources, staff and support systems have been found to be adequate to run each module.
This validation is carried out either by a SCOTVEC team if it's a private centre or by the Director of Education if it's a local authority centre.
In fact, about 95% of modules seen by subject assessors are certificated and only about 5% are refused.
Remember, though, that if a subject assessor refuses to certificate a module, then none of the candidates in that centre will be credited with that module until the problems are sorted out, usually by another visit by a subject assessor or perhaps by a Field Officer.’
So what factors lead to modules being refused certification?
Can centres learn from the experience of others and check that their modular house is in order?
The feedback from subject assessors suggests so.
The biggest single reason for refusal of certification being recommended is that the subject assessor is unable to see evidence of student performance.
Two points follow from this.
First, it is important that centres put the correct start and finish dates on the Form NC5 so that is a subject assessor visits a week before the declared finish date, he will find that students are close to finishing the module — and not that the declared date was fairly fictitious and related to a timetabling convenience.
Second, staff in every centre should know, and apply, the retention dates for evidence or student attainment.
These dates are circulated by SCOTVEC to all centres at the start of every session.
What other factors lead to non-approval?
Andrew Burt explains that another common reason is that the instruments of assessment specified in the module descriptor are not being used or have been varied.
‘Of course, it is possible for centres to use assessment instruments which are different from the ones in the module descriptor — but permission for this change MUST be obtained from SCOTVEC in advance.
There are details are of the way to do this in the National Certificate ‘Guide to Procedures’ and advice can be sought from my staff or from Field Officers.’
The diagram puts the reasons for non-approval in 1987/8 in pictorial form.
Perhaps it's surprising that in some cases the learning outcomes and performance criteria were not being assessed or applied — all the National Certificate publications stress that these features are at the heart of the competence-based system and that they cannot be varied under any circumstances.
So what are the lessons from the subject assessors' feedback?
Centres must stick to the published learning outcomes and performance criteria and only vary the assessment instruments if they have permission — and they must make sure that candidates' work is retained until the published dates.
And last, but not least, centres must ensure that procedures are in place to allow those staff who are teaching the same module to talk to each other so that internal standardisation — essential in a devolved system such as National Certificate — can take place.
Intensive Subject Assessment
Have you had a subject assessor visit recently?
If you teach in Central College, Glasgow, Thurso College or Clackmannan College, the answer will most definitely be ‘yes’.
So why are these National Certificate centres special?
The reason is that these colleges agreed to be pilots for a new form of subject assessment described as ‘intensive’ to distinguish it from the usual sampling method by which visits take place.
Why the new system and how does it work?
Dennis Gunning, Depute Director (Assessment) explains: ‘Each year, SCOTVEC arranges around 4000 subject assessor visits.
We operate a sampling system to decide which centres should be visited and, of course, we try to ensure that each cognate group in each centre is sampled regularly.
But on any one day, although there will be subject assessors beavering away in places all over the country, their activity is not very visible unless you happen to teach in a department being visited; the rest of the staff in your own college or school may be unaware that a subject assessor is there.
So the true level of SCOTVEC activity is not apparent and prevents the presence of subject assessors being fully exploited by centres’ staff.’
It  occurred to National Certificate staff that instead of programming say twenty subject assessors to different centres all over the country on a particular day, all twenty could be programmed to visit the same centre on the same day.
If the centre was given some notice of the team's arrival, and if the team were lead by a SCOTVEC officer, then not only would the profile of subject assessment be raised but the centre could use the presence of so many SCOTVEC staff in a positive way for staff development purposes.
This the ‘intensive’ form of subject assessment was born.
The model has been discussed internally within SCOTVEC and with Field Officers and assessors.
The first pilot took place in Central College, Glasgow, during November.
Over the period of a full week (not just one day!), almost every cognate group being run in the College received a subject assessor visit and the activity was coordinated by the local SCOTVEC Field Officer, Madeline Blakely — who virtually took up residence in the college for the week.
Both Madeline and the college's 16+ coordinator, Christine Symington, conducted evaluations of this new-style subject assessment and the general impression they got from subject assessors and college staff like was favourable.
The twin objectives of raising awareness of subject assessment and of providing opportunities for college staff to benefit from the SCOTVEC presence seem to have been achieved.
Two colleges were receiving pilot ‘intensive’ visits in the spring term, Clackmannan College and Thurso College, under the coordination of local Field Officers Muriel Dunbar and Chris Maythorne.
Clackmannan was visited in January and Thurso in March.
Further pilots in Jewel and Esk Valley, Aberdeen College of Commerce and Cumbernauld are scheduled for the summer term.
It's too early to say whether the ‘intensive’ model will become a regular feature of subject assessment, although early indications are favourable.
The feedback from college staff, subject assessors and Field Officers will be used to carry out a detailed evaluation of the model.
‘Remember, though,’ says Dennis Gunning, ‘that the intensive model is not a replacement for either normal sampled visits or for support for the kind of staff development activities which subject assessors get involved in at present.
But we do see the possibility that the intensive model would be an additional element in the National Certificate's quality assurance system.
If the signs are encouraging, we might be able to extend the piloting in session 1989/90, but there's a lot of discussion to take place first!’
Subject Assessor Training
So you always wanted to be a subject assessor?
How would you become a subject assessor?
The team of subject assessors is around 400 strong — but new recruits are regularly needed as module uptake patterns change and as previous assessors leave, SCOTVEC tries to maintain a balance in the team, ensuring if possible that different sectors of  education , as well as industry and commerce, are represented.
And candidates for the post have to be respected in their subject area, have good inter-personal skills and should have a working knowledge of, and commitment ,to the National Certificate system.
If you apply, SCOTVEC will take up references and you will be interviewed, probably by a Field Officer.
If all goes well, you will then have to attend the subject assessor induction training — which provides a grounding in SCOTVEC procedures, in criterion-referenced assessment issues and in the key task of maintaining national standards by visiting centres.
This initial training takes three days — two are residential and one based in Hanover House.
The training is lead by SCOTVEC officers.
Finally, your first visit to a centre will be arranged in which you will be ‘double-banked’ with an experienced subject assessor.
Then you are ready to undertake duties as a fully-fledged subject assessor.
But training doesn't end there.
Two days of every session's secondment to SCOTVEC is devoted to update training aimed at both keeping you in touch with the latest developments in SCOTVEC and in the modules in your area and also at giving you opportunities to meet fellow subject assessors to discuss the implementation of national standards in your cognate group.
As you would expect from an organisation committed to staff development, SCOTVEC carries out an evaluation and review of all subject assessor training events.
The results are analysed and used to improve training for the next batch of recruits.
SCOTVEC is always interested to hear from people who feel that they have the subject expertise and commitment to National Certificate to enable them to undertake the job of subject assessor.
If you would like to know more about it — and you have checked that your employer would be prepared to allow SCOTVEC to second you for a maximum of 15 days per year — contact Andrew Burt on .
He would be particularly interested to hear from those with experience in the following cognate groups areas:
Principal Subject Assessors
Over the last five years, the number of centres entering candidates for National Certificate has grown steadily and, over the same period, the number of modules in the catalogue has risen from around 700 in the first year of operation to around 2500 this year.
This expansion has meant that SCOTVEC has had to increase its subject assessor force.
But more subject assessors operating in the same cognate group leads to the need for more induction and training.
The meeting of both needs have been greatly helped by the appointment of Principal Subject Assessors in the larger cognate groups.
The Principal Subject Assessors, as well as carrying out team leaders in their cognate group, undertake staff development work in centres and assist in the training of new subject assessors.
There are now 36 Principals out of the total subject assessor strength of around 400 and all of the larger cognate groups have a Principal.
There are twelve new appointments in the team — they are listed below:
Statistics for National Certificate Centres
Teachers and lecturers have always asked the question, ‘How can I learn from my students’ performance?’
The results of assessments and examinations have been a valuable source of feedback to enable teachers to evaluate their teaching material, curriculum, presentation and so on.
Because of the devolved nature of National Certificate assessment, much more feedback is available than from a traditional external examination.
But centres still need to see the complete picture for all modules and all students, not least because results data is needed for inclusion in prospectuses.
Until now, summarised results data on the National Certificate was not available until well after the end of session to which it related — because of the backlog of outstanding results which had been allowed to build up in some centres.
Now, as described in Update 5, a results deadline has been introduced and this has allowed the statistical service to be improved.
Starting this year, an agreement has been reached between SCOTVEC and the SED's Statistics Branch.
SCOTVEC will supply a complete results file to the SED — who need the data to compile the ‘Statistical Bulletin’ on National Certificate.
In return for this data service.
SED will produce a series of statistical tables for use by SCOTVEC, centres and Regions.
The tables for National Certificate centres will show the results by module and by candidate, compared against regional and national data.
The tables sent to the Regions will be similar, showing results summarised by centre and by module, with national data for comparison.
This year is something of a trial run for this new service.
The format of the tables isn't fixed for all time; if you think that improvements could be made, write to Colin Urie at SCOTVEC with details.
National Certificate Staff
If you are contacting SCOTVEC on National Certificate matters, it helps to know who does what in Hanover House.
The Assessment Department is headed by Dennis Gunning, Depute Director, and its National Certificate Unit by Muriel Dunbar, Acting Assistant Director.
The Unit has three Sections each led by an Education Officer.
Andrew Burt's section deals with appointment, training and deployment of the subject assessors.
Patricia McCarron's section deals with coordination of the work of the Field Officers and with validation of centres.
Colin Urie's section deals with procedures and enquiries on endorsements, enrolment and certification.
The Curriculum Department, headed by Iain Anderson, Depute Director, is responsible for the rolling programme of module revision and updating and for the processing and evaluation of new modules.
This work forms part of the remit of John Hart, Assistant Director.
The picture opposite shows a group of the SCOTVEC staff in the National Certificate Procedures Section.
Recent staff changes are described in Stop Press on page 1.
National Certificate Publications
SCOTVEC publishes a number of guides which are designed to help teachers, lecturers and other staff keep informed of developments in the National Certificate and to provide details of procedures for candidate enrolment and module registration.
‘Guide to Procedures’ outlines all the procedures involved in entry, certification, subject assessor visits, change to assessment instruments — and has samples of the forms involved and exemplars of module descriptors, module summary forms etc.
A new edition is published every session and all centres receive copies.
‘Guidelines for Teachers and Lecturers of Students with Special Needs’ is intended to help teachers and lecturers who wish to deliver modules to students with special needs, whether these arise from a learning difficulty, a sensory impairment or from some other reason.
Among other advice on using modules, this Guide sets out the procedures which allow students to be accredited with adapted learning outcomes where this is necessary and desirable.
The Guide has recently been slightly revised and the second edition should now be in all centres.
Additional copies of the Guide are available from SCOTVEC at a modest cost.
‘Guide to Assessment’ was published in the summer of 1988 and is intended to be a ready reference on National Certificate assessment.
It is structured to provide information for those who have to ‘flesh out’ a module as well as discussing criterion-referenced assessment and choice of assessment instruments in more detail for those who might be thinking of developing their own module or seeking permission to vary the assessment instruments in an existing module.
All centres received copies of the Guide — further copies are available from SCOTVEC at a modest cost.
‘Guidelines for Module Writers’ is intended as essential reading for those involved in module writing.
This applies equally to members of module review groups and to those involved in making proposals for additions to the Catalogue.
However the Guide also provides good preparation for anyone involved in National Certificate work, either as an administrator or as a teacher or lecturer.
Again, all centres received copies of the Guidelines last summer, but additional copies are available at a modest cost.
In addition to these guides, SCOTVEC publishes handy leaflets on the National Certificate and on Advanced Courses.
These might be useful for guidance and counselling, for career conventions and for informing employers of the qualifications which prospective employees might have.
If you would like samples of these leaflets, please contact SCOTVEC's Public Relations Unit.
This brief summary of National Certificate publications gives details of four important SCOTVEC guides.
Of course, there are other sources of material on National Certificate.
The Scottish Education Department recently issued ‘The National Certificate at Work’ and ‘School Leavers’Qualifications in Scotland’, both particularly useful summaries for employers.
And the Curriculum Support and Advice Team, CAST, based at the School of FE in Jordanhill College of Education, has a wide range of material available, particularly for staff development on National Certificate issues.
SCOTVEC Group Award UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 17 1990
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
INTRODUCING GADP
UPDATE number 12 (January 199) described the new certification framework which SCOTVEC has established for its awards and this issue aims to bring readers up to date on what has happened since then.
SCOTVEC has initiated a Group Awards Development Programme within which the work of the main Departments of the Council will be focussed to flesh out the details of the framework and to put the new awards in place.
A co-ordinating unit, headed by Dr Myra Nimmo, has been established to underpin this activity and will provide a single point of contact for general enquiries about the programme.
GADP co-ordinates all the work being carried out on SCOTVEC's group awards comprising National Awards (including Scottish Vocational Qualifications,(SVQs)) and tailored awards devised to meet the needs of particular organisations and employers.
However, a very high priority has been assigned to the development of SVQs, given their central position in government policy, and in the training programmes to be implemented in the Local Enterprise Companies established under Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
SCOTVEC's role in accrediting SVQs was announced by Ian Lang, Scottish Education Minister, in 1989 and since then developments have proceeded at a very rapid pace.
Ensuring that is qualifications are credible and responsive to the needs of all user groups is always a key issue for SCOTVEC and so all new qualifications undergo very rigorous scrutiny by the Council.
A new Accreditation Sub Committee has been set up to ensure that proposed SVQs meet the stringent criteria which have been laid down.
Key features of these new qualifications are that they must:
be based on industry Lead Body standards;
provide for changes in technology or the needs of industry;
specify outcomes which place emphasis on the conditions of the workplace;
allow breadth of application.
The award is then endorsed with the SVQ ‘hallmark’, which will appear on candidates' certificates as a distinctive feature.
Mr Bill Nicol, whom many readers will know as a former Chairman of  SCOTVEC , chairs the new Committee.
The articles in this issue of Update highlight various important aspects of the development of the new awards:
A profile of an industry Lead Body, the Training and Development Lead Body
An overview of SVQs within the land and sea based industries
Quality assurance systems for assessment in the workplace.
SCOTVEC and NCVQ
Over the last few months SCOTVEC and the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) have collaborated to produce a joint statement, the main feature of which is an agreement that SVQs and NVQs are compatible in their essential features and that there will be mutual recognition of these throughout the UK.
Tom McCool, SCOTVEC's Chief Executive commented ‘This agreement will help to ensure that employers and others get the message that SVQs and NVQs are based on the same industry determined standards and say the same things about the competence of those who hold them.
Trainees will acquire qualifications which are understood throughout the United Kingdom and, in time, will have currency also in Europe’.
A summary of the statement appears on page 4 of this issue and the full text is available on request from SCOTVEC's Publications Unit ().
Since new SVQs are being accredited almost on a monthly basis, SCOTVEC is introducing ‘SVQ Accreditation Update’ which will list all accredited SVQs and those expected to be approved over the ensuing few months.
Copies are being circulated with this edition of Update.
Further information on the Group Awards Development Programme may be obtained by telephoning .
QUALITY ASSURANCE OF WORKPLACE ASSESSMENT
Quality assurance is a term which summarises those aspects of the design and delivery of qualifications which guarantee credibility to end users.
The quality assurance systems within SCOTVEC's National Certificate and Higher National provision are already familiar to many.
Less well known perhaps are the systems which have been developed for assessment in the workplace.
This article gives an overview of SCOTVEC's current position on quality assurance, as it relates to workplace assessment, which is now becoming an important feature of SVQs.
The various components of the system are shown in Figure 1.
STANDARDS
All SVQs are based on ‘standards’(in the form of elements of competence/outcomes and their performance criteria), grouped together into relevant units.
ASSESSMENT
As standards are being finalised, consideration is given to arrangements for the assessment of candidates' competence.
Standards which do not enable valid and reliable assessment are of little value to end users.
This is not, however, to suggest that assessment considerations should be the overriding factor in the development of qualifications.
The following extract from the Certificate in Retail Distribution, an SVQ at Level 1, provides an example of how appropriate assessment links to standards:
Unit 8: Stockhandling
Element: Weigh a range of products
Performance criteria:
Correct products selected
Equipment selected is appropriate to use
Correct equipment selected and used
Products handled carefully to avoid damage
Weight is recorded accurately and legibly where necessary
Customer advised of weight and price
Equipment cleaned and made ready for subsequent use
Process carried out safely, hygienically and efficiently.
Direct observation of the candidate is the most appropriate way of assessing the candidate in this instance.
An examination or written test would be less effective.
A draft competence from the Level IV retail qualification currently under development indicates the need for a different methodology.
Unit 6: Interpret, analyse and communicate information to contribute to problem solving and decision making
Element: Interpret and evaluate information to contribute to decision making and problem solving.
Performance criteria:
Key objectives are identified
Information is evaluated for accuracy, reliability and usefulness
Appropriate procedures of analysis are used consistently
Conclusions drawn from the information are based on the rational assessment of the information
Consultation with others is undertaken to aid interpretation and analysis where appropriate
Previous decisions and recommendations are evaluated against their implementation outcomes and used to inform future decision making and problem solving.
In this care, observation of a trainee's performance would not alone ensure comprehensive assessment of competence.
Consideration would also have to be given to other ways of gaining evidence of the skills implicit in the stated standards.
This might involve, for example, the use of self and peer assessment based on structured interviews or the completion of detailed report forms, or could involve the use of simulations or assignments.
It is important that assessment methodologies which will provide valid and reliable results are developed at an early stage.
SCOTVEC has substantial and growing expertise in devising practicable assessment arrangements matched to standards-based units.
The specification of assessment requirements leads in turn to the identification of individuals within the workplace to act as assessors.
They should be credible in the assessment context, which means that in addition to having expertise in the relevant discipline, they should also have some formal training in assessment methodology and techniques.
SCOTVEC is able to offer assistance and advice on the form and content that such training should have for individual qualifications.
VERIFICATION
It would be unrealistic to assume that any assessment process based solely on one assessor's judgement of another's competence would always be regarded as completely valid and reliable.
There will be occasions where individual assessors may, for whatever reason, allow subjectivity to colour their judgements or fail to carry out instructions when making assessments.
For this reason, a mechanism must be built to ensure that assessors can be monitored and supported.
This mechanism is called VERIFICATION and involves ensuring that what should happen in an assessment scheme is actually happening.
There are two distinct levels of verification.
INTERNAL VERIFICATION is the process by which an organisation, approved to offer a particular qualification, identifies people whose function is to ensure that groups of assessors are carrying out their duties in an appropriate way.
In some large centres with many trainees it may be necessary to have more than one layer of internal verification.
There is likely to be a training need for internal verifiers, since verification is usually a new and formalised aspect of their supervisory function.
Not only will internal verifiers need to understand the operational requirements of the scheme, they will also have to be aware of the exact nature of the role of the assessor and have the ability to oversee groups of assessors.
In carrying this out they will seek to ensure that all assessors for whom they are responsible are applying the standards in an objective and consistent way.
Internal verification deals with consistency of application of standards within one centre.
EXTERNAL VERIFICATION is the process by which SCOTVEC ensures that, on a national basis, centres are operating to the same standard.
This work is undertaken by verifiers appointed by SCOTVEC.
PERSONNEL INVOLVED
In summary, a picture emerges of the personnel who would be involved in the implementation of a qualification within an approved organisation.
Although sometimes the terminology will vary, there will always have to be people who carry out the various roles identified in Figure 2.
During the development of the qualification package consideration should be given not just to the training needs of assessors and internal verifiers, but also the way in which the person responsible for the day to day management of the scheme (the central contact) could be assisted in the planning of the implementation of the qualification in the organisation.
It is the central contact who will have the responsibility of managing the training of others as well as the administration of the scheme.
APPROVAL
Having looked at assessment and verification and the people involved it is appropriate to consider whether or not a process of approval (sometimes called ‘validation’) should be developed and applied to organisations wishing to offer particular types of provision.
Approval involves organisations being matched against a set of approval criteria drawn up by SCOTVEC in consultation with the industry body, for example by a visit to the organisation by a verifier trained for the purpose.
Experience shows that the approval process gives a reliable indication of a centre's potential to deliver and also encourages effective planning for implementation.
One final point should be mentioned in the context of qualifications development.
Credibility will be enhanced if the body responsible for the standards has an effective communication strategy with all interested parties during the development process.
Not only will this guarantee relevant standards and practicable quality assurance, it will also help organisations to plan for the implementation of the qualification.
Further information on any issue relating to workplace assessment may be obtained from  .
THE TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT LEAD BODY: A PROFILE
Industry Lead Bodies are organisations designated by the Training Agency to act as a focus for setting the standards of competence for their particular occupational area.
Around 180 industry Lead Bodies are now in existence.
Some of these are long established, for example the Agricultural Training Board, whilst others such as the Training and Development Lead Body and the Care Sector Consortium are much more recent in origin.
Some bodies have a responsibility for particular occupational areas, eg the Clothing and Allied Products Industry Training Board, whilst others have a generic remit in areas such as management and training which are important across all sectors.
Many of the newer bodies have been formed specifically to develop and implement occupational standards for their sector and, as might be expected, these bodies have established different ways of undertaking this key task.
However, since all readers of Update might reasonably be expected to have a keen interest in training issues, the Training and Development Lead Body (TDLB) has been chosen to illustrate how at least one such organisation has taken up the challenge to develop qualifications for its sector.
Chaired by Alistair Graham, Director of the Industrial Society, the TDLB has formed a 50 strong advisory committee of personnel from industry, training and education to set the standards which will form the basis of vocational qualifications for all training and development personnel.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARDS
Following extensive research with industry into the needs and activities of the training function, the standards will be published later this year.
They will be relevant to any role involving training and development and will be incorporated into SVQs and NVQs.
The draft standards were produced by specialist consultants who undertook a major programme of analysis of the many occupational roles of those involved in training and development.
They considered the traditional areas of training and those incorporating strategic business change, corporate learning and total quality management.
The consultants have now submitted a set of standards for consideration.
Although these are still in draft form, the Lead Body will use them to prepare a new framework for Vocational Qualifications.
Two clear groups of standards are emerging: one relates to an  organisation's requirements and provision for human resource development, the other to an individual's learning needs, their implementation and assessment.
The following is an example of a single unit related to training delivery which would be relevant to a range of occupational roles, including line managers, supervisors and trainers:
‘to negotiate, agree and implement a programme of action to enable individuals/groups to apply learning in order to achieve standards of performance in the workplace.’
The unit is then broken down into several outcomes or elements to which performance criteria are attached.
One of these elements is:
‘to support individuals/groups to apply learning to achieve standards of performance in employment.’
and the following performance criteria would apply:
Relevant techniques, methods and technologies are used to enable individuals/groups to apply learning
Appropriate methods of providing advice and feedback are used
Individuals'/groups' perceptions of progress and difficulties/successes are obtained
individuals/groups are given opportunities to experience the full range of standards and conditions which are the focus of their learning.
The outcomes would also be accompanied by a range statement indicating the range of contexts in which the standards would apply.
In addition, guidance in the form of performance evidence, assessment evidence, assessment methods and related knowledge will be provided for the benefit of those who have to implement and assess standards.
THE APPLICATION OF STANDARDS
Standards will represent a new way of describing performance at work and will enable organisations to identify and match peoples' needs more effectively to the requirements of industry in a constantly changing world.
Since the standards will be used to form the basis of Vocational Qualifications throughout the UK, it will mean that all training qualifications will relate to a common framework for the first time.
The standards will also be relevant to occupations where training takes a subordinate role, for example line managers and supervisors.
The TDLB is currently planning discussions with other Lead Bodies, for example in management, to discuss the adoption of common standards across occupations.
SVQ DEVELOPMENT FOR THE LAND AND SEA BASED INDUSTRIES
At a ceremony in Elmwood College in April 1990, Lord Sanderson, Scottish Minister for Agriculture, presented 22 candidates with the Preliminary Certificate in Agriculture, jointly awarded by SCOTVEC and the Agricultural Training Board.
The Preliminary Certificate was the first SVQ to be developed and awarded and will be followed in the near future by a range of SVQs in agriculture and commercial horticulture.
The land and sea based sector has been very active in the development of occupational standards.
The industry Lead Bodies engaged in this work include:
The Joint National Horse Education and Training Council (JNHETC) is well advanced in the development of Vocational Qualifications.
A programme of National Certificate Modules is being developed with a view to accreditation as a Level I SVQ.
The Scottish Trekking and Riding Association has already had a qualification approved at this level.
The Forestry Training Council will soon have agreed vocational packages at craft level.
It is likely that SVQs may be achieved via Workplace-assessed Units, for those in employment, or via an approved group of National Certificate Modules prior to embarking on a career in the forestry sector.
Agreement has been reached with the Floristry Industry Vocational Qualifications Group that a newly developed group of National Certificate Modules, together with two already in the catalogue, should comprise the Preliminary Certificate in Floristry, an SVQ at Level 1.
Work is in hand to examine the relationship between existing HNC and HND courses in Agriculture developed by the Scottish Agricultural College and Lead Body standards at Level III and IV with a view to establishing SVQs.
The above exemplify ways in which specific qualifications are being developed in the land and sea based sector.
All other Lead Bodies are also progressing well with the development of standards and it is expected that a wide range of new qualifications will be available within the next year or so.
NCVQ/SCOTVEC
Joint Statement
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A joint statement has been agreed by the Councils of both NCVQ and SCOTVEC.
It follows the announcement by Mr Ian Lang, Minister of State for Industry and Education at the Scottish Office, that the Scottish Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC) would have responsibility for the development and accreditation of Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
Mr Lang stressed the importance of SCOTVEC working together with NCVQ ‘so that all students can obtain full recognition for their vocational achievements throughout the United Kingdom’.
Subsequent to the Minister's announcement, NCVQ and SCOTVEC held discussions which aimed to ensure that an individual's vocational achievements would receive recognition throughout the United Kingdom.
Detailed comparison of the criteria and procedures of both Councils has led to the conclusion that these are compatible in their essential features and therefore that there should be mutual recognition of NVQs and SVQs throughout the United Kingdom.
The main points covered in the statement are as follows:
1
NCVQ and SCOTVEC have both, by different but compatible routes, made substantial progress towards achieving systems of vocational qualifications which are defined in terms of competence, including associated performance criteria, and focus on the needs of employment.
2
NCVQ, which has an overall responsibility to reform and rationalise all vocational qualifications in England, Wales and Northern Ireland exercises essentially an accrediting role through recognising as NVQs those qualifications which meet its criteria.
SCOTVEC, which was established as a result of the SED's reform of vocational qualifications in Scotland, is the sole Scottish awarding body and has responsibility for the accreditation of SVQs.
Both NVQs and SVQs are based upon the same employment-led standards whose development rests with the appropriate ‘lead’ or standard setting bodies.
3
The statement sets out and compares the respective criteria for NVQs and SVQs.
This comparison highlights the centrality of the assessment of employment-led standards in vocational qualifications and pays due regard to access, progression and breadth.
Both NCVQ and SCOTVEC has adopted unit based systems to facilitate credit accumulation and transfer.
SCOTVEC recognises that the use of levels to describe vocational qualifications is becoming generally accepted and has therefore decided to adopt a system of levels for SVQs which is analogous to that adopted by NCVQ and NVQs.
4
Where NVQs and SVQs are based on the same statements of competence the qualifications will carry titles which clearly indicate that area of competence.
5
NCVQ and SCOTVEC will establish procedures to ensure consistent interpretation of the criteria for SVQs and NVQs based on common standards.
To this end, SCOTVEC officers will participate with NCVQ and the Training Agency in the review of potential NVQs at various stages of their development.
Cross membership will be arranged for the committees responsible for accreditation in the respective organisations and appropriate arrangements will be made to ensure coordinated development and progression of applications for accreditation.
6
Both organisations will collaborate in development work in the areas of: credit accumulation and transfer; records of vocational achievement; generic units; the accreditation of prior learning; databases, and information and marketing.
7
The joint working arrangements described in 5 and 6 above will be in place from October 1990 onwards.
SCOTVEC Awards Framework NEW CERTIFICATION POLICY UPDATE
Issue number 12 January 1990
The implementation of the SCOTVEC National Certificate in 1984 revolutionised vocational education and training in Scotland and simultaneously created an environment within which further innovation and development could flourish.
As well as enabling the delivery of flexible training programmes to meet the needs of employers and individuals, the National Certificate has proved capable of responding to new education and training initiatives; for example TVEI and Employment Training; of providing a basis for access to Higher Education courses; and of delivering vocational education and curriculum enrichment in schools.
Building on this experience and success, SCOTVEC initiated the Advanced Courses Development Programme in 1987.
This programme is directed towards restructuring Higher National Certificate and Higher National Diploma courses so that they can be delivered in the same flexible and responsive ways that have been pioneered by the National Certificate.
However there are many other challenges on the not-too-distant horizon.
The Single European Market, the demographic trough and the need to train and retrain the UK workforce to the higher standards of competence attained in many other countries are only three examples.
In order that providers of vocational education and training can meet these challenges, SCOTVEC has developed a framework of awards which is capable of delivering a flexible and responsive system of qualifications and of meeting the challenges of the future.
It is fundamentally robust and so will not require frequent adjustment, a significant feature if Scottish qualifications are to be credible and readily  understood in the rest of the UK and beyond.
Work towards this goal has been progressing for some time, culminating in a public launch at a major conference, held in the Forum Hotel, Glasgow on 23 October, 1989.
The keynote speaker was Mr. Ian Lang, Scottish Education Minister, who used to occasion to highlight many of the current important issues in vocational education in Scotland.
This issue of UPDATE seeks to explain SCOTVEC's new framework and, as an introduction, extracts from Mr. Lang's speech are reproduced below.
IAN LANG ANNOUNCES SVQs
‘Over the last five years we have had a quiet revolution in vocational education in Scotland, and today we should celebrate that.
Five years ago the National Certificate was introduced in Scotland.
It has been an outstanding success, and has been one of the most far reaching reforms ever carried out in Scottish Education.’
‘Of fundamental importance in the philosophy of the National Certificate has been the aim of reconciling educational and industrial training viewpoints.
The Government are fully committed to placing the emphasis on employment-lead standards of competence and giving a major role to industry lead bodies both in the development of competence based occupational standards and in ‘ownership’ of them.’
‘I should like also to pay tribute today to the important development work being carried out by SCOTVEC in the field of higher education.
SCOTVEC have embarked upon a programme of converting advanced courses, such as the Higher National Diploma and Higher National Certificate, into a modular form similar to that used for the National Certificate.
In future, students will be able to take individual Higher National Units or build them up to gain group HNC or HND awards.
The programme has also been a useful catalyst to closer collaboration between FE colleges, Central Institutions and Universities and in linking their courses.
This should make it easier for students to gain access to higher education and to progress to higher levels of education by building on previous achievements; and I welcome this development.’
‘Close links already exist between SCOTVEC and industry lead bodies.
Representatives of several lead bodies are already serving on SCOTVEC's sector boards.
And this has already resulted in the development of joint certification agreements with bodies such as the Engineering Industry Training Board.
This process requires to be strengthened and today's conference is an important step in that direction.
NCVQ and SCOTVEC have both adopted qualification structures which are based on units of competence, or modules, which can be separately assessed and accredited and within which individual elements of competence are separately identified.
This similarity of format should allow these units to have common currency in the credit accumulation system — the National Record of Vocational Achievement, which both bodies operate.
The Secretary of State and I attach great importance to SCOTVEC working in partnership with NCVQ so that all students can gain full recognition for their vocational achievements throughout the United Kingdom.
SCOTVEC's new certification policy and its Record of Education and Training will assist this process.
In future SCOTVEC will recognise as ‘National Awards’ particular groups of modules or units which have nationally recognised vocational relevance which should also facilitate mutual recognition.’
‘SCOTVEC must go further however and create within its National Awards a category of vocational qualifications which embrace industry determined standards and meet the needs of specific occupations.
These may combine programmes of SCOTVEC's National Certificate modules or Higher National Units with skills or competences gained in the workplace, building on the experience of joint certification agreements which SCOTVEC has already established with several industry bodies.
These qualifications should be clearly identified as ‘SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS’.’
‘The standards on which Scottish Vocational Qualifications are to be based will be the national standards of performance in each industry.
Industry bodies, therefore, will have ‘ownership’ of the Scottish Vocational Qualifications for their own sector.
The aim should be to make the Scottish Vocational Qualifications ‘passports of excellence’ which will allow their holders to enjoy a skilled and prosperous future wherever they choose to work.’
THE SCOTVEC FRAMEWORK OF AWARDS
National Certificate modules replaced a system based on subjects, often externally examined, which were clustered together to give courses which had names indicating the area of study, for example the Scottish National Certificate in Business Studies.
Students received a certificate only if they successfully completed the whole course: partial success was not formally certificated.
A similar certification system operates currently at advanced level for HNC and HND courses.
The National Certificate concept of free standing modules introduced flexibility and openness into non-advanced provision by allowing students to enrol for one or two modules only or for programmes of modules to meet the needs of a particular employer.
All modules are credited individually on the National Certificate and this flexible system has proved to be very successful.
Student numbers have grown from 50,000 in the first year of operation to nearly 190,000 in session 1988–89.
Over the same period module enrolments have risen dramatically from 300,000 to just over 1,000,000 per annum.
The range of modules has also expanded greatly, with over 2,500 in the current catalogue.
Over the five years of operation of the National Certificate employers and providers have indicated that, whilst the flexibility of the modular system is of great benefit, it would also be useful to be able to provide an additional separate certificate for a student who successfully completes a group of modules designed to meet the needs of a particular occupational area.
At advanced course level the situation is the reverse.
The strength of the HNC/HND system of group awards needs to be reinforced by an additional form of certification to recognise success in each unit making up the group.
The Advanced Courses Development Programme has provided the opportunity to consolidate the existing system and simultaneously to introduce certification for individual units.
SCOTVEC's new awards framework has been designed to cater for both unit-based and group certification by
Making group awards available at all levels, including National Certificate;
Certificating success in all individual modules or units.
The ways in which this will be accomplished are explained in more detail below.
Unit-based Certification
Currently all students who are successful in one or more National Certificate Modules have their achievement recorded on a single National Certificate document which is cumulative.
This system will continue, but from 1990 National Certificate Modules will be certificated on the new Record of Education and Training (see below).
Under the Advanced Courses Development Programme HNC and HND courses are being redesigned in such a way that they will be built up from Higher National Units.
Providers will be able to offer these HN Units as part of an HNC or HND course, as free standing units or grouped together in a way that will meet a particular local or individual need.
HN Units across a wide range of occupational areas are currently being developed, some by SCOTVEC on a national basis and others by providers either individually or in consortium or in partnership with employers.
A third type of unit is also currently under development: Workplace-assessed Units.
These usually encompass the competence of Industry Lead Bodies and, as the name implies, are assessed in the workplace.
Workplace-assessed Units are already available in sectors such as retail distribution and caring.
Elsewhere in the UPDATE the work of Industry Lead Bodies is described in detail.
It is important to emphasise that, as the competences identified by these bodies emerge from the Standards Development Programme, these will be incorporated into the appropriate SCOTVEC provision: National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units or Workplace-assessed Units.
Detailed consideration has been given to the way in which these different types of unit should be certificated.
Rather than providing separate certificates for each, along the lines of the existing National Certificate, it has been decided to introduce one unit-based certificate which will be used for all units.
This is called the RECORD OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING (RET) and the way in which it operates is fully described below.
The RET will provide a system which is comprehensive, concise and easily understood by students, employers, providers and others.
Group Awards
As discussed above, the high currency of the group awards of HNC and HND has been built upon in the Advanced Courses Development Programme and the expressed need for analogous awards in the National Certificate has convinced SCOTVEC of the desirability of having group awards at all levels.
An additional important factor in influencing the way in which group awards should be designed is the introduction of National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) in the rest of the UK.
These latter awards will comprise groups of units containing the competences that emerge from the work of Industry Lead Bodies.
The SCOTVEC system of group awards which is being introduced will consist of two categories.
Awards which are developed on a national basis and meet the criteria outlined below will be designated as NATIONAL AWARDS.
However, some organisations and companies may wish to build on the flexibility enabled by an entirely unit-based system and so design customised groups which no not meet all of the national criteria but for which a case can be made for special recognition, for example in the implementation of a particular programme of training or career development.
SCOTVEC will be prepared to certificate such user designed group awards.
Scottish Vocational Qualifications
A particularly important of National Awards will be those intended to attract recognition, both in Scotland and beyond, as vocational qualifications for a particular occupational sector.
These will be called Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs), will encompass the competences identified by Industry Lead Bodies and will be designed to be compatible with NVQs awarded in the rest of the UK.
At its December meeting the SCOTVEC Board approved the first SVQ: The Preliminary Certificate in Agriculture, which comprised a group of National Certificate Modules.
Discussions are currently taking place with NCVQ to identify mechanisms which will ensure that holds of SVQs and NVQs can move freely within the UK and have their qualifications recognised without difficulty.
Criteria for National Awards
National Awards may comprise units drawn from any of the three categories described above, ie National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units or Workplace-assessed Units or from units of appropriate industry bodies.
The groups of units will have to satisfy the following criteria:
ii
The group award should be designed to cover a significant range of activities.
ii
The group award must attract national recognition by relevant users as being worthy of certification either for employment or progression.
iii
The group award should be designed to allow breadth of application and reflect the needs associated with problem solving and task management.
iv
Provision should be made for ensuring that the competences specified can take into account changes which may occur in technology or market requirements.
v
Requirements should relate to the acquisition of competence rather than to periods or modes or study.
vi
Assessment must be valid and reliable with an associated quality assurance system that ensures the credibility of the award.
In addition, Scottish Vocational Qualifications should meet the following criteria:
vii
The group award should be based on national standards of competence which have been determined or approved by those responsible for standards in that occupation.
viii
The group award should specify outcomes which place due emphasis on the application of skills, knowledge and understanding in the conditions of the workplace.
SCOTVEC's eight Sector Boards will have the key responsibility for investigating the acceptability of particular groups of units.
The Course Coordination and Review Committee will take final responsibility for all group awards.
Titles of National Awards will be of great importance and considerable thought will be given to identifying suitable names which relate to the needs of users.
Where awards consist solely or largely of National Certificate Modules these may be called: ‘National Certificate in…’.
Other titles might be ‘Certificate in…’ or ‘Joint Certificate in…’.
In some industries there are already well established titles and where this is the case, such titles may be used.
Where several awards occur within one occupational sector then titles will be chosen to indicate progression.
INDUSTRY LEAD BODIES
Industry Lead Bodies are organisations designated by the Training Agency to act as a focus for setting the standards of competence for their particular sector or occupation area.
In a number of cases existing Industry Training Organisations have become the Lead Body for their particular sector.
However, there are many areas where suitable industry bodies were not in existence.
This was the case for occupational areas which span a number of sectors of industry, for example management and supervision, office occupations, information technology and training and developing occupations.
In these cross-sectoral areas the Training Agency has helped to establish Lead Bodies by bringing together all relevant interests.
There are currently around 180 Lead Bodies in existence.
Some examples are:
Once identified, the Lead Body is the focus for developing ‘occupational standards’.
These comprise elements and units of competence.
‘Elements’ are precise descriptions of what people need to be able to do to be considered competent and have associated with them ‘performance criteria’, which are the key indicators used to judge the individual's level of performance.
The term ‘performance criteria’ is a very familiar one to anyone acquainted with SCOTVEC provision.
‘Elements of competence’ may be equated with SCOTVEC ‘outcomes’and just as SCOTVEC outcomes are grouped to give modules or units, ‘elements’are also grouped by the Lead Body to give units.
In general the Lead Body operates through working groups of employers, trade unions and others.
It often manages specific projects designed to develop all aspects relating to the development of occupational standards, which would usually include:
Defining the occupational area for which the Lead Body is responsible.
Analysing occupations to determine key functions and related occupational standards.
Developing and testing the standards, including assessment processes.
Working with other organisations to develop appropriate vocational qualifications based on the standards.
Promoting the use of the standards and qualifications.
The Government has set a target date of 1991 for the development of occupational standards relating to the majority of occupations in the UK.
Several Lead Bodies have already produced standards for some of the occupations for which they are responsible.
However, most Lead Bodies are currently involved in the development work which will lead to the production of standards.
For a number of years SCOTVEC has worked in active partnership with organisation which have now become Industry Lead Bodies.
In several instances this had led to joint certification agreements by which SCOTVEC and the body concerned award certificates jointly.
SCOTVEC is represented on many Lead Bodies and the various development groups which carry out the work of standards development.
Currently SCOTVEC is piloting the competences of several Lead Bodies.
Where standards are already available these are being incorporated into SCOTVEC provision: National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units or Workplace-assessed Units, as appropriate.
It is likely that most of the qualifications developed in this way will be designated as Scottish Vocational Qualifications and many may be jointly certificated by SCOTVEC and the Lead Body.
RECORD OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING (RET)
As mentioned earlier, it was realised at an early stage that the new certification framework would have to be underpinned by a documentation method that was easy for all to understand, cost effective and capable of responding to new developments in education and training.
It seemed essential to minimise the proliferation of paper as far as possible and to centralise the recording of achievement in such a way that updating over a number of years would be possible.
Fortunately SCOTVEC had already developed a sophisticated database system to cope with the scale and complexity of the National Certificate and this is capable of extension to allow all qualifications achieved by an individual to be held against one key number.
Further consideration led to the conclusion that it would be appropriate to certificate all unit-based provision, and to record all group awards on the same document which will be known as the RECORD OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING (RET).
Many people value their group award certificates, such as HNC or HND, highly and wish to display them or present them to prospective employers.
It was therefore decided that for all group awards a separate certificate would be issued in addition to this achievement being recorded on the RET.
The introduction of the RET will be of great value to all who have an interest in vocational education and training.
It will record all achievement within SCOTVEC's provision and also has the capability of including success recorded by other organisations where this has been agreed.
The RET will be sent to everyone who is successful in any SCOTVEC module, unit or course.
A section showing recognition of achievement by industry, commerce, professional bodies and others will be included.
The RET has already been introduced in a limited way for students who have undertaken units and courses under the new advanced level arrangements.
In 1990 it will be extended to cover all SCOTVEC certification with the exception of the old system of HNCs and HNDs which are being phased out over the next few years.
The existing National Certificate will therefore be replaced by the RET, since modules, together with Higher National Units and Workplace-assessed Units, will all be certificated directly on the RET.
As new qualifications are gained the RET will be updated automatically i.e. it is a cumulative record of achievement.
NATIONAL RECORD OF VOCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT
The National Record of Vocational Achievement (NROVA) us a folder or personal file within which an individual can keep certificates and other documentation relating to his or her vocational education and training.
In Scotland the Scottish Education Department, the Training Agency and SCOTVEC have combined to produce the NROVA.
In the rest of the UK it is published by NCVQ.
Currently the Training Agency provides the NROVA for all who are on Employment Training and this is being extended to YTS.
It will also be available to anyone else involved in vocational education and training.
MARKETING
As with any new development, it is very important that full and accurate information on the new framework is made available to all who might be affected.
A leaflet which explains the RET has already been produced and is available free of charge from SCOTVEC.
This issue of UPDATE aims to provide details of the new system for those who are involved professionally in vocational education and training.
Further publications targeted at specific user groups are now in preparation and these will be circulated widely as they become available.
SCOTVEC will be pleased to respond to any comments or ideas as to how information on the new framework may be disseminated effectively to all who have an interest.
SCOTVEC Statistical UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 30 JUNE 1992
STATISTICAL REPORT FOR SESSION 1990/91
Session 1990/91 proved to be the most successful yet for SCOTVEC in terms of candidate uptake.
The Council processed registrations for 238,590 candidates for National Certificate and 15,358 for candidates undertaking traditional advanced courses.
After the pilot period, the first year of the new style Higher National Certificate and Higher National Diploma courses attracted 8,587 candidates in 151 courses.
Last session, 3,073 candidates enrolled on 74 courses.
Altogether, therefore, over a quarter of a million candidates from over 800 centres became involved with SCOTVEC at a variety of levels during the session.
National Certificate
Although the overall increase in National Certificate uptake is small, the general picture indicates that considerable inroads have been made in the school sector.
This balances out the slowing down evident in the further education (FE) sector, which can be ascribed mainly to demographic trends, and to the fact that an increasing number of candidates progressing to FE have already been registered with SCOTVEC while at school.
Total module enrolments have remained static.
Nevertheless, a significant upswing is again shown in the school sector, which accounts for a 17% increase.
Advanced courses
The session saw the consolidation of the work of the Advanced Courses Development Programme, with the new Higher National courses becoming incorporated in mainstream provision.
As the changeover from traditional courses gathers pace, it is interesting to note that there has been an overall increase in the uptake of advanced level awards.
There were 23,945 candidates involved in HNC/Ds, an increase of almost 15% on the previous session's figures.
New developments
The major development of the session was the introduction of Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
By July 1991 120 SVQs had been accredited, with almost 2,000 enrolled.
The level of uptake is encouraging given that SVQs are relatively new, and enrolments are expected to increase steadily as more and more centres offer the growing number of awards available.
Another development of note is that the SCOTVEC Testing Services Section began operating the Police Examinations on behalf of the Police (Scotland) Examinations Board.
The initial resit diet processed results for approximately 300 candidates, covering six exams at two levels, elementary and advanced.
This figure is expected to expand considerably at main diets.
Tailored awards, designed to meet the specific needs of particular organisations and employers, were also offered for the first time, attracting over 500 candidates.
An example of this type of award is the qualification scheme developed in partnership with United Distillers plc.
Changes in certification
1990/91 also saw the Record of Education and Training (RET) extended to include Higher National and Workplace Assessed Units and Group Awards.
The RET is now a truly comprehensive, cumulative record of achievement, which has been well received by candidates and employers alike.
More than 200,000 RETs were issued over a very busy summer period.
Figure 1 shows the output of certificates between July and October in comparison to the previous session.
The sharp upturn indicates a great improvement in SCOTVEC's ability to ‘turn around’ results; it also indicates that more centres are returning results to SCOTVEC as early as possible.
A guarantee had been made that any centre submitting all results by the end of a given month would have all candidates certificated by the end of the following month.
Those centres which took up the offer helped SCOTVEC plan the deployment of its resources more effectively, while at the same time benefiting from earlier candidate certification.
A similar offer will be made for Session 1991/92.
Statistics
This Statistical Update provides a summary of SCOTVEC uptake statistics for 1990/91.
Using data supplies by SCOTVEC, the Scottish Office Education Department will issue a complete Statistical Bulletin at a later date.
The statistics given relate mainly to uptake of the different levels and types of provision offered by the Council.
The statistics given in this document relate to
National Certificate Modules
Group Awards
Testing Services Section examinations
For comparison purposes, data for Session 1988/89 and 1989/90 are given where available.
1.
SCOTVEC candidates
The age distribution of candidates for both Higher National and National Certificate reflects the pattern of previous years.
The majority of National Certificate candidates are 17 years old or less (61%).
The typical Higher National candidate is somewhat older, with 23% in the 18–19 age group, and 38% in the 20–25 age group.
2.
The National Certificate
The National Certificate remains SCOTVEC's largest area of uptake.
Previous dramatic increases in uptake have now begun to level off, with changing patterns within the participating sectors now becoming more significant; for example, schools' candidate registrations have almost reached parity with the further education sector.
(a) Overall statistics
Of the 1,151439 enrolments in session 1990/91, 740,832 resulted in full success, 147,034 resulted in part success, 227,863 results were withdrawn and 35,710 results were awaited.
Results for National Certificate Modules are classified as follows:
Full success — all learning outcomes achieved, the module appears on the candidate's RET;
Part success — some learning outcomes achieved, the module does not appear on the candidate's RET but details of outcomes achieved are issued;
Withdrawn — this category includes cases where the candidate:
has achieved none of the learning outcomes
has enrolled but taken no further part in the module
may have been enrolled more than once for the module
has been enrolled in error by the centre
Result awaited — The module was expected to be completed after 31 July 1991 (end of session 1990/91) and the result was unknown at November 1991.
Note:
The statistics used in this report relate to ‘active enrolments’— modules which were active at some point within session 1990/91.
As a few of these modules may have started in a previous session, or may be expected to finish in a future session, some will count in statistics for more than one session.
(b) National Certificate uptake and successes
The following tables and figures gives greater detail on the level of National Certificate activity and provide a picture of the candidates and their centres.
Table 2.1 compares National Certificate uptake over the past three sessions.
Note:
Column A
‘Candidates registered’ refers to the number of candidates with at least one module enrolment active during the session.
Column B
‘Modules studied’ refers to the number of individual module enrolments which were active during the session, excluding those which were subsequently withdrawn.
Column C
‘Full success’ refers to the number of individual modules for which candidates successfully achieved all learning outcomes.
Column D
‘Certificates issued’ refers to the number of RETs issued to candidates who had successfully completed at least one module during the session.
In addition, some candidates received notification of part success in at least one module.
Group type
‘Other’ comprises the university sector and other non-educational authority centres.
(c) National Certificate — candidate registrations and module enrolments
Figure 2.2 and Table 2.3 show National Certificate candidate's registration and module enrolment data subdivided by type of centre.
Schools accounted for 45% of candidates but only 26% of module enrolments.
On average a school pupil enrols for 2.2 modules in a year compared to 5.6 modules for an FE student.
The significant difference in the average number of modules taken by candidates in schools and in FE centres reflects the different curricular functions fulfilled by modules in each sector.
In FE centres, National Certificate Modules make up the main part of the curriculum, whilst in schools, modules are used mainly to supplement other courses and as taster or enrichment courses.
Note:
‘Other’ comprises the university sector and other non-education authority centres.
3.
Group awards
The range of group awards currently available divides into several different types.
Figure 3.1 outlines the structure of the Council's group award provision, comprising national awards (including advanced courses and Scottish Vocational Qualifications) and tailored awards.
The following sections give greater detail on the level of uptake for the SCOTVEC Higher National awards.
Entry and award data related to advanced courses are divided into two sections, dealing firstly with new courses and secondly with traditional courses.
Overall there has been an increase in the number of candidates involved in advanced courses, with a total of 23,945 candidates (20,870 previously) enrolled for assessment.
The following tables indicate a sharp increase in uptake of new courses, building on the numbers involved in the pilot schemes.
Nevertheless, the drop in enrolments for traditional advanced courses does not correspond exactly with the increased interest in the new style courses, with the overall result that more candidates are currently involved in advanced courses than in previous sessions.
(a) New Courses
These courses operate on a developed system derived from the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
Certification can be gained for individual units and for completion of a predetermined group.
Such courses are similar to the National Certificate in that both are modula forms of provision and both are certificated on the Record of Education and Training.
Statistics for 1990/91 include enrolments and results for the first batch of candidates undertaking ‘live’ courses, as well as for candidates continuing on pilot courses begun in 1988/89 and 1989/90.
Table 3.2 shows the new course uptake and group award details, giving pilot schemes figures for comparison.
(b) Traditional Courses
Traditional courses comprise centrally devised courses which are examined by externally set national examinations.
These courses are being phased out and replaced by new courses.
As with new courses, in any one session, of all candidates actively involved in assessments, some will be taking assessments which are early steps along the way to the award, whilst others will be taking assessments which will complete the set of subjects making up the group awards.
Table 3.3 shows traditional course uptake and group award details.
4.
Contracted Testing Services
In addition to the traditional courses, the Testing Services Section operates a number of exams on contract to external clients and, in a few cases, exams linked to National Certificate Modules or programmes.
(a) Department of Transport Certificates of Competency
This represents the largest area of externally contracted testing services.
The examinations are organised and administered on behalf of the Department of Transport for engineers and deck officers of the merchant navy and fishing fleets.
Entry and results data for these examinations are summarised in Table 4.1.
(b) Construction crafts
Tests in this area are associated with groups of National Certificate Modules and with the Construction crafts technology module 85422.
The tests form part of a joint certification agreement with the Scottish Building Apprenticeship and Training Council.
Entry and results data are summarised in Table 4.2.
Statistical Reports
Future annual statistical reports will adopt the same format and will incorporate information similar to that contained in this Update.
Any enquiries regarding the statistics given in the Update should be directed to  .
Additional copies of the Update can be obtained from SCOTVEC's Publications Unit .
SCOTVEC National Certificate UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 19 FEBRUARY 1991
Review of SCOTVEC's Quality Assurance
On 14th September, 1990 SCOTVEC published a consultative paper on its system of quality assurance.
This paper is one of the most important to emerge from the Council since the consultative paper on Advanced Courses in 1987.
The fruits of the Advanced Courses paper are now being seen in the phased transition to the new courses based on Higher National Units.
As far as quality assurance is concerned, the new paper describes how mechanisms have evolved to meet the various demands which have arisen over the last five years — such as the National Certificate, the new Advanced Courses and, most recently, Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
The paper argues that these various mechanisms now need to be harmonised.
To quote an editorial in the ‘Times Scottish Education Supplement’:
‘SCOTVEC faces an unenviable task.
It oversees a myriad of courses delivered in a wide range of centres.
But in the long term, the currency and credibility of students’ qualifications depend on its efforts.’
The paper proses a set of principles which should underpin quality assurance systems and develops a strategy to harmonise the current systems, building on strengths and tackling weaknesses.
In particular, a framework for the future devolution of quality assurance to centres is suggested, based on the concept of a ‘quality audit’ by which a centre's readiness for devolution would be assessed.
A copy of the paper has been sent to every centre and to other interested parties such as teacher trade unions, industry Lead Bodies, professional/commercial/education bodies, local authorities and LECs.
Advice, comment and reaction to the consultative paper was gratefully received.
The response is being used to help shape future policy in this vital area.
The RET arrives
Last summer, successful National Certificate candidates had a new experience when opening the familiar SCOTVEC brown envelope.
Instead of the old form of certificate, they found the new Record of Education and Training (RET).
Why the change?
SCOTVEC is in the process of revising its Advanced Courses from a traditional system of centrally written syllabuses and examinations to one based on units.
At the same time, SCOTVEC is continuing to respond to the wishes of some industry Lead Bodies to develop units which are designed to be delivered and assessed in the workplace.
To carry out the recording of these units and National Certificate Modules, SCOTVEC has introduced the RET.
A candidate can now see his or her successes accumulate in a single certificate, whatever type of SCOTVEC unit or module has been undertaken.
But the RET does more than just record unit success; it will also record successful completion of a group award and recognitions attached to particular groups of units or modules.
The RET is, therefore, a national record of achievement covering all aspects of SCOTVEC's system and is the first of its kind in Britain.
It provides the kind of record which the CBI argues, in its recent report ‘Towards a Skills Revolution’, should be a feature of all vocational education and training systems.
Despite the greater complexity of the RET and an increase in candidate numbers last session, results were being despatched to candidates at the usual speed through the summer.
SCOTVEC aims to issue the RET to candidates within 2 weeks of results arriving in its office.
Over the summer certification period the turnaround on RETs may increase by a week or so because of the very high numbers of candidates seeking certification.
SCOTVEC has recently increased the number of certification dates a year to 4 — October, January, April and July.
Even before this change, however, the majority of candidates were presented for certification in July (97% in 1989/90).
Many of these candidates had completed their studies much earlier in the session and would have been eligible for certification at earlier dates if centres had requested this.
There is, however, a continuing tendency within centres to regard the end of the session as the only certification point.
Although high numbers of candidates may slightly delay the issue of RETs, the major factor for lengthy delay is the failure of centres to submit results promptly after the expected module finish date.
For example at the end of October 1990 37,000 results were still outstanding from centres for session 1989/90.
Colin Urie, of the Operations Section, is looking at ways of increasing cooperation between SCOTVEC and centres so as to reduce delays in certification.
He will readily discuss any suggestions for such cooperative initiatives and can be contacted at .
INTENSIVE SUBJECT ASSESSMENT
A model of intensive subject assessment has been piloted in 18 colleges and one school over the last two sessions, supplementing the usual sampling in these centres.
Centre staff and Subject Assessors who took part in the project are encouraged by its results.
In intensive subject assessment, a systematic approach is adopted and every module which a centre offers is reviewed by a team of Subject Assessors within a relatively short period of time, usually one to two weeks.
During the visit, a SCOTVEC Field Officer is also present to coordinate activity and make support available to the centre.
The model is intended to provide not only more effective quality assurance and better support and feedback to centres, but also more efficient deployment of Subject Assessors.
‘In the past, subject assessment varied a great deal’ explained Fiona Baikie, Assistant Principal at Telford College in Edinburgh, Scotland's largest National Certificate centre.
‘Although we had regular contact with our Field Officer, some modules had never been assessed before.
A concentrated assessment helped us focus on teaching procedures and materials more effectively and the problems we uncovered could be tackled immediately as we had direct access to the Subject Assessor’.
Telford's intensive subject assessment, co-ordinated in college by Fiona Baikie, took place over a fortnight at the end of November 1989.
‘We teach the highest number of SCOTVEC modules in Scotland,’ she explained.
‘Around 80 Subject Assessors visited us during that fortnight, and every module was looked at.
One practical problem was providing everyone with suitable places to work — in the end we allocated one of our conference rooms to them for the fortnight.’
Wester Hailes Education Centre, also in Edinburgh, was visited by 20 Subject Assessors over three days at the beginning of February this year.
WHEC teaches more SCOTVEC modules than any other secondary school in Scotland, and 51 modules were assessed across a range of cognate groups.
‘Having so many Subject Assessors in at one time did prove disruptive!’ admitted Depute Principal Roy Beavis.
‘We tried to find visiting times which were suitable for the teachers concerned as well as the Subject Assessor, but it wasn't always possible’.
Supportive approach
‘Such an intensive subject assessment was stressful for the staff,’ commented Fiona Baikie, ‘but it helped that we were all assessed together, so no one subject or person was singled out.
As the subject assessment proceeded it also became clear that the Subject Assessors were there to be supportive — not to look for mistakes, but to help us’.
At Wester Hailes a small support group was set up in advance of the assessment to advise staff on what would be required of them.
The group consisted of Roy Beavis, two members of staff with experience of assessing others and an administrative assistant.
‘We were available for advice and, if anyone felt it necessary, we reviewed their work before the Subject Assessors arrived.
That seemed to defuse a lot of tension,’ said Roy Beavis.
English teacher Lynn Pratt agrees.
‘This was our first experience of subject assessment in this department, and we were unsure what to expect.
We made amendments to our procedures on the advice of the support group, but we still expected negative comments.
In fact we received a lot of praise.
The Subject Assessor was extremely approachable, and we now feel able to ask for advice’.
Positive response
The advantages of the intensive models included a sense of raised awareness and motivation.
Norrie Wilson, of the Business Studies staff at Telford College, felt ‘there was a buzz through the whole college — everyone was aware of it.
This department has been assessed regularly in the past so it wasn't a new experience, but the heightened focus of attention was new’.
Because intensive subject assessment is concentrated over a short period of time, many felt that disruption of staff and students was less, in the long run, than under the normal system.
Effective preparation helped iron out many problems.
‘We knew well in advance when the Subject Assessors would be visiting Wester Hailes, and that enabled us to prepare the staff.’
said Roy Beavis.
‘The support group contributed to that’.
At Telford Fiona Baikie commented, ‘We worked closely with our Field Officer while we prepared for the visit, and he helped college staff enormously.
He also briefed the Subject Assessors very fairly indeed’.
Another positive response identified the importance of quality assurance.
‘It is reassuring to know everything is correct,’ commented Roz Chetwynd of Communication and Personal Development at Telford College.
‘The Subject Assessors had a sound feeling for the way the department runs, and the experience was very encouraging.
Tackling problems
Many of the problems encountered were dealt with easily.
‘Most of our problems would be resolved on the spot — for example, where a module summary form was incomplete,’ commented Fiona Baikie.
‘Others required more attention.
Our new computer system is intended to monitor course registrations, but more students have registered than were represented on the computer printout.
The intensive visit highlighted the need for us to reassess our own internal structures and tighten them up where necessary’.
At WHEC, Music teacher Graham Lovett welcomed the opportunity to resolve queries relating to the modules.
‘The music descriptor is very much open to interpretation,’ he explained.
‘The assessment was a supportive and useful experience’.
Although the intensive system of subject assessment takes up a good deal of time, it has been well received by these two centres.
Staff generally felt their programmes of study, and hence their students, benefited from the experience.
Recommendations on subject assessment frequency varied between modules, though all staff appreciated the importance of regular checking, especially after the introduction of a new module.
Both centres were able to identify specific areas for action as a result of the Subject Assessors' visits and comments.
On the basis of this feedback, intensive subject assessment represents a significant step forward for SCOTVEC and, as a result of the experience, SCOTVEC is continuing to supplement its sampling visits with a programme of intensive subject assessment in session 1990/91.
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE
The Growth Continues
Another Milestone
The latest statistics, which appear in SCOTVEC's Annual Report, showed that the sustained growth in National Certificate continued in 1989/90, despite the demographic factors which affect the potential number of candidates.
In 1988/89, a milestone was passed when, for the first time, there were more than a million module enrolments in a single year.
In 1989/90, the million mark was passed in May and the total for the whole session exceeded 1.1 million.
Another milestone was passed in 1989/90 with more than 200,000 candidates registering for one or more modules for that year; indeed the growth in the number of candidates has been so strong that it is likely to pass 225,000 this year, a rise of more than 15%.
In recent years, the growth of National Certificate uptake has been especially strong in secondary schools.
In 1989/90, that trend continued, but growth also occurred in all other sectors.
In Further Education, despite the impact of demographic factors, the number of candidates rose by 13%; this must reflect not only the attractiveness of the National Certificate but also the success of the colleges in promoting their services in a competitive environment.
With the launch of the joint initiative ‘Fast Forward with Further Education’ by the Scottish Education Department, COSLA and SCOTVEC, there is potential for further growth in the National Certificate's uptake.
The public sector centres such as schools, colleges, community/adult education makes up 98% of candidates.
The remaining 2% come from SCOTVEC's ‘approved centres’.
These centres include private training organisations, training divisions of both private companies and public bodies, educational institutions outwith the arrangements for devolved validation (for example, Universities, Colleges of Nursing) and HM Prisons.
These centres also recorded an increase in National Certificate uptake, with their proportion increasing to 2% from 1.5% in 1988/89.
The number of approved centres has also increased — there are now around 70, out of the total of almost 720 National Certificate centres.
The Top 10
Of the individual modules in the Catalogue, Introduction to Computers continued to be the single most popular in all sectors, with nearly 11,000 candidates.
In schools, the most notable growth has been in the use of 81200 Work Experience 1 — enrolments for this module have increased by over 200%; other substantial increases were for the Communications and Mathematics modules.
In Further Education, the PSD module 81188 Induction attracted twice as many candidates as in 1988/89, becoming fifth most popular; another large increase in enrolment was for 81095 Introduction to Computer Application Packages.
The ‘Top 10’ for all centres for 1989/90 is listed below, with the positions for 1988/89 shown in brackets.
CHANGES TO THE FIELD OFFICER TEAM
Following the reorganisation of the Assessment Services Department, the Field Officer team has seen a few staffing changes.
Hugh McGill and Madeline Blakely have transferred to other posts within Hanover House and Anne Davidson has taken up a post of Head of Department of Service Industries at West Lothian College of Further Education.
Two members of SCOTVEC staff, Christine Fraczek and Lesley Gallagher, have joined the Field Officer team.
Christine has transferred from the Testing Services Section and Lesley from the Product Development Department.
In addition Andrew Burt has returned to the team after working as an Education Officer in Hanover House.
The Field Officer team and its regional/divisional responsibility is now:
The Scottish Prison Service and National Certificate
The Scottish Prison Service has greatly increased its commitment to vocational training and education in the last five years.
There are now opportunities for inmates in the majority of Scottish prisons to gain National Certificate awards across a variety of vocational areas such as.
Other areas of vocational training in prisons which are under consideration for SCOTVEC certification are .
Also available in most prisons (through Education Units) is SCOTVEC modular provision in .
The prison authorities recognise the need for coherent planning of modular programmes for prison candidates.
The two specific areas which are currently under consideration are Sentence Planning and Pre-release Programmes and SCOTVEC modules are seen as being central to these initiatives.
Already in some of the vocational areas in the Scottish Prison Service there is a readiness to offer Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
These initiatives enable those who are responsible for drawing up programmes of modules to offer provision which realistically addresses the needs of inmates, whether at the start of a sentence or embarking on pre-release courses.
Until relatively recently, Instructors delivering National Certificate modules in prisons tended to be rather isolated.
Responding to SCOTVEC's suggestions, however, the Prison Service has now created a support structure across institutions which ensures parity of standards and allows Instructors to come together at regular intervals for staff development sessions.
Staff covering the same modules develop materials and resources together and these are banked centrally.
Added to this SCOTVEC Subject Assessors have made development visits to provide support for staff in refining their materials further and updating themselves as providers as modules.
The majority of candidates in Scottish prisons who start SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules go on to complete them successfully.
Indeed, hundreds have successfully completed modules over recent years and it is evident that the National Certificate's flexibility is as viable in prisons as in any other centre.
The prison authorities see this flexibility as the principal benefit both for the deliverer and the candidate and they intend to build on this in future.
Therefore candidates who are transferred to other institutions within the penal system will be able to continue their education and training.
Similarly when prisoners are released, they should be able to continue their training in Colleges of Further Education.
The idea that the Vocational Training Workshops and the Education Units in prisons have quite distinct and, in many ways, unrelated functions is rapidly changing.
Using sound induction systems and assessment techniques, the prison authorities are more able to meet the educational/vocational training needs, aspirations and abilities of inmates.
It is clear that SCOTVEC has a central role in helping to meet these needs.
The National Certificate and SVQs
In October 1989, Ian Lang, then Scottish Education Minister, announced that SCOTVEC would have responsibility for the accreditation and development of Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
SVQs are nationally recognised awards; their particular feature is that they incorporate the occupational standards defined by industry Lead Bodies.
SVQs will therefore not only be recognised within that industry but will also be regarded as a counterpart of the NVQs accredited by NCVQ in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
A formal statement, issued jointly by SCOTVEC and NCVQ, now acknowledges the feature of mutual recognition accorded to SVQs and NVQs.
SCOTVEC is now engaged in a massive development programme to put SVQs in place across as wide a range of vocational areas as possible.
Over 70 SVQs have already been accredited; the target is to have 150 by next April.
The criteria for accreditation include a requirement that SVQs ‘specify outcomes which place due emphasis on the application of skills, knowledge and understanding in the conditions of the workplace’ as well as incorporating the Lead Body's standards.
In some cases, the units which make up the SVQ are designed to be assessed in the workplace by the candidate's immediate workplace supervisor; in other cases, the flexibility and responsiveness of the National Certificate system have allowed the Lead Body Standards to be built into National Certificate Modules.
These different routes to SVQs reflect the outcome of discussion between SCOTVEC and the Lead Bodies.
A further possibility is emerging of supervisory/management SVQs built of Higher National Units which incorporate Lead Body standards at Level 3, 4 and beyond.
Already, with the agreement of Lead Bodies, SVQs composed of National Certificate Modules have been accredited in the Agriculture, Forestry, Floristry, Hairdressing, and Administrative/Business/Clerical areas and developments are under way in Caring.
To achieve this recognition, the modules in these areas have been matched against the Lead Bodies' standards and amended where necessary.
This type of revision, arising via a matching exercise, will be a feature of National Certificate in future as Lead Bodies continue to generate standards.
At a national level, there is a debate going on about the need for generic units to underpin those qualifications which are highly occupationally-specific so that, for example , skills in areas such as literacy, numeracy and communication can be promoted.
In the National Certificate in Scotland there are already such generic units and these can be used to support occupational programmes.
Even is these ‘broadening’ elements are not a formal part of an SVQ programme, candidates taking these modules will have them credited alongside the occupational SVQ units and modules on their Records of Education and Training.
A wide range of modules is available in the Catalogue to fulfil this potential need, in areas such as.
University Entrance
An important development on entry to degree courses has been announced in the 1991 Scottish Universities' Committee on Entrance Guide.
SUCE has agreed that SCOTVEC awards may be accepted as satisfying, either in full or in part, the general entrance requirements.
Each University faculty will now require to decide which modules offer the appropriate evidence of academic potential for specific courses.
In addition, SUCE accepts that 91003 Communication 3 satisfies the English component of the general entrance requirements and has issued, through its Mathematics panel, guidance on the groups of modules which, in appropriate combination, are acceptable for University entrance.
Please refer to the 1991 SUCE Guide for further detail.
University of Stirling
National Certificate Modules are offered in colleges, schools non authority centres and now universities.
The University of Stirling has been validated to run SCOTVEC modules as is currently offering modules in Italian and Spanish through its Continuing Education Department.
Stan Gilmour of the Continuing Education Department said: ‘The classes comprise mostly adults from the local community although students from the University also attend.
We are hoping to increase the numbers of modules on offer next session to include French and German.’
The University students who are interested in undertaking National Certificate Modules are often foreign students who wish to increase their knowledge of other languages.
They have always had this opportunity at the University of Stirling but now they also gain national certification via SCOTVEC.
SCOTVEC Quality Framework UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 23 JUNE 1991
INTRODUCING THE QUALITY FRAMEWORK
Candidates put a lot of time and effort into gaining qualifications.
They will want to use their qualifications to shape their future, relying on the currency of these awards to help them gain access to more education/training, to support job applications or to underpin planned personal development.
Since awards have such importance for individual candidates, SCOTVEC, as the awarding body, and centres, as the places in which the candidates learn the new skills and knowledge, must work in partnership to ensure that the awards for which we are responsible have the highest possible currency and credibility in the eyes of candidates, employers and other users.
REVIEW
One key aspect which supports currency and credibility is the quality system which SCOTVEC applies to its awards.
This system has evolved over the last six years, having originally been designed to deal with the maintenance of national standards in the National Certificate.
Although the National Certificate, with its competence-based, internally-assessed modules, has almost become part of the educational establishment now, we should not forget that Scotland led the way in the development of this kind of award and our experience has been drawn on in subsequent moves to make all Britain's vocational qualifications modular and competence-based.
More recently, our quality system has been adapted to deal with the new HNC/D awards and the growing number of Workplace Assessed awards.
Now, with the expansion of availability of SCOTVEC awards to increasing numbers of candidates, to a wider range of centres and to a greater coverage of occupational areas, SCOTVEC's Board decided that the time was right to review the quality system which supports our awards to ensure that the system could continue to meet its objectives in the years head.
The result of this review was a Consultative Paper published in September 1990.
Because of the importance which we place in the development of our quality system, the Consultative Paper was sent to all Scottish colleges, secondary schools and institutes of Higher Education, to all professional and technical bodies, to industry Lead Bodies, to trade unions and to local and national government bodies.
Almost 1500 copies were despatched, ensuring that the proposals reached as many interested parties as possible.
In January 1991, the Board looked at the responses to this consultation and used the views of respondents to help shape our new Quality Framework and the development programme which will help to put it in place — the Quality Development Programme — QDP.
PARTNERSHIPS
The introduction of the Quality Framework is an evolutionary, rather than revolutionary, step by SCOTVEC.
It builds on the experience of the past six years while, at the same time, recognising that improvements can be made in the light of that experience.
The result will be a more coherent and comprehensive system by which to maintain standards in our awards.
The key to its success is the further development of partnerships between SCOTVEC and centres to provide qualifications which will be valued by our candidates and respected by employers and other users.
In the wider context, the new Quality Framework signals our commitment to supporting the success of education and training providers as a means of developing the highly-skilled workforce on which Scotland's future economic health depends.
This edition of ‘Update’ is devoted to the new Quality Framework.
There is a fuller description of the Framework in the ‘Quality Development Programme Policy Paper’, a copy of which has been sent to all centres.
Further copies of the Policy Paper are available, at a small handling charge, from the Publications Unit at SCOTVEC.
On the inside pages of this ‘Update’, there is a description of the new Quality Framework.
On the back page, the timescale for its implementation is shown and the steps involved in putting it in place, through the Quality Development Programme, are listed.
Work on the Quality Development Programme has already started and will continue apace over the next year.
We are giving this work a high priority — our intention is to put the new Framework in place by completing QDP, PDQ!
The New Quality Framework
The new Quality Framework to be introduced in 1992/3 will have three components:
a set of six principles on which the quality system's procedures are to be based;
a set of elements of quality control and quality assurance which will provide a reliable means of maintaining consistent standards in SCOTVEC awards;
a quality auditing system which will determine the balance of responsibility between the centre and SCOTVEC for the operation of the elements of the quality system.
The quality principles provide the foundation for the system and give a set of benchmarks against which to test its calibre.
Their explicit inclusion in the Quality Framework is also an expression of SCOTVEC's determination to deliver quality systems which match, and are see to match, these benchmarks.
The quality elements are the detailed procedures to be applied by centres or by SCOTVEC to ensure that assessment of candidates has accurately reflected the standards laid down for the award.
The quality audit will be the measure of the calibre of centres' internal quality systems and will provide the means by which SCOTVEC can decide whether a centre is ready to accept devolved responsibility for operating any of the quality elements.
Each of these three components of the Quality Framework is described in this ‘Update’.
Looking at the broader perspective, the Quality Framework's introduction will represent a significant step forward in the development of SCOTVEC's awards system.
The incentive of devolved responsibility will place more emphasis on the development of effective internal quality systems in centres.
Thus good practice and ‘ownership’ of standards in centres will be promoted and Quality Partnerships between SCOTVEC and centres will be fostered.
Through such partnerships, SCOTVEC will:
support and strengthen centres in delivering awards which are attractive to students and to training contractors;
enable centres to assume a level of devolved responsibility commensurate with the nature, scope and calibre of their internal quality systems.
The Quality Principles
These are the principles to underpin the new quality system.
1.
The system will ensure that candidates' achievement is compared accurately against the level of achievement required for the award and is rewarded consistently, whenever and wherever that achievement has been demonstrated.
— consistency of standards in all centres at all times.
2
The system will promote good practice in the management, delivery, assessment and quality assurance of SCOTVEC qualifications.
— a SCOTVEC commitment to its continued involvement in staff development for centres, both directly and through the work of other bodies such as the Scottish Further Education Unit, Education Authorities and Colleges of Education.
3
The system will provide a channel of communication between users and SCOTVEC.
— two-way communication so that SCOTVEC gets feedback on its awards and centres get feedback on their assessment of candidates.
4
The system will allow as much devolved responsibility as is compatible with the maintenance of consistent standards across centres and over time.
— SCOTVEC and centres in partnership.
Responsibility devolved to centres where they are willing and ready to accept it — readiness measured by the quality audit of their internal systems.
5
The system must be understandable to users and generate their confidence.
— all users; candidates, centres, employers, professional bodies, education and training establishments.
6
The system will be effective in deployment of resources, economical in the demands made on those to whom it is applied and free of practices or procedures which restrict access or opportunity.
— effective recruitment, training and deployment of quality assurance staff, including secondees;
complementing, not intruding on, centres' work with candidates;
applicable to all centres and all candidates.
The Quality Elements
In the Quality Framework, there will be three elements which provide quality assurance and quality control.
These elements, validation, approval and verification, will be applied at key stages in the operation of an award.
All of the elements listed, with the two exceptions marked * and +, will be able to be administered either by SCOTVEC or by the centre.
In the case of *, SCOTVEC will retain responsibility.
In the case of +, centres must take responsibility for this element; the presence of a system for internal verification will be a condition of approval of a centre.
With these two exceptions, all elements can either be administered by SCOTVEC or devolved to centres, depending on the outcome of the Quality Audit.
The way in which these will operate is described below.
APPROVAL
There will be two levels of approval.
Approval as a SCOTVEC Centre *
For a centre which has not previously offered SCOTVEC awards, approval as a SCOTVEC centre will be assessed against centre-related criteria.
For example does the centre have an internal quality system in place?
is there a system of induction/guidance for candidates?
Approval to Offer Specific Awards
For a centre which is already approved and which wants to enrol candidates for an award which it has not used before, approval to offer that award will be assessed against award-related criteria.
For example:
are the staff appropriate for the delivery and assessment of that award?
is the assessment method and material suitable?
are the teaching/training resources appropriate?
VALIDATION
There will be two levels of validation.
Validation of a new Group Award
If a centre wishes to package a programme of units/modules into a group award, either a new programme to result in an existing group award title or an entirely new group award title, the proposal will be assessed against criteria which cover:
the coherence of the proposal programme;
the appropriateness of the programme against the desired group award title.
Validation of a new Unit/Module
If a centre wishes to design a new unit/module, either free-standing or as part of a group award, the proposed unit/module will be assessed against criteria which cover:
the appropriateness of the unit/module outcomes in terms of its title and its purpose
the technical quality of the unit/module specification;
the suitability of the assessment instruments proposed.
VERIFICATION
There will be two levels of verification.
Internal Verification +
A centre will have to have a system of internal verification in place in order to ensure that:
all assessments for a unit/module are comparable in terms of the demands made on candidates;
results are consistent between assessors, where more than one assessor assessed the same unit/module;
assessment and recording procedures were followed;
appropriate evidence of assessment is available for the external verifier.
External Verification
The system of external verification will ensure that:
results for an award are consistent between different centres;
centres' internal verification systems are operating effectively and procedures have been followed.
This level of verification will normally be carried out by an individual who is not an employee of the centre.
The Quality Audit
As part of the approval of a new SCOTVEC centre, the centre's system for internal verification will be evaluated.
All SCOTVEC centres require to have such a system because they need to ensure that their standards, and recommendations for certification of candidates, are internally consistent.
Centres with more experience of operating SCOTVEC awards amy have developed more comprehensive internal quality systems.
To reflect this, the Consultative Paper proposed that such centres could be offered the opportunity to accept devolved responsibility for quality elements normally administered by SCOTVEC, provided that the internal quality systems in place were appropriate to each element for which devolved responsibility was being sought.
This proposal met with wide support.
If a centre does not wish devolved responsibility for any of the quality elements, SCOTVEC will continue to administer those elements.
A centre will not have to take on devolved responsibility at a level which it is unwilling to accept — and SCOTVEC will not offer devolved responsibility to a centre whose internal quality systems are not ready for that responsibility.
The evaluation of the operation of a centre's current level of devolved responsibility and its readiness to accept additional devolution will take the form of a quality audit conducted by SCOTVEC.
The quality audit will:
analyse, where available, reports of external verification of awards offered by the centre;
appraise the internal quality system for, and the operation of, elements for which responsibility has already been devolved;
appraise the internal quality system for elements for which new devolved responsibility is sought;
consider the outcome of audits on the centre carried out by other organisation.
The outcome of the Quality Audit will be an agreement between the centre and SCOTVEC, in the form of a Quality Contract.
This contract will formalise the quality partnership between SCOTVEC and the centre and will:
specify the elements for which the centre will have devolved responsibility and the way in which the centre will discharge its responsibility;
define the way in which future review will take place.
Unless the centre or SCOTVEC identifies a need for an earlier date, a contract will operate for a fixed period, after which a further Quality Audit will take place.
Towards Implementation of the Quality Framework
We intend to implement the new Quality Framework in session 1992/3.
Between now and then, the Quality Development Programme will prepare the ground for the new Framework, giving SCOTVEC and centres time to prepare for the changes.
Initially, most of the development activity will take place within SCOTVEC itself.
Centres will not immediately be affected, with the exception of those who, by agreement, become involved in small-scale piloting of aspects of the new Framework.
As part of the Quality Development Programme, we intend to:
harmonise the differences in the operation of elements of the current quality assurance system;
prepare guidelines and exemplars of internal quality systems;
produce staff development material for centres, to support the new Framework;
discuss the new Framework with other bodies which have an interest in the quality auditing of centres to seek mutual recognition, to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort and to minimise intrusion in centres.
For example, we have set up a joint working party with Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise for this purpose.
We are also considering the implications of quality systems such as BS 5750 and Total Quality Management for our quality auditing approach;
investigate the implications of devolving responsibility on the cost of SCOTVEC's, and centres', quality systems and relate it to SCOTVEC's future fee structure.
When that development has been completed, we will implement the new Quality Framework by a centre-by-centre timetable of Quality Audits.
We will design the sequence in the timetable to give priority to:
centres which have a well-prepared and effective quality system in place and are keen to proceed quickly towards devolved responsibility;
centres where SCOTVEC has identified concerns, based on previous experience, on the effectiveness of the internal quality systems and assistance to meet the new criteria may be required.
In addition to these priority cases, we will develop a timetable for a rolling programme of Quality Audits for other centres.
Until centres are audited, they will continue to operate under current arrangements, and with the current level of devolved responsibility.
Onward…
We are very grateful to the many individuals, centres and organisations who submitted responses to the Consultative Paper.
The Quality Framework described in this Update has been shaped by those responses.
The Quality Framework is an important goal in the establishment of a comprehensive, coherent and respected quality system, but it is not an end-point.
We will continue to consult all those who have an interest in vocational education and training and will refine our policy and procedures in the light of that consultation.
The immediate goal is to complete the Quality Development Programme and then to implement the new Quality Framework.
Having done so, we will be in a good position, with our partner centres, to consolidate the strengths of Scotland's coherent, flexible and responsive system of vocational qualifications.
We will keep all interested parties informed of progress towards this goal, through the publication of further Updates.
SCOTVEC Quality Framework UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 26 APRIL 1992
QUALITY COUNTS
SCOTVEC is committed to working in partnership with centres and to devolving responsibility to those centre which are willing and able to accept it.
The keys to success in a devolved system are
clear understanding of the respective roles of the partners.
accountability for the successful operation of each role.
SCOTVEC's new Quality Framework, announced last year and due to be implemented in August, will make it possible for centres to take devolved responsibility for a range of quality assurance processes.
The near feature of the Framework is that the decision on whether to devolve responsibility (or not) will be based on the outcome of a Quality Audit.
A centre which has had its internal quality assurance system successfully audited will be able, if it wishes, to take devolved responsibility at a level agreed with SCOTVEC and formalised in a Quality Contract.
The converse also applies — that centres whose Quality Audit raises problems will not be offered devolved responsibility and might even have any existing devolution reduced in scope.
Over the next few years, every SCOTVEC centre will be ‘quality audited’.
Each audit will lead to a Quality Contract which is tailored to the centre's needs and reflects the confidence which SCOTVEC has in the centre's internal quality system.
This system will provide a clear accountability relationship between centres and SCOTVEC, will enable greater recognition to be given to centres with proven internal quality systems and will provide a spur to those centres whose systems are found to be ineffective.
The overall aim of this audited approach to devolution is to strengthen the quality partnerships between SCOTVEC and centres and thereby to enhance the currency of SCOTVEC awards in the eyes of candidates, parents, employers and other users.
Those who have worked hard to achieve the awards deserve nothing less.
HARMONISED CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL
The arrangements to harmonise aspects of the current approval systems, which were outlined in ‘Update’ No 23 are nearing completion.
From August 1992 there will be two levels of approval which will be applied consistently across all types of centre and across all parts of the SCOTVEC provision.
LEVEL I APPROVAL OF A CENTRE
For a centre which has not previously offered SCOTVEC awards approval will be assessed against the following centre-related criteria.
Management and Organisation
The centre has implemented an effective management system, has the operational policies to support good practice in the management, delivery, assessment and internal quality assurance of SCOTVEC provision and is financially viable,
Staff Recruitment and Staff Development Policy
The centre's staff recruitment policy ensures the appointment of adequate numbers of appropriately competent staff and the staff development policy encourages staff to develop/keep up to date with current practice in their field and in education/training.
Internal Quality Assurance System
The centre has implemented systems and procedures to monitor and evaluate the quality of all provision offered and has adopted effective strategies to promote the maintenance of consistent standards in all awards offered.
Consultation/Liaison with Other Agencies
The centre has an effective consultation/liaison arrangement with appropriate national and local agencies.
Premises and Learning Environment
The centre's premises, resources and facilities are appropriate to the total number of candidates enrolled and that they comply with the relevant Health and Safety legislation.
Access and Equal Opportunities Policies
The centre has implemented a policy which is non-discriminatory in terms of access to its provision and which ensures equal opportunities for all candidates to achieve awards.
Candidate Support
The centre has implemented an effective system of induction, guidance and support for its candidates' Appeals.
External Verification
The centre agrees to provide access to staff from SCOTVEC and from appropriate national agencies in the interests of the monitoring of national provision and national standards.
LEVEL II APPROVAL TO OFFER SPECIFIC AWARDS
For a centre which is already approved and which wants to enrol candidates for an award which it has not used before, approval to offer that award will be assessed against the following award-related criteria.
Resources
The centre assures the supply and availability of the resources necessary to support and assess candidates' achievement of the award's outcomes to the required performance criteria and in the appropriate range of settings.
Resources should include equipment, teaching/training material, availability of appropriate reference material and appropriate assessment material matched to the outcomes and performance criteria.
Staffing
The centre ensures that staff providing teaching/training and assessment are:
a
competent in the occupational area, at a level appropriate to the level of the award.
b
competent in the application and evaluation of the types of assessment relevant to the award.
c
familiar with the relevant procedures and documentation.
Evidence of (a) and (b) would be provided by the holding of a recognised qualification or by appropriate experience.
The centre has implemented effective systems for ensuring that consistent standards are applied to the evaluation of the candidates' work and that the standards comply with those specified in the unit/model.
The system should allow adequate opportunity for staff discussion and consultation, ensure that documentation and evidence required for External Verifiers' consideration are available in accordance with requirements and ensure that SCOTVEC results procedures are followed.
Copies of these criteria may be obtained by contacting the Validation Section in SCOTVEC.
THE QUALITY AUDIT
For SCOTVEC centres, the most obviously new feature of the Quality Framework is the regular audit which SCOTVEC will carry out on centres' internal quality systems.
Much effort is going into the development of this audit and one or two of its key features are described in this article.
SCOTVEC is also working to ensure that the audit which emerges will be compatible with developments elsewhere — for example with the Scottish Quality Management System being developed by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Island Enterprise.
The Quality Audit of a centre will take place at regular intervals, probably around every five years (unless either SCOTVEC or the centre triggers an earlier event.)
In addition to the full audit, the operation of a centre's internal quality systems will be informally monitored, for example, through the outcome of Verifier activity and through periodic contact with a quality auditor.
Personnel to carry out the Quality Auditor role are currently being identified: it is intended that they will be trained to IQA Lead Assessor standards.
The Quality Audit's main purpose is to look in detail at the centre's internal quality assurance system.
The scope of the audit will depend on how much devolved responsibility the centre has and is seeking.
For example, if a centre already has some devolved responsibility, the Quality Audit will look at the way in which the centre assures that the SCOTVEC criteria are being applied.
Both the system which has been set up to do this and the evidence of its operational effectiveness will be audited.
A satisfactory audit will lead to the confirmation of devolved responsibility as part of the Quality Contract.
Similarly, if extension of devolved responsibility is being sought, the Quality Audit will look at the system which the centre proposes to use to ensure that the appropriate SCOTVEC criteria will be applied: the operation in practice of the new devolved responsibility would be monitored and be reviewed at the next full audit.
SCOTVEC is now developing the documentation to underpin the auditing system.
For example, centres will get statements of the criteria which have to be applied — by SCOTVEC directly or by devolved centres — for each of the Quality Elements (validation, approval and verification).
With each of the sets of criteria will come guidelines which amplify the criteria and which indicate the evidence which Quality Auditors will need to see.
In addition, self-assessment checklists are being developed to assist centres to decide their readiness for devolved responsibility, and more general staff development material for centres is being looked at.
Before the summer, SCOTVEC will be contacting all centres to discuss the programme for Quality Audit visits.
The first audits will take place this autumn as part of a rolling programme which will eventually take in all centres.
Until a centre is audited, its current arrangements with SCOTVEC will continue.
Once key aspect which SCOTVEC will be discussing with centres will be the nature of the quality partnership being sought.
For example, centres will be invited to indicate how much devolved responsibility they want the audit to include.
There will also be the option of being audited as an individual centre (for example, a single college or training organisation) or as a network (for example , a group of neighbouring schools or a group of workplaces).
For networks, the Quality Audit will focus on the internal quality system to which all members will operate.
The SCOTVEC system will provide national audit criteria as benchmarks for centres' internal quality systems to be measured against and also as targets against which those systems can be developed.
For SCOTVEC, the start of the quality auditing system is a reflection of strong commitment to the delivery of quality in all centres and in all awards.
BS 5750: PART 2: 1987 QUALITY SYSTEMS
Articles on BS 5750 appear regularly in the educational and general press nowadays and there is a growing interest in the application of the British Standard to the service industries.
Like many other service sector organisations, SCOTVEC believes that BS 5750 has much to offer and has therefore embarked on the registration process as part of the Quality Development Programme.
This does not mean that SCOTVEC also expects centres to adopt BS 5750.
Initially, SCOTVEC commissioned a feasibility study to assess the relevance and benefits of applying the quality systems standard to SCOTVEC.
At an early stage, it was decided to define the scope of the quality system as the services of testing, quality assurance and certification of candidates.
Responsibility for these services lies in the Assessment Services Department; essential support services supplied by the Administration and Finance Department such as office services and computing have also been included within the scope of the quality system.
Staff information seminars and internal audit training sessions are under way and staff in the Assessment Services and Administration and Finance Departments are busy writing procedures in line with the requirements of BS 5750.
The procedures are being developed by building on existing good practice to ensure that the services offered by the departments within the quality system will be subject to continuous improvement.
Work is ongoing to develop the entire quality system against the requirements of BS 5750: Part 2: 1987.
SCOTVEC's ultimate goal is to become registered by a 3rd party certification body as an organisation of assessed capability.
As yet, no definite timescale for assessment by a certification body has been set.
Registration as an organisation of assessed capability will require an extensive audit of SCOTVEC's quality system by trained, impartial auditors.
As a result of the Quality Development Programme, therefore, SCOTVEC will be required to open its doors to auditors from an ‘awarding body’: an experience that many centres will recognise!
Standards and charters abound these days.
SCOTVEC's audit criteria, by building on existing good practice in centres, will make it easier for centre personnel to find their way through the maze.
Partnerships in quality between SCOTVEC and centres — and high-currency awards for our candidates — are the aims we are working towards.
FAST TRACK: PILOTING THE NEW QUALITY FRAMEWORK
In SCOTVEC's new Quality Framework, centres will be given the opportunity to take devolved responsibility for elements of quality assurance which are currently administered centrally by SCOTVEC.
These elements are:
approval to offer existing SCOTVEC units or awards
validation of new units or awards
external verification
One aspect of Quality Assurance which will not be devolved is the initial approval of a centre as a ‘SCOTVEC centre’.
This element will be retained centrally by SCOTVEC.
New patterns for External Verification are being developed but are being phased in gradually over a longer timescale.
Therefore responsibility for External Verification will remain with SCOTVEC for the time being.
To assist with the development of the necessary approval and validation criteria, procedures and documentation, it has been agreed that aspects of devolved responsibility should be piloted during session 1991/92.
Time is limited and the pilot has therefore been restricted to those centrally-funded institutions which have been audited (either by CNAA) or by degree-awarding institution) and which also have experience of offering SCOTVEC awards.
Two SCOTVEC officers, Colin Urie (Assistant Director), and Madeline Blakely (Development Officer), are managing the project.
Early last November, invitations were issued to 12 institutions to participate in the project.
Nine indicated that they were planning either to introduce or change SCOTVEC awards during the lifetime of the project and that they would be happy to permit SCOTVEC officers to observe their various internal quality assurance procedures as part of the pilot.
Gavin Ross, Vice Principal at The Robert Gordon's Institute of Technology, welcomes the pilot and said:
‘The Institute has built up considerable expertise in the quality control and quality assurance areas both prior to, and since, accreditation by CNAA in September 1989.
It does, however, see this area of activity as one of continuing development and is constantly striving to refine its expertise in this field.
SCOTVEC's intention to devolve more authority to RGIT is seen as a logical move in line with recent trends in higher education’.
At the Scottish College of Textile, Roger Wardman, Head of Quality Assurance said:
‘The College has a well-established quality assurance procedure which is fully documented in its Quality Assurance document’, he said, ‘In addition, it is able to call on academic staff with a wide variety of expertise in course development, particularly under the SCOTVEC Advanced Courses Development Programme’.
There are 2 broad aims of the pilot project.
Firstly, to test that the harmonised approval and validation criteria, designed to be used centrally by SCOTVEC, can operate smoothly within centres with established quality assurance systems and secondly, to observe internal quality systems in action.
Other centres anticipating the benefits that will arise from the partnership exercise are Napier Polytechnic and Glasgow Polytechnic.
Napier Polytechnic feel that the devolution pilot recognises the extensive expertise already present in the centre to ensure the quality of provision.
‘We expect’, said a spokesperson ‘that collaboration between ourselves and SCOTVEC officers will allow the criteria to be considered in a practical rather than theoretical manner and to highlight the importance of the range of monitoring processes, formal and informal, which operate in the time leading to the approval of a course’.
A spokesperson at Glasgow Polytechnic said ‘Glasgow Polytechnic will welcome the attendance of SCOTVEC Officers at any course validation or review event during the lifetime of the project, regardless of whether the event involves a SCOTVEC course.
We expect that such Officer involvement will lead to increased mutual understanding of the quality assurance ethos as practised by both Glasgow Polytechnic and SCOTVEC’.
SCOTVEC is optimistic that the aims of the Fast Track Pilot will be met and that much will be learned on both sides as a result of this co-operative venture between SCOTVEC and the centres.
For SCOTVEC, Colin Urie said:
‘So far the project has proved most illuminating.
Madeline and I will be kept very busy over the next months as we visit the pilot centres to attend key events in their validation or approval processes.
The level of support from all the centres involved has been most encouraging and we would like to record our thanks for the co-operation and hospitality, which we have received’.
A JOINT COMMITMENT TO QUALITY: THE WAY AHEAD
A joint statement recently issued by Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and SCOTVEC, details the intention to co-operate closely in ensuring that the various organisations involved in the delivery of training, work to agreed national standards.
The co-operation is founded on strong mutual interests, with each body sharing a commitment to training which:
is properly certificated with nationally recognised qualifications;
is relevant to current and anticipated employment demands;
maintains the highest standards.
Ronnie Cairns, Head of Standards at Scottish Enterprise, had this to say about the three organisations' joint commitment to quality:
‘The skills of any nation's workforce are crucial to its economic well-being.
These skills can only be developed by having a highly effective education and training system.
The Scottish system has many distinctive advantages and we must play to these strengths.
Our joint commitment on Quality Assurance will greatly assist that process and bring benefits to individuals and employers as well as enhancing the competitiveness of Scottish industry’.
Working together makes sense: not only does it ensure that duplication of effort is minimised, it addresses the need for a single, coherent, national system.
SE, HIE and SCOTVEC are committed to the pursuit of top quality training through a comprehensive system of quality assurance.
SCOTVEC Assessment UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 38 JUNE 1993
Support for professionals
Dennis Gunning, Director of SCOTVEC's Assessment Services, introduces this edition of Update
It is an inescapable fact that the professionalism of those who assess candidates for SCOTVEC awards is crucial to the credibility of the system and to the prospects of candidates.
We require all centres to take responsibility for assessment.
This means that the professionals who teach or train candidates also assess them.
It also ensures that all outcomes are covered by the assessments and are given the right emphasis, whether the assessment is knowledge-based or practical, achieved in the workplace or in a classroom.
To support centres, we provide advice and guidance on assessment.
We do this in a number of ways, including publications, development activities of SCOTVEC verifiers and services provided by our Training and Development Unit.
Recent publications included support material for schools delivering National Certificate Modules.
Amongst these was a Guide for Teachers which was sent to every secondary school teacher in Scotland.
We are now working on a second edition of our ‘bestseller’ Guide to Assessment which will be available later in the Summer.
Guidelines for centres on alternative routes to certification was also published in the last year and provides centres with advice on how to get the best out of the highly flexible assessment and certification system which SCOTVEC offers.
The Guidelines are described more fully in this edition of Update.
This Update also includes an article on the restructuring of the SCOTVEC verification system.
As well as verifying centres' assessments, our verifiers offer support and advice on assessment and other topics during their visits.
The new approach to assessment has been one of the most important changes in vocational education and training over the last ten years.
We hope that this Update will keep you abreast of the latest developments in assessment and related issues.
External verification: the harmonised approach
August 1992 marked the introduction of a new approach to external verification of SCOTVEC awards.
The previous systems evolved to meet quality assurance requirements of National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units and Workplace Assessed Awards and, therefore, contained three separate approaches to external verification.
Although there were similarities in these approaches, the procedural requirements of each type of award resulted in inconsistencies between the three systems.
We hope that the new external verification procedures incorporate the best features of the old systems and, in addition, offer a harmonised approach which centres will find helpful.
The strength of the previous external verification arrangements lay in the expertise and the flexibility of the three teams of external verifiers.
The system needed to be improved, however, to overcome the separation of these teams and the differences between three different sets of procedures.
The new harmonised approach has rationalised procedures for SCOTVEC awards in order to create one common external verification system.
There are obvious benefits to this streamlined system.
External verification is now operated on a cognate group basis, with over five hundred SCOTVEC external verifiers extending their experience, within the groups, across National Certificate Modules, Higher National Units and Workplace Assessed Awards.
Formerly, a centre offering these three types of SCOTVEC provision within one cognate area would have been visited by three different external verifiers.
Now, SCOTVEC verifiers work across all types of award, and make use of cognate group meetings to ensure that consistent standards are conveyed to centres.
We hope that communication between SCOTVEC and centres will be strengthened as a result of the subject-expert support of the external verifiers.
Consultation with centres on when and how verification visits will be organised takes place throughout the year.
Effective feedback is ensured through external verifier reports sent both to SCOTVEC and to the centre.
As well as offering rationalised procedures, cognate group verification and improved communications between SCOTVEC and centres, the new approach introduces a new type of verifier to the SCOTVEC team — the systems verifier.
Six systems verifiers are employed by SCOTVEC on a full-time basis.
The systems verifiers, who each have a wide experience of assessment and verification systems, visit centres to ensure that the internal quality systems required to underpin the delivery of SCOTVEC awards are in place in each centre.
The systems verifiers work closely with the external verifiers to ensure that centres receive support, both on subject issues (the external verifiers' responsibility) and on internal quality systems (the systems verifiers' responsibility).
SCOTVEC will be able to monitor quality systems within individual centres and ensure comprehensive verification of national standards within all SCOTVEC awards.
The new approach addresses the procedural weaknesses of the previous systems and builds on their strengths.
Together, external verifiers and systems verifiers can ensure that a flexible and centre-focused quality assurance service is available to centres while verification of national standards is maintained.
As part of our continuing review of quality systems, we are completing an evaluation of the way the new system has worked in the first year.
This evaluation takes into account the comments of the centre staff and the verifiers themselves.
We hope that the results of the evaluation will enable us to make further improvements in time for the start of the next session.
Alternative routes to certification
In July 1992, SCOTVEC published its new Guidelines for centres on alternative routes to certification.
These guidelines were developed to assist centres increase their use of three common alternative routes to accreditation — accreditation of prior learning (APL), credit transfer and assessment on demand.
The guidelines state the policy on alternative route schemes and clarify the procedures and systems needed to implement such schemes.
Credit transfer, or ‘exemption’ as it is sometimes called, has long been recognised as part of SCOTVEC's provision.
SCOTVEC is also at the forefront of the development of APL and has participated in nationally-funded projects with centres running pilot APL schemes.
APL is now part of SCOTVEC's mainstream activities.
Both APL and credit transfer rely on giving credit for previous experience.
In credit transfer, the previous experience is always attested by an award or certificate from an awarding body.
In APL, the previous experience is more varied and is therefore not usually supported by a certificate as the main evidence of competence.
However, the two routes are similar and often overlap.
For example, in credit transfer a certificate may need to be supported by a portfolio of evidence, while in APL some certification may be produced to support the portfolio.
In both cases, assessors may need to ensure current competence by means of assessment on demand.
Candidates may seek to gain credit towards SCOTVEC awards on the basis of:
previous SCOTVEC qualification
qualifications gained outwith the SCOTVEC system
learning gained through previous experience.
Such credit can be given to candidates provided that:
the candidate still has the knowledge and skills gained previously through experience or qualification
the knowledge and skills are matched to outcomes and performance criteria in SCOTVEC modules and units
sufficient evidence can be gathered to confirm current competence.
Changes to procedures
The development of the guidelines highlighted the need for two amendments to SCOTVEC procedures to ensure that there were no barriers to the use of alternative routes to certification.
The procedures involved relate to:
approval as an APL centre
changes to assessment instruments in National Certificate Modules.
The amended procedures came into force at the start of the new session.
New procedures
Centres wishing to offer certification by alternative routes are no longer required to seek separate approval from SCOTVEC.
Instead, they should refer to SCOTVEC's criteria for approval of a centre when setting up their systems and should discuss the systems that they intend to implement with their systems verifier.
Members of staff who wish to vary an assessment instrument in a National Certificate Module no longer require formal permission from SCOTVEC before doing so.
Of course it is essential that the alternative assessment instrument is valid, reliable and practicable and that its use is documented, but it is no longer necessary to ask for permission.
Documentation of the variation to the assessment will need to be presented to a visiting external verifier.
The module summary form could be used for this purpose.
When an assessment instrument is varied in a National Certificate Module for candidates with special needs, it would be helpful if brief details of the change could be sent to us.
This is to enable us to continue to build up a database on the application of our provision in response to special needs.
Any such details can be sent to 
Joint awards
SCOTVEC Updates 23 and 26, on the Quality Framework, stated that one of the intentions of the Quality Development Programme was to harmonise the criteria for quality assurance of SCOTVEC awards wherever possible.
This means that, in the main, all SCOTVEC awards are now approved, validated and verified to common quality assurance criteria.
There are occasions when SCOTVEC develops awards jointly with partner organisations.
In these situations, the partner's involvement may lead to variations in the operational aspects of the quality assurance of these awards.
SCOTVEC has established a new section to deal with the approval and external verification aspects of such awards.
This section is called Joint Awards and is part of the Quality Assurance Unit.
All of the following awards have quality assurance arrangements or procedures which differ from the norm.
The different arrangements are described in the information that the Joint Awards Section sends out to centres.
If your centre is offering one of these awards, you will be guided by the Joint Awards staff on the different procedures to be followed.
An update on the awards in this category can be obtained from  .
The systems verifiers at work
The six systems verifiers, who were appointed in August 1992 are carrying out their approval and verification duties in centres.
Although they have a base in Hanover House, they are rarely seen here as their workload of visits increases.
The six are .
Chris and Joe are probably known to many already because of their previous work with SCOTVEC as Field Officers.
Tony, Bob, Edna and Andrew all have extensive experience of training and teaching.
We hope that their experience of both SCOTVEC and centres will strengthen the systems verifier team and increase the support that we give to centres.
Allocation of systems verifiers to centres is along geographic lines.
We have notified all centres of the name of their systems verifier.
The person in the centre who is most likely to link up with the systems verifier is the SCOTVEC co-ordinator.
If SCOTVEC co-ordinators are in any doubt as to who their systems verifier is, they should consult the list opposite.
Contact between centres and systems verifiers is, of course, not restricted to visits alone.
The systems verifiers are at the end of a telephone and can be contacted by phoning the numbers below.
Because of their workload, they may not be immediately available but they all have telephone answering machines and will return all calls.
If you feel that you want to discuss a quality assurance issue at short notice, please ring your systems verifier.
Your query may be referred to a specialist SCOTVEC officer or it might be suggested that an external verifier should visit you.
However, your first resort in any query concerning the verification process should be your systems verifier.
Calling all internal verifiers
Internal verification is a crucial part of the SCOTVEC quality assurance system.
The staff who carry out internal verification must ensure that for each award good assessment instruments are available, that the assessors' judgments on candidates' work are objective, consistent and in line with the standards for the award, and that the appropriate procedures have been followed.
When planning internal verification, centres must bear in mind that staff carrying out the role must have the experience and background to enable them to be effective.
SCOTVEC's Quality Elements Criterion 5.1 asks that ‘Internal verifiers are appropriately qualified/experienced’.
One important aspect of this criterion, and its amplifying note, is that staff carrying out internal verification must be experienced in the award's occupational or subject area — experience or qualifications in the generic area of assessment is not enough.
Scotched myths
A new edition of the SCOTVEC Guide to assessment is currently under preparation.
It will cover the changes that have taken place in assessment since the original version was first published in 1988.
The guide will be available for the start of the new session in August 1993.
Some things do not change despite time.
Myths and rumours can still circulate about what SCOTVEC does not does not accept in terms of assessment.
Here are two such myths.
‘SCOTVEC's policy doesn't allow centres to use examinations to assess candidates.’
‘SCOTVEC requires every module/unit outcome to have its own separate assessment instrument.’
Use of examinations?
Written or oral exams and tests are allowed; they are a perfectly reasonable way of gathering evidence of candidate achievement for certain types of outcomes.
They are acceptable, for example, for gathering evidence of a candidate's knowledge and understanding — but they would not be acceptable for providing evidence of practical skills such as driving or welding.
In other words, SCOTVEC policy asks for the assessment to match the nature of the outcome or outcomes being assessed.
‘Will this assessment provide appropriate evidence of…’ is the key question — and if an exam or test can do so, fine!
Separate assessment instruments for each unit?
SCOTVEC does not require every module or unit outcome to have its own separate assessment instrument although we do require evidence of a candidate's achievement of every outcome.
However, we are very keen to encourage centres not to interpret this as meaning a separate assessment instrument for every outcome.
This would lead to fragmented, trivialised and over-frequent assessment.
We encourage centres to take opportunities to assess several outcomes in a module or unit — or even several outcomes from different modules or units — in the same assessment instrument.
So, for example, a single engineering project could provide evidence of a candidate's achievement in outcomes of specialist engineering and maths and problem solving and communication.
We are keen to promote the use of such integrated assessment.
The only points we need to reinforce are:
that the assessment task chosen (the project, in the above example) must provide identifiable evidence of the candidate's achievement in each outcome covered
that the candidate knows which outcomes or units are included in any assessment he or she is undertaking.
So, to summarise:
exams/tests are acceptable — if they provide evidence of a candidate's achievement which is appropriate for the outcome(s) being assessed,
we encourage centres to use integrative approaches to assessment in which a single assessment instrument can generate evidence across a range of outcomes.
If you have the feeling that other myths are circulating please contact us.
We will do our best to clear up any problems.
Anne Galloway, who is co-ordinating production of the new Guide to assessment will be happy to help.
Her number is .
STOP PRESS!
Certification for external verifiers
Since the arrival of the National standards for assessment and verification, it has been our intention to find ways of achieving certificates for our team of external verifiers.
A pilot assessment and certification exercise has been running between February and May.
The aim of the pilot is to test the systems which will have to be set up to put our external verifiers through the SCOTVEC unit, Verify the Assessment Process.
Centres approved to offer the unit were asked to tender for the pilot and Stevenson College, Anniesland College and QTAC, the business arm of Fife College, were selected to run it.
The three work as our assessment and certification partners and are each responsible for a group of 10 external verifiers.
All of the external verifiers selected to participate in the pilot have been through our induction training and have considerable experience in external verification.
They are mostly using a mixture of APL and assessment on demand to gain the award.
Once the pilot exercise is complete and the views of the three centres and the 30 guinea pigs have been considered, we hope to broaden the pilot into a regular continuous process with more centres setting up certification programmes for the rest of the 500-strong team of verifiers.
We are sure that the exercise will prove beneficial both to ourselves and to the individuals who undertake the unit.
Muriel Dunbar, Head of Quality Assurance said, ‘we have always had confidence in our external verifiers.
By putting them through the assessment and certification process we are demonstrating that confidence, as well as showing our commitment to quality assurance.