

SCOTVEC Advanced Courses DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME UPDATE
issue number 2 November 1988
Invitation to participate in pilot schemes for implementation in session 1989–90
The first issue of UPDATE brought readers up to date with the pilot schemes which were validated to commence in 1988 under the new arrangements.
The response from colleges greatly encouraged the Council and it was agreed that this part of the Development Programme should be continued by inviting colleges to participate in 1989 pilot schemes.
The Chief Executive wrote to all Directors of Education and Principals/Directors of colleges in late September extending such an invitation.
The Council will be particularly interested in pilot proposals which further enhance the Development Programme rather than simply duplicate the work of either the 1988 pilots or central developments planned to take place during session 1988–89.
If colleges decide to submit proposals for pilot courses and units in subject areas which are covered by central development, the proposals should complement the central development and address (i) to (iv) below.
Colleges submitting such proposals may, where appropriate, be invited to participate in the central development.
Given the response of colleges in session 1987–88 we anticipate that the Council will have to make a selection and, in inviting colleges to progress their proposals, will consider the extent to which proposals will:
i
offer enhanced opportunities for wider access and provide opportunities to extend credit transfer;
ii
articulate with other provisions e.g. National Certificate, degree programmes, the provision of professional bodies and industry/commerce;
iii
lead to recognition by and, or joint validation with, industry or professional bodies;
iv
develop units and courses, along the lines set out in the ‘Advanced Courses Development Programme — Policy Paper’(March 1988) incorporating the concepts of competence based assessment.
The selection of appropriate pilot courses and units will allow SCOTVEC to investigate and refine approaches to course and unit design, assessment, conditions of award, credit transfer, validation models and the interrelationship of these.
Colleges wishing to participate were asked to indicate their intention by submitting a ‘Request for Approval in Principle to Participate in the 1989 Pilot Programme’(Form HN1).
The closing date for submissions was 7 November 1988.
Although it is appreciated that the timescale for submission was fairly short, this was  necessary in order to sequence all the other steps in the validation process.
All pilot proposals will be evaluated as to the contribution they will make to the Development Programme and, in the case of colleges without a Validation Procedures Agreement (for details of this see UPDATE 1), proposals will be considered by Scrutiny Panels set up by SCOTVEC.
Decisions on selection for development to full validation will be intimated by 31 December 1988 to all colleges submitting Form HN1.
The closing date for the submission of full validation documentation is 28 February 1989.
We look forward to telling you the outcome of this invitation in due course.
Centrally developed courses: implementation
As part of the Advanced Courses Development Programme, SCOTVEC decided to take the lead in developing HN Units in a number of occupational areas, particularly those in which a large number of colleges offer courses.
As indicated in UPDATE 1, the broad subject areas which have been given priority for development during the 1988–89 session are:
Computing
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Catering and Hotel Management
Management/Finance
The development work in these subject areas is being carried forward by teams of National Development Officers, seconded from colleges.
It has not proved straightforward to obtain the services of appropriate staff, and although work has now commenced in each of the areas mentioned, it is difficult to predict when development will be complete and thus give a firm date as to when information will be available to allow colleges to plan for the introduction of new courses in session 1989–90.
We have therefore decided that colleges may continue to recruit students to all existing courses for session 1989–90 and this information was confirmed in a letter from the Chief Executive to Directors of Education and Principals/Directors of colleges at the end of October.
However, we know that some colleges will be anxious to take advantage of the greater flexibility and relevance of the new-style courses as soon as possible and SCOTVEC is still confident that substantial progress can be made in the current session in the development centrally of the new style course material.
It should therefore be possible for some colleges, particularly those whose staff have played a substantial role in the development, to use the material produced and offer new courses based on HN Units in session 1989–90.
If a college is particularly interested in mounting any of the new courses in session 1989–90, becoming involved in the Programme would be an excellent way to keep abreast of developments.
The Chief Executive has already written to the Principals/Directors of colleges inviting nominations for seconded National Development Officers and a further letter relating to this will be sent out in the near future.
Any enquiries relating to centrally developed courses may be directed to the NDOs with responsibility for the area in questions, who will be pleased to keep colleges informed on progress.
Single college courses
A significant number of the HNCs and HNDs within the SCOTVEC provision are offered by one college only.
The question then arises as to whether there should be central development of such courses and there are two factors which have an important bearing on this decision.
The first relates to the desirability of undertaking central development work where only one college is involved.
Given that part of the rationale behind the ACDP is the devolution of responsibility to colleges, one could make the case that the specialist nature of these courses makes it very desirable that colleges should undertake the main part of the development work, in partnership with the Council and the commercial organisations served by the course.
The second factor in coming to a decision relates to resourcing.
It is unlikely that, given the current level of resources, both financial and human, the Council would be in a position to initiate central development of these courses in the near future, and it would therefore be some time before they would be incorporated into the new style provision.
We are very much aware that initiatives involving major revisions of the curriculum have significant resource implications for institutions as well as for SCOTVEC and, for this reason, we have decided that a phased introduction would be appropriate for the revision of advanced courses.
However, we are equally conscious that some colleges may find the pace of development too slow for their needs and are concerned to explore ways in which some of the aims of the Programme might be accelerated for those colleges which wish to develop their provision rapidly.
Where courses are offered at only one teaching centre, it would be possible to make significant progress by initially devolving responsibility for assessment only to the college, while maintaining for the time being central control of the course content.
Some advantages of such a strategy would be:
the college would have fill control of the timing of examinations/assessments, thus introducing a degree of flexibility not feasible in the present system;
the college could, if desired, offer a resit facility to suit its own particular requirements;
the opportunity for the development of staff and of college procedures should prove invaluable as a preparation for the more extensive devolution of responsibility implicit in the Development Programme.
The Chief Executive wrote on 1 September 1988 to colleges offering courses which would be appropriate for this type of development and a number have expressed interest.
Discussions have been initiated and we hope that agreement will be reached with several colleges to devolve responsibility to them in 1989.
NDO profile: Bill Morton (Accounting)
My introduction to the Advanced Courses Development Programme was in the form of SCOTVEC's Consultative Paper which arrived at the College early in 1987.
This was the first hard evidence that a change in the advanced courses was on the way although, ever since the development at National Certificate level, it had been assumed that a major change in the advanced level would follow in due course.
To someone accustomed by the existing advanced accounting courses, with no involvement in the National Certificate, the proposals seemed somewhat revolutionary and the document generated a good deal of discussion over the following few weeks on the relative merits of the B1 and B2 models etc.
Gradually, such considerations took a back seat as the day to day business of the college continued, with the interviewing of applicants to courses, the organising of new classes etc, and the new session started off much as before.
However, when the opportunity arose to participate in the Programme as a SCOTVEC National Development Officer, the changes began again to figure fairly prominently.
Being by nature fairly cautious and sometimes reluctant to adapt to change, I was at first somewhat bemused by an array of unfamiliar terms — competence elements, HN units, performance criteria.
I was fortunate to join three other NDOs, Messrs, Bannatyne, Fielding and Laurie, who had been in post for several months, involved in assessment, validation and regulations pertaining to pilot courses.
Their approach was enthusiastic, good humoured and at times irreverent and they all made me feel very much at home.
My main remit was to coordinate the central development of advanced accounting courses and units.
It had been decided that while certain HN units and courses should be developed by colleges, SCOTVEC would undertake to develop HN units and courses particularly in those areas where a significant number of colleges were invited or where units of wider application could be identified.
All units, whether college or centrally developed, should contain a broad statement of the area covered by the unit, the preferred entry level, a statement of the competences required,(a competence can be defined as the ability to perform tasks in employment) and the criteria by which competence can be assessed.
Each unit would also have a credit value based on its notional design length and, in addition, the centrally devised units would in some cases have guidance on curriculum content and context, appropriate teaching and learning strategies and assessment procedures and instruments.
Before work on the units could be started, it was necessary to review the existing advanced accounting provision and to examine the requirements of the jobs likely to be filled by HNC and HND holders.
There was a period of consultation with employers, professional accounting bodies and colleges.
Apart from skills in accounting, mathematics and communications, employers stressed the need for knowledge and skills in the use of computers and business software.
The professional bodies gave a positive response to the Development Programme although requiring more detailed information on the exact nature and content of the HN units before giving their final decision regarding exemption policy.
The visits to the colleges provided a much wider perspective on the provision of accounting courses as opposed to the narrow single college viewpoint.
A wide range of colleges was visited, both CIs and FE colleges, all at various stages of development, each one listing different sets of priorities for the new courses.
I was warmly welcomed in all cases and an enthusiastic and positive attitude prevailed although mixed with understandable anxiety concerning the radical changes proposed.
The consultation process culminated in the Seminar on the Advanced Accounting Provision held on 7 October at Hanover House which was extremely well attended by accounting lecturers and other interested parties.
This meeting generated a great deal of lively discussion and useful feedback.
The task of reviewing the existing structure was made much less onerous due to the fact that a working party had already been set up by SCOTVEC under the chairmanship of Principal Huckle of Kirkcaldy College of Technology to review the advanced accounting course provision.
I was able to benefit greatly from the work already completed by this group and by the advice and encouragement which they provided.
Proceeding side by side with the consultative process was the development of an exemplar of an HN unit in the general area of accounting.
of the Curriculum Advice and Support Team (CAST) at Jordanhill College of Education is a member of the Advanced Courses Task Group and was closely involved in the HN unit development, producing first of all a unit in the field of engineering.
With his support and encouragement I took my first somewhat unsteady steps towards the production of a unit in financial accounting.
As I had only very limited experience in writing in output terms, the process was exacting and extremely slow progress was made initially.
However, in the end, the experience gained was well worthwhile and the results confirmed that the application of the competence based approach to higher levels of accounting is a feasible proposition.
As a result of the consultative process, several key areas have emerged as being appropriate for developing as HN units for Accounting courses, areas such as financial accounting, management accounting, computing, law, economics, management and mathematics.
The next step in the process will be the appointment of subject specialists to write one or more units in each of these areas which will form the basis of the new accounting courses.
It is hoped that at least some units will be available for introduction in session 1989–90.
Certain of these units will be regarded as core units, requiring to be completed as part of the course, other units being options, the student being able to select those units which would be best suited to his/her own particular needs.
For example, a unit might be selected to develop a particular skill for employment or to gain a subject exemption from the examinations of a professional body.
The colleges will be able to produce their own units perhaps to meet a specific local need.
The role of the NDO throughout this stage will be to monitor the progress of the unit writing, arrange for the meeting of writers to discuss common problems and review each other 's work, arrange for feedback from representatives of interested parties such as employers and college staff and to negotiate with professional bodies vis-a-vis recognition of the units and courses.
There is no doubt that major changes are underway in higher education involving a substantial degree of devolution to the colleges for course design and assessment.
The central development of courses and units will assist this process, as not only will HN unit exemplars be made widely available but also the experience and staff development received by NDOs and Unit Writers at SCOTVEC will be extremely valuable and will be put to good use by their respective colleges.
graduated from the University of Strathclyde in 1965 with a B.A. (Hons) in Commerce and became a Member of the Association of Certified Accountants in 1971.
Between 1965 and 1981 he was employed in the textile industry as an accountant, company secretary, and, latterly, Financial Director.
Since 1981, Bill has been based at Bell College of Technology in Hamilton, working initially as a lecturer, before being promoted to the post of Senior Lecturer.
He has been a SCOTVEC examiner since 1984 and is involved with SCOTVEC's Advanced Accounting courses, and in the teaching of Professional Accounting and Banking courses.
Staff development
A crucial issue highlighted in the responses to the Consultative Paper of 1987 and reiterated frequently since then is the fundamental importance of effective staff development.
SCOTVEC has devoted a substantial amount of time to debating how staff development might proceed and set up an ad hoc group to undertake more detailed discussions.
The group's remit was:
i
to consider general issues relating to staff development in the ACDP;
ii
to identify specific target groups and their training needs;
iii
to suggest methods of meeting the identified needs.
The group identified a number of needs, including information dissemination, validation, preparation of course documentation, writing competences and units and assessment techniques.
Action has already been taken to meet some of the needs identified.
For example, we have already held a seminar for administrative staff in colleges mounting 1988 pilots (a short account of this event follows this article).
The publication of UPDATE is part of the information dissemination strategy and a number of SCOTVEC staff have spoken to groups of college staff about the ACDP.
At the end of November, NDOs, SCOTVEC Officers and outside consultants will participate in a three day workshop to provide training and develop guidelines in writing competences.
We are aware that this is not an easy task for colleges to undertake and we hope to provide assistance for those colleges which are selected to develop pilot proposals for full validation.
Workshops on several of the other issues identified above are planned for early 1989.
In addition, SCOTVEC will be giving consideration to establishing an ACDP Staff Development Forum early in 1989.
We would be very pleased to discuss any aspect of staff development and in the first instance contact should be made with   the Administrative Officer with responsibility for this area of our work.
Spreading the news
Registrars and Examinations Officers of colleges participating in the 1988–89 Pilot Programme attended a presentation at Napier Polytechnic of Edinburgh in early November.
Although principally intended as a launch for the new operation procedures, the occasion afforded administrative staff an opportunity to hear about the history and purpose of the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
The event was well attended attracting delegates from as far afield as Thurso and Skye.
College staff were invited to take an active part in helping SCOTVEC to develop the new operating procedures — a proactive role for colleges is seen as essential to the introduction of efficient, easy to use systems.
The new procedures were well received by the delegates who took full advantage of the opportunity to clarify the administrative details relating to the Pilot Courses.
A number of constructive suggestions were made which have led SCOTVEC to refine the system proposed for 1988–89.
The presentation was such a success that SCOTVEC intends to organise similar events for other groups of college staff at venues around Scotland.
Future events will form an integral part of the drive to publicise the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
Joint CNAA/SCOTVEC Statement
The following statement which relates to the articulation of CNAA degree courses and SCOTVEC advanced courses has recently been issued jointly by the two councils.
Articulation between SCOTVEC HNC/HND courses and CNAA degree courses
1.
CNAA and SCOTVEC are currently discussing collaboration on a number of educational issues with a view to:
i
establishing more clearly defined relationships between the awards of the two Councils;
ii
facilitating the development of linked courses of various kinds;
iii
promoting a wider acceptance and implementation of schemes of credit accumulation and transfer.
2.
CNAA and SCOTVEC have agreed in principle that, where an institution wishes to propose a package of linked courses leading to awards of SCOTVEC and CNAA, it may ask to have the package jointly validated by SCOTVEC and by CNAA (in the case of a CNAA associated institution) or by SCOTVEC and by itself (in the case of a CNAA accredited institution).
Officers of the two Councils will be pleased to enter into discussion with institutions on arrangements for the joint validation of specific proposals.
3.
The following guidelines describe the general framework within which proposals should be formulated:
i
Where the degree course and the HNC/HND course have not been designed to be integral with each other, students seeking entry to the degree course on the basis of the HNC/HND will normally need to take two further academic years of full-time study for a Degree and three further academic years of full-time study for an Honours Degree (or the part-time equivalents).
However, a student who has performed outstandingly well in the HNC/HND examinations or has taken a combination of units particularly well matched with the requirements of the degree course may be considered for exemption from appropriate parts (normally up to half) of the second-year (or the part-time equivalent) of the degree course.
Under CNAA's regulations institutions also have discretion to admit students direct to the beginning of the third year of a degree course (or the equivalent part-time stage).
However, HND/HNC students should not be admitted unless they have satisfactorily completed assessments equivalent to those required for progression from the second to the third year of degree course (or the equivalent part-time stage).
ii
Where the degree course and the HNC/HND course are designed to form a continuous integrated programme and where students by the end of the second year or the equivalent stage have not only achieved the SCOTVEC award but also satisfied the objectives and reached the standard required by CNAA for that stage of a degree course, students may take one further academic year of full-time study for a Degree and two further academic years of full-time study for an Honours Degree (or the part-time equivalents).
(Note: The relationship between an HNC and HND can vary depending on the subject area.
The guidance given in section 3 assumes a broad equivalence between an HNC (together with associated work experience) and the corresponding HND award.
Where this assumption is invalid the credit given for the possession of an HNC would be less than that stated.)
4.
The extend to which HNC/HND courses and degree courses can be integrated while still satisfying their own particular objectives is likely to vary from one subject area to another.
However, institutions may put forward proposals for fully integrated courses in any subject areas where they believe that a case can be made.
5.
Both Councils have endorsed the principles of credit accumulation as a valid means of gaining their awards.
Discussions are taking place to establish a credit transfer agreement.
SCOTVEC's new validated courses section
The moves towards devolution of assessment to colleges will have a great effect on the work of the SCOTVEC Assessment Department's Advanced Courses Unit.
Much of the Unit's current work is involved in setting, checking, distributing and marking the examination papers: almost 1100 different papers are set every year.
With the new Advanced Courses, the work of the unit will shift towards the management of quality assurance mechanisms and the development of their supporting staff development, administrative and financial systems.
With the certification of 1988–9 pilots due next year, the first steps now have to be taken to move towards the new assessment procedures.
A new Validated Courses Section has therefore been set up in the Advanced Courses Unit of the Assessment Department: its initial tasks will be:
i
to make arrangements for quality assurance and certification of the 1988–9 pilots;
ii
to organise training for external assessors involved in 1988–9 pilots;
iii
to participate in discussions with colleges on devolution of assessment of single-college courses.
The new section will be headed by , supported by an Administrative Officer — yet to be appointed — and Clerical Officer,.
Although the section will be relatively small to start with (because the number of students involved in pilots is only a small proportion of all those taking Advanced Courses), over the next few years more staff will move across from traditional examination work to work on quality assurance as the number of students in validated courses grows larger.
As a consequence of  's move, her previous remit for Technology subjects will be taken by , who is also in charge of Science subjects.
The Unit has been set up to help colleges offering Pilot Courses: we hope that you will make use of it.
The new Assessment Department structure is summarised in the diagram.
STAFFING NEWS
As indicated above, we have now set up a Validated Courses Section within the Assessment Department and  () is heading this.
We are also pleased to welcome two new Word Processor Operators to the ACDP Unit:, who has worked with the Council for some time, first of all in General Office Services and latterly in the Assessment Department; and , who comes with first hand knowledge of Advanced Courses, having recently completed an HNC in Secretarial Studies at Motherwell College.
National Development Officers currently in post are:
SCOTVEC Advanced Courses DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME UPDATE
issue number 3 February 1989
Strong support for Phase 2
SCOTVEC is delighted by the response of centres to Phase 2 of the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
The number of proposals for Pilot Schemes is more than double that for Phase 1 and the standard of the initial submissions is encouraging.
Many new and innovative subject areas are included.
37 centres have submitted requests for permission in principle to run Pilot Schemes.
These include proposals for new Higher National Diplomas, Higher National Certificates and Higher National Units.
In total 146 submissions have been received compared with 59 for Phase 1.
The proposals cover a broad range of vocational areas.
Public and Business Administration, 38% of submissions, is the largest category; followed by Technology 25% and Science 14%.
We are pleased to see that Construction, which did not feature in Phase 1, is strongly represented at 11%.
The other submissions are from Life Science 7% and from Agriculture and Food Science 5%.
The increase in submissions is fairly uniform across all subject areas.
Using the six subject areas adopted for grouping the Council's previous provision the diagram below compares the responses for Phases 1 and 2.
These initial submissions were considered by the Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee.
The Sub-Committee examined the contribution which each proposal made to the Development Programme and the extend to which it met the Council's stated objectives for Phase 2 Pilots.
It ascertained that centres had formally sought Scottish Education Department and, where applicable, Local Authority approval, and also considered the resource implications both for the Council and for the presenting centres.
On this basis the Sub-Committee selected the set of submissions for further development to Phase 2, and in some cases gave guidance on the approach to be adopted.
For example, when different colleges came up with similar proposals, it was suggested that they might co-operate in the development work.
If a centre has a Validation Procedures Agreement with the Council the progress of its submissions after their approval by the Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee is as prescribed by that agreement.
Submissions from centres without Agreements are considered by Scrutiny Panels whose members are knowledgeable in the subject areas involved.
The Scrutiny Panel takes advice from various sources including National Development Officers, Her Majesty's Inspectorate and Council Officers.
It may accept a submission with or without qualification, or it may recommend that it should be not proceeded with in the current session.
The Scrutiny Panels for Phase 2 have now completed their work and centres have been notified of the decisions taken.
Each entre whose initial submission was accepted by the Scrutiny Panel has been invited to prepare a more detailed submission to reach SCOTVEC by 28 February 1989.
The detailed submissions will be considered by Validation Panels composed of members from industry and education (including the centre concerned).
A Validation Panel considers the acceptability of a proposed Course or Unit from both of these viewpoints and makes its recommendations to SCOTVEC.
Staff Development
The changes introduced by the implementation of the Advanced Courses Development Programme have created an increased need for staff development for college staff and also for the Council's own staff.
The ultimate success of the Programme will depend on the widespread knowledge and understanding of the Council's procedures and philosophy.
In achieving this SCOTVEC will rely on the assistance of many other bodies, including Her Majesty's Inspectorate, Local Authorities, Professional and Industrial Bodies and the School of Further Education.
It is also anticipated that the Curriculum Advice and Support Team will play an important role.
It is vital, therefore, that staff development is recognised as an integral part of the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
SCOTVEC has started the development process for its own staff and has prepared an outline programme to meet the other staff development needs which have been identified.
A meeting for College Registrars has already been held (see Update No. 2).
SCOTVEC's team of National Development Officers (NDOs) working on the central development of Higher National Units attended a three-day Workshop on Competence at the end of November.
The Workshop aimed to assist the participants in:
a
writing in competence terms within their occupational area;
b
understanding the role of knowledge and understanding and how it fits into the competence model;
c
evaluating the nature and sufficiency of assessment evidence;
d
evaluating competence statements.
After three very intensive days under the leadership of Lindsay Mitchell, ex Manager of SCOTVEC's research project on Competency Testing and now employed by Barbara Shelborn Associates, the NDOs left the Workshop to develop their skills by writing Higher National Units in their own occupational areas.
SCOTVEC will arrange appropriate follow up training sessions for the NDOs.
Other workshops for college staff participating in the pilots are also being organised.
Plans are well advanced to hold two-day Workshops for staff of colleges invited to progress their Pilot Proposals to Stage 2.
The themes of these Workshops will be ‘The preparation of course documentation’ and ‘Preparation for Validation’.
The first Workshop will start on 31 January and continue on a day at the beginning of March.
On the first day of each Workshop, participants will work through a series of case studies and discussion groups will consider the preparation of course documentation.
On returning to college this will assist them and their fellow course team members to finalise their own Stage 2 submission(s) prior to forwarding these to SCOTVEC by 28 February 1989.
On the second day of the Workshop those who attended the first meeting will return to participate in activities which will assist in preparing for their own course validation event.
Consideration is also being given to running workshops on the internal quality assurance mechanisms which colleges will be required to develop.
Full details of these workshops and meetings will be circulated to colleges as soon as arrangements are finalised.
As will all aspects of the Development Programme we are always glad to receive suggestions on appropriate staff development activities.
Validation Procedures Reviewed
SCOTVEC considers the validation of courses and units to be a vital element in maintaining confidence in its new advanced awards and it is monitoring the process closely.
The first indications are that the pilot procedures adopted are proving satisfactory.
One of the objectives of the first phase of pilot schemes was to test the validation procedures.
During the summer and autumn of 1988 views from a wide variety of sources were collated by National Development Officers and a report was prepared for the Council's Task Group.
This consideration has resulted in continuation of the same procedures with some minor modifications for the second phase of pilot schemes.
The validation arrangements used in the Development Programme are based on those devised by the Council for the small number of college-developed courses which it inherited from predecessor bodies.
They are centred around the ‘validation event’ at which a panel representing industry and education meets with college staff.
It will not be possible to say whether validation has been effective in ensuring that the Council's courses are truly fulfilling their aims until the first graduates start entering industry but we have already started to review the operation of the validation process.
This is a summary of the arrangements which were adopted for the Phase 1 Pilots, a statement of the impressions which have been collected of their operation and an outline of the interim conclusions which have been reached.
Validation arrangements
SCOTVEC believes that colleges should have the maximum delegated authority which is compatible with the Council's responsibility to maintain nationally recognised standards and two schemes for validation were applied for Phase 1 Pilots.
If colleges were experienced in validation and had developed acceptable validation procedures, the Council made Validation Procedures Agreements with them which enabled them to take responsibility for the organisation of validation for their own pilot schemes.
The validation of schemes for the remaining colleges was organised by the Council.
At Council organised validation events the validation panel membership was approved by the Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee and typically it consisted of:
a member of the Council's Advanced Courses Committee;
a member of the appropriate Sector Board;
an industrial or professional specialist;
a college representative;
a SCOTVEC officer and an SED assessor.
In the case of college organised events a SCOTVEC officer attended and the Council nominated a member of the Advanced Courses Committee and an industrial or professional specialist.
Whether organised by the Council or by a college most ‘major events’ had a broadly similar programme:
In the case of ‘minor events’ which were arranged to cope with less complex proposals the programme was similar but scaled down to take only half a day.
The Guidelines issued by SCOTVEC to panel members explained that the main purpose of a validation event was not to scrutinise in detail the documentation but rather to use the information provided to enable an informed discussion about the proposal to take place.
Comments received
In appraising the validation process, college principals, panel members, National Development Officers and SCOTVEC staff were invited to comment.
The response was encouraging and helpful in pointing to detailed improvements which could be introduced.
In general the quality of discussion and level of participation were highly praised but in some cases it was thought that staff, who were unfamiliar with validation, were unsure of their role in the event.
For example detailed analysis of the proposal and close questioning of the course team was occasionally misinterpreted as criticism.
The purpose and remit of the panel should, therefore, be made explicit to colleges and it was recommended that this be addressed by colleges and the Council as part of staff development.
Some panel members felt that time spent in discussion of the documentation led to a tight schedule and that this might have been avoided by an additional private meeting on the evening or day before the event.
It was also suggested that either or both of the following procedures might be followed:
i
a subject specialist with industrial or professional expertise, who was not a panel member, would prepare detailed comments on the documentation for circulation to panel members and the course team prior to the validation event.
ii
panel members would highlight issues of interest and submit comments on the documentation to the SCOTVEC officer and, or, panel chairman.
The main points for debate could then be circulated to panel members and the course team before the event.
The adequacy of the time provided for discussion at Validation Events will be monitored closely during the validation of Phase 2 Pilots and the experience gained over both pilots will contribute to the framework established for the post Pilot stage.
Documentation
SCOTVEC documentation was generally well received and welcomed by panel members and college staff.
College documentation, however, drew a wide variation in comment from ‘poor’ to ‘commendable’.
Panel members said that, when awards were intended to articulate with degrees, a copy of the degree course documentation or a diagram indicating clearly the scope and nature of articulation would have been helpful.
Since these observations were received, SCOTVEC and CNAA have agreed that joint Validation Events may be held (see Update No. 2) and it is hoped that this will avoid problems of this kind arising.
At least one panel member thought that an exemplar set of papers should be produced by SCOTVEC to show what was required, but others felt that an exemplar might be seen by colleges as a check list, and that close adherence to it could stifle initiative and innovation.
It has, therefore, been decided not to produce an exemplar in the meantime.
No pattern in the standard of submissions was discernible.
Prior involvement in course validation did not seem to be a major factor.
Some without experience of validation were praised for the high standard and clarify of their documentation.
Personnel
In many cases panel members had little or no previous experience of validation but they showed a high level of commitment and were in general well prepared.
It was, however, felt that there was a need to stress that the college representative was a full participating member of the panel.
The balance of panel membership was sometimes questioned and there is a need for careful selection of members to ensure an adequate complement of expertise.
This is particularly necessary in innovative or highly specialised subject areas.
It is also necessary, in areas where student members are small, to select experts who are seen to be neutral and do not have a conflict of interest with the college.
The appointment and role of the panel chairman emerged as a key issue.
The chairman was chosen from members of the panel, other than the SCOTVEC officer and SED assessor, by SCOTVEC or the college, whichever body organised the event.
Some comments suggested that the chairman should always be external to the college involved.
This is an issue which will be monitored during the validation of Phase 2 Pilots.
The quality of chairmanship was regularly praised and never questioned.
Panel members commented on the skill displayed in handling difficult issues.
Most comments expressed satisfaction with the backup provided by SCOTVEC officers at validation events.
One response suggested that proper training of college staff in validation procedures might dispense with the need for a SCOTVEC officer but in general their support and guidance was welcomed.
Future Validation
The validation procedures for the first pilot phase are being continued with minor modification for the second phase.
The procedures for validating centrally developed courses and units, and also those for courses developed by consortia are being developed on a similar basis.
These procedures will all be subject to a further critical examination when the Phase 2 validation is completed.
As with all aspects of the Advanced Courses Development Programme comments from users are welcomed and will contribute to the evolution of the system which is eventually adopted.
Assessment Devolution
SCOTVEC has written to colleges reminding them of the availability of a devolved system of assessment for awards for which only one college provides the course.
As was reported in Update 2 (November 1988), this transfer of quality assurance by the appointment of External Course Assessors and retention of control of course content by SCOTVEC is in line with the Council's policy of gradually devolving more responsibility to colleges.
It gives colleges freedom to decide on the timing of assessment and the provision of resits.
It also provides staff with experience in the development of assessment procedures, and this experience should be valuable preparation for the more extensive devolution of responsibility which is envisaged by the Council.
Colleges which did not respond last autumn to SCOTVEC's invitation to discuss the future arrangements for single college awards are now being reminded of the possibility for change in a letter to the Principals.
Tom Drake or Anne Galloway of the Assessment Department will be happy to discuss any aspect of the college's assumption of responsibility for assessment or to give information on the systems which other centres are adopting.
We feel that this may be helpful to Principals in deciding the appropriate action to take within their own colleges.
A NEWER HIGHER NATIONAL DIPLOMA IN OFFICE STUDIES
The new course in Office Studies was launched in Autumn 1988.
It replaces the previous provision in Secretarial Studies and subsumes three interwoven courses: the HNC in Office Studies, the HND in Office Studies and the HND in Office Studies with Languages.
It is the result of a three-year development programme, undertaken by the Department of Office Administration, which aimed to turn the highly successful SCOTVEC Secretarial Courses into a progressive, integrated and equally attractive course provision which would meet the demands of the 1990s.
This involved an attempt to accurately define the organisational and administrative needs of business over the next decade and, within this context, to draw up a taxonomy of secretarial skills suitable for this environment.
This latter aspect was greatly hampered by the discovery from our research that there was  an endemic misinterpretation of the term ‘secretarial’ in many areas of business management.
Recruitment personnel agreed that there was a need for an attitudinal change in this area of business and suggested that educational establishments had a responsibility to help achieve this.
The need, then, was to design a portfolio of courses which would provide continuing opportunities to those entering the secretarial/administrative field.
Today's office technologies and open network architectures radically affect traditional organisational boundaries in the office sector, bringing a horizontal and vertical integration of the work of management and support staff.
The structure of the course in Office Studies reflects those changes and needs.
The objective of the course provision is to produce office professionals who can make extensive use of technology but who are able to accept responsibility and operate heuristically as well as technically within organisational systems.
Course Structure
Students who obtain passes in the first year subjects but do not intend to complete the HND may apply for the award of the HNC.
Students are required to undertake a period of at least six weeks' relevant business-orientated work experience between Years I and II.
This can be undertaken in Britain or abroad.
The Core
The core subjects are directed towards providing the communication and information systems for modern business operations.
The teaching approach in these subject areas is designed to go far beyond the basic development of psycho-motor skills.
The skills in typewriting which were once achieved by intense practice, are now largely embodied in technology.
In Year I of the core subject of Information Systems, therefore, emphasis is given to creating within the student the facility for gathering information efficiently, analysing it systematically and acting on it effectively using clear, concise communication techniques.
Office Management I provides the theoretical framework to allow students to respond to direction and to operate within the necessary constraints of the organisational environment.
Year II of the core subjects is designed to develop the first year taxonomy of skills at a problem-solving and decisional level and to provide an integrative view of the office environment.
Particular attention is paid to personal inter-relationships and the relationships between people and technology, this preparing Diplomates to activate administrative support for any management function within the increasingly transparent organisation of the 1990s.
Students are encouraged to apply analytical and diagnostic skills to the information-related problems which are likely to be encountered at the interface of Personal Assistant, Office Supervisory and Middle Management levels, thus enhancing their ability to work in an interactive role in team situations.
Work, at this level, becomes greatly affected by the new type of vertical integration which demands that knowledge workers manage or monitor their own activity to a much greater extent.
Throughout the course, emphasis is put upon this aspect.
It is developed by the use of specific learning and teaching modes such as integrated practical packages, group work, case studies and workshop sessions.
Administrative support posts are becoming increasingly attractive to men and this broader approach to the core subjects opens up the market of applicants to both sexes who wish to work as part of the executive office management team.
The Options
The range of options offered at Napier contributes to the breadth of course curriculum and provides a necessary flexibility in choice of subjects studied.
These syllabuses have been developed as far as possible in common with the HND in Business Studies.
This allows a wider range of options to be offered as well as a better use of available resources.
Careful selection of Options enables the Certificand and the Diplomate to achieve a suitable personal profile in terms of future career plans.
Also, opportunity is provided for direct articulation with the faculty degree programmes for those who wish to study to degree and Honours degree level.
By accepting that there is a market and career structure for the Administrative Assistant as well as the Shorthand Secretary, it is possible to treat Shorthand as an optional subject rather than as a major core element.
It is also possible to offer a number of levels of shorthand attainment.
In the study of Languages, the pronounced use of interactive techniques underpins the necessity to understand and manipulate the syntax that forms the basis of the language.
In this way, communication is enhanced in written and oral modes to develop the expertise needed to work in an international office environment.
At the same time, lectures, videos and discussions are used to broaden the students' knowledge of the sociopolitical aspects of the target language area.
Admission to the Course and the Award of Credits
Admission to the course is on a negotiated basis but entry requirements normally include successful completion of modular programmes, passes in SCE and GCE examinations or other equivalent qualifications.
Students accumulate credits in individual subjects which they study, either out of interest or because they wish to obtain the award of a Group Certificate or Diploma.
Formal certification is provided for subject credits.
This allows greater access to the programme i.e. part-time study by associate students.
So where are we now?
The first year of the pilot programme is still incomplete.
The course team, headed by the Course Co-ordinator, maintains that involvement in the course has been exciting, incredibly demanding, sometimes excessively demoralising but in summation, a most rewarding experience.
The course has settled down but course organisation has not always gone smoothly.
We underestimated the amount of counselling required to ensure that students choose appropriate options.
Timetabling difficulties were more acute than anticipated, being caused especially by the involvement of such a large variety of equipment and software.
The preparation of good quality, innovative and integrated course materials for case study and workshop sessions is still hugely demanding of staff time.
But the successes heavily outweigh those problems.
Both the full-time and the associate students have responded enormously well to the greater flexibility offered by the programme.
They have adapted quickly — two weeks into the course, comments such as‘This is certainly different from school’ suggested a certain bewilderment.
The open choice of options accompanied by such a vast amount of student-centred learning provided challenges for both staff and students.
Two weeks before Christmas, however, an example of the feedback received from a school leaver was: ‘I like the course very much, I like the autonomy it affords and the subject availability.
I would say though, that in some subjects a little too much is left to self-discretion.
This does not mean that I like to be led by the nose, but only that I would appreciate a little extra guidance’.
The following comment comes from a mature entrant: ‘The course is geared to preparing students to go into the business world with confidence.
As a mature student I found it difficult at first to work on my own or in groups but now that the course is settling down, I feel that I will be able to tackle most tasks in business because we have had to learn to look for information and assimilate it so that we make it work for us.
Very good choice of options — perhaps too many’.
These comments indicate the very real problem of maintaining an effective balance between different modes of learning.
They also highlight the necessity to continuously identify the objectives and learning outcomes of the course.
Our students refer us to our own teachings: ‘Good communication’, they say, ‘is of the essence’.
The first Diplomates in Office Studies will complete their course in June 1990.
They will have a great deal of expertise to offer within the administrative support function.
They are likely to be highly skilled technical practitioners and first-rate communicators.
Such potential augurs well for the 1990s.
The HNC in Computer Aided Engineering
Background
The results of an MSC-funded Local Collaborative Project, investigating the training needs of the local electronics industry and completed in 1986, highlighted the need in Fife to train and retrain engineers and technicians in hybrid skills and the techniques involved in Computer Aided Engineering.
This need was further highlighted in 1987 through the development of proposals for a Department of Trade and Industry FE pilot scheme for skills up-dating in the Glenrothes-based paper manufacture industry.
As a direct result of these projects discussions were held with management level representatives of a large number of local companies, ranging from a multi-national electronics firm to a local laundry service.
Industry representatives strongly supported the concept of training and retraining in hybrid (ie both mechanical and electrical/electronic) engineering skills, with an emphasis on the use of new technology in all areas.
The Application Process
At the time that these discussions were taking place, SCOTVEC had embarked upon its Advanced Courses Development Programme, and the college therefore seized the opportunity to meet these local training needs by submitting a proposal for a unitised HNC in Computer Aided Engineering.
This was done not without trepidation, for the experience of preparing and presenting a proposal for external validation was new to the College and it was recognised that the development of the proposals, and subsequently of the course, in the very limited time scale necessitated by the speed of the Programme, would create major workload problems.
The deadlines were tight but they were met (with a little bit of stretching kindly allowed by SCOTVEC), due to extraordinary effort by both teaching and non-teaching staff.
The latter in particular deserve praise for the production of the Stage 2 submission, which involved the translation of written unit syllabi (with all the problems of deciphering which we know are involved with that) into a professionally-presented proposal document within the space of 10 days.
Some difficulties were experienced in the interpretation of SCOTVEC guidance documents, but this was to be expected as we were one of the first colleges to be involved in developing units for the HNC Pilot Scheme, and telephone communication with the SCOTVEC Curriculum Development Officers, who were most helpful, usually resolved them for us.
The approach of validation day did present a problem of a different kind.
All of the teaching staff who had worked on the proposal were keen to be involved in the process, and it would have been difficult to leave anyone out.
It was decided that the college staff would be split into 2 teams — the first team comprising the senior staff responsible for the overall course design while the second team would comprise the lecturers who would present the course material — ie the unit specialists.
This plan satisfied everyone and was effective on the day of validation.
Validation Day
The validation panel consisted of representatives of Industry, Education, SCOTVEC and SED and was very ably chaired by Mr J Murray, Dean of Technology, Napier College.
The Chairman set the scene by immediately putting the College staff at ease and set the tone of the meeting as friendly, efficient, and business like.
He indicated that the validation would not be an inquisition but rather a process of evaluating our proposal on its merits and also producing constructive and supportive criticism where necessary.
By effective chairmanship this was achieved.
Most of the day was spent in discussion and comment on individual units with college responses in the main being provided by the Senior members of the ‘first team’.
The announcement of our success, subject to the specific changes agreed during the validation being made, was welcomed by all concerned but the realisation that we had now committed ourselves to commencing a new course on 5 September 1988 made for a summer of hard curriculum development work.
The Course
The HNC in CAE is designed to provide potential Technicians/Technician Engineers with the skills necessary to enable them to take up employment in a multi-disciplinary engineering environment.
In considering the requirements of local industry it was found necessary to place emphasis on the students elective programme ie he/she would be able to design his/her own programme to satisfy his/her own needs.
The design and operation of the Elective programme was based on the experience gained from the successful results obtained in the running of our college-based programme at National Certificate level.
Another factor considered in the Course Design was the introduction of units designed to meet local requirements and enhance the student's career opportunities, eg Management Orientation, and Quality Control and Reliability.
The incorporation of these units in the Core Programme provides a balance to complement the more ‘technological’ units of Computer Aided Engineering.
The course is based on the completion of 6 Core units with a minimum of 6 chosen from the Elective programme.
For our students the total number of units required is 16, and although more than the minimum 12 necessary to gain the award of a Higher National Certificate, this is considered necessary for FT students who do not have the benefit of on-going industrial experience.
Student Response
There are currently 24 full time students on the course sponsored by either the Training Agency or a local Education Authority bursary.
Their entry qualifications range from an equivalent ONC in Electrical or Mechanical Engineering achieved through a National Certificate Modular Programme through C & G FTC to and HND in Electronics.
It has been found that students qualified in one discipline have opted to select units with emphasis in another, eg two students with a ‘mechanical’ background have elected to do Computer Aided Design with an Electrical bias.
Students like the style of the course because:
a
after discussion with their Course Tutor they are able to select a programme of units which satisfies their needs from the elective programme.
b
having more applications of computers in academic areas allows a more effective use of time, eg the teaching of the Principles of Network Analysis is backed up by BBC Software (MITEYSPICE) thus reducing laborious mathematical calculations.
b
those who have come through traditional SCOTVEC and C & G courses consider that the style of the HNC ‘unitised’ programme allows them more freedom to further develop their personal and academic skills.
Conclusion
It is obviously too early to judge the success of the course but, as noted above, early student response to it is encouraging.
Employers too are keenly interested in it, and those who participated in its planning are now co-operating in the design and conduct of student projects.
For the college, the experience of developing and mounting the course has been a beneficial one, although at times it felt like self-inflicted punishment!
It has been beneficial in that:
more staff have participated in curriculum development, and have developed a greater sense of confidence, having satisfactorily completed the new task
the need to explain curriculum thinking to industry and academic peers during the validation process was in itself an aid to the development of curriculum ideas and philosophy
integrative nature of the new development
the College has  benefited from increased staff and student skills in CAE — eg the attached design for the CAE lab was produced by the course students
a body of experience in the submission of advanced course proposals for validation now exists, and is being eagerly tapped by staff from other departments who are now preparing Phase 2 submissions.
NDO VIEWPOINT
Roy Kennedy —(Hospitality)
1984 has for some time been identified as an important milestone in the twentieth century.
Certainly, as far as further education in Scotland is concerned, this indeed is the case.
The introduction of The Action Plan that autumn heralded the most radical restructuring ever experienced within the non-advanced sector of education.
Modules arrived — designed to provide statements in competence terms, of what a successful student ‘can do’ and credit them with their demonstrated achievement.
The modular system provides a basis of transferable skills which assists those who, for whatever reason, wish to change career direction; those preparing for return to employment and those wishing to add to or update their skills.
The Advanced Courses Development Programme will restructure advanced courses on a unit model which will offer similar articulation and client choice as that provided by the National Certificate modular system.
In 1982, with the backing of the inspectorate, the inaugural meeting of Scottish Catering Further Education (SCFE) was held.
This group includes Heads of Departments or Section Heads from every college in Scotland which offers non-advanced programmes or courses in catering studies.
SCFE proved to be an invaluable means of communication and exchange during the introduction of Action Plan.
It provides a national platform for information and debate and has been strengthened by the willing co-operation received from SCOTVEC, CAST, SCRE, SCET, HCTB, representatives from industry, Jordanhill College School of Further Education and college Principals.
In April 1984 the National Development Officer for catering in the Western Division, which includes Strathclyde and Dumfries and Galloway, organised the initial ‘fleshing out’ of the catering related modules through the SCFE members from the Western Division.
This development work has led to regular inter-college meetings of subject specialists.
These meetings offer the opportunity for discussion, exchange of experience and best practice and in turn have contributed to the rationale of some of the recommendations currently being considered by the SCOTVEC Catering Review Group.
Scottish Heads of Advanced Catering Education (SHACE) was formed in May 1983 by the Heads of Department in the colleges offering the Higher National Diploma in Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management.
The national dimension of this group resulted in the members being asked, by the Scottish Education Department, to prepare a discussion document on the proposed policy for higher education in Catering Studies which was completed and submitted in April 1987.
Through SHACE, meetings of subject specialists, related to the Higher National Diploma, now take place and this organisation, under the chairmanship of a member of Sector O Board, was able to assist SCOTVEC when in 1986 a revision of the Higher National Diploma was required to retain exemption status from the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management (HCIMA) Professional examination.
As a member of each of the above mentioned groups (SHACE, SCFE and the group from the Western Division which ‘fleshed out’ catering related modules), I fully appreciate that they provide an excellent national and local framework for developing meaningful programmes of study but also realise that the membership consists solely of college staff.
To date advanced courses have been designed on an input model with emphasis being on the content.
It is now essential that an output model is adopted with the student achievements being expressed in competency terms.
The identified competences must relate realistically to the tasks students will eventually undertake within industry and this is where the apparent limitation of the group membership, mentioned above, is put in perspective.
As National Development Officer my remit is to co-ordinate the central development of the Higher National Units which will be structured round competencies which have been identified following consultation with industrialists, the Lead Industry Body and Professional Associations.
I have already had preliminary meetings with  — Senior Consultant with HCTB, which is also the Lead Industry Body for the hospitality industry, and  — consultant for HCIMA.
It is interesting that both of these organisations are using a competency based approach in the current revision of their courses.
HCTB in their recently published new Mastercraft series and HCIMA in their proposed Certificate, which will replace the Professional Qualification Part A and the Diploma which will be tabled at the next meeting of the HCIMA Education and Development Committee which I will be attending at the end of January 1989.
Towards the end of November a three-day training workshop was organised by SCOTVEC with  from Barbara Shelborn Associates to assist the National Development Officers in structuring competency based units.
The starting point in the exercise is the determination of the key purpose for the whole occupational area and then using a functional analysis approach to work from the ‘whole’ down identifying the competencies required to achieve the key purpose.
Once the range of competencies has been identified, and SCOTVEC is most insistent that this key element of the development exercise must be correct and acceptable, then unit writers, with the appropriate professional knowledge, expertise and experience, will be appointed.
The format and structure of the Higher National Units has not yet been finalised.
However, it has been agreed that they should be analogous in structure and language to the National Certificate Module descriptors, but it is anticipated that they may not be so prescriptive in content.
An initial meeting was held at Napier College on Wednesday 30 November with representatives from all the colleges currently offering the Higher National Diploma in Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management.
During this presentation I explained the move from input to output model, the use of functional analysis to identify possible competencies, the writing of outcomes in competence terms and the performance criteria associated with the outcomes.
Despite the elements of confusion, which I am sure I introduced, I was greatly encouraged by the enthusiasm shown.
I started by highlighting the important role SCFE played in assisting the implementation of Action Plan, SHACE will play an equally important role developing the Higher National Units to the agreed competencies.
The most important element of this development is agreement: agreement through consultation with employers, the lead industry body, professional association and unit writers.
I trust that the benefits which will accrue during this central development will carry over into the future developments by individual colleges and institutions as the process of devolution of unit writing and assessment is established.
The Author
William M (Roy) Kennedy is a diplomate of the Scottish Hotel School, graduate B.A. from the Open University, and a Fellow of the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association.
From 1960 until 1967 he was employed as manager of the Buchanan Arms Hotel, and after holding posts at various Scottish colleges he took up his present post in 1983 as Head of Hotel Management and Catering at Glasgow College of Food Technology.
He was an Examiner with  SCOTVEC from 1978 to 1981, a member of the SCOTVEC Equivalences Committee during the introduction of Action Plan, served on the HND Revisions Committee in 1986, the HNC Pilot Committee in 1987 and is currently a member of the HCIMA Education and Development Committee.
Validation of Consortia
All the courses introduced during the first phase of the Advanced Courses Development Programme were devised and submitted by single centres.
This approach will also be suitable for many of the courses and units in the second phase but, where colleges are developing courses in the same occupational area, there is much to be gained from their collaboration.
One of the ways in which the Council is trying to avoid duplication and to make course and unit development more efficient is by encouraging centres with similar proposals to work together as consortia.
When a course is developed by a consortium the work is shared and each centre gets the benefit of its partners' experience.
For the Phase 2 Pilot Programme a joint validation event will be held for such consortium developments.
This procedure will be reviewed and evaluated and may be amended when the arrangements for future sessions are established.
The consortia which are established may cover a wide range of situations and it is important that the position of each centre involved is made clear at an early stage in the validation process.
In some cases all the centres involved may be equal partners.
In other cases some centres may only be involved in the development or delivery of part of a course.
The validation procedures for consortia taking part in the 1989 Pilot Phase are as follows:
Stage 1
Each centre participating in a consortium development and wishing to offer the course or units should submit a Form HN1 — Request for Approval in Principle to Participate in 1989 Programme.
A separate Form HN1 for each centre is essential because SCOTVEC requires to know whether a centre has the approval of the Scottish Education Department and, if appropriate, the Regional or Islands Council concerned.
SCOTVEC also needs information on the involvement of industry, professional bodies or local employers in the preparation of the centre's proposals.
Stage 2
If it is in the interests of the development, a single Stage 2 submission from a consortium may be accepted provided it sets out clearly the ability of each course team to deliver and the ability of each centre to support the course or the units which it proposes to offer.
Validation Event
The validation event for a consortium development will be arranged as is appropriate for the circumstances.
Normally it will be a joint validation for the centres involved and held at the SCOTVEC offices.
The composition of the Validation Panel will be determined by SCOTVEC and will include a senor member of staff from each centre.
Usually members of the Panel, a SCOTVEC Officer and/or an SED Assessor will visit each centre.
These procedures for the validation of consortia will be reviewed in the light of the experience gained during the 1989 pilot phase.
Validated Courses Section
The new Validated Courses Section has now been established and first among its priorities is the appointment and training of External Course Assessors for running the Pilot Courses in 1988–89.
External Course Assessors nominated by Colleges offering pilot courses are presently being contacted by the Section and the first training sessions will be held on 23 and 24 February.
The telephone numbers for the Section are 
Staff News
National Development Officers
Seven National Development Officers (NDOs) have recently been appointed to assist SCOTVEC Officers in progressing the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
Four are working on the central development of Courses and Units, two in the Management area, one in Computing and one in Electrical and Electronic Engineering.
Three are examining various aspects of validation, competence and credit accumulation and transfer.
JOHN MCKAY, NDO for Management, has been seconded from Glasgow College where he has been Senior Lecturer in Marketing since 1973.
He has had close involvement with the Diploma in Industrial Administration since its introduction.
LIZ VAUGHAN, NDO for Management, has been seconded from Glasgow College of Technology where she lectures in Marketing Research.
She has acted as Organiser of the Diploma in Industrial Administration Course since 1985.
She was also a member of the team that developed the recently launched New Initial Award in Management (NIAM).
PETER WILKS, NDO for Electrical and Electronic Engineering, has been seconded from Glasgow College where he is Senior Lecturer in the School of Engineering.
He was involved in the development of the Digital, Computing and Software Engineering Syllabus of the new B. Eng.
Course at Glasgow College and is currently External Examiner for the CNAA B.Sc Applied Physics Degree at Napier Polytechnic.
MIKE BURGESS, NDO for Validation, has been seconded from Glasgow College of Building and Printing where he is Senior Lecturer and Depute Head of the Department of Complementary Studies and Educational Services.
RODERICK BENNETT, NDO for Competence and Validation, has been seconded from Robert Gordon's Institute of Technology where he was previously Head of School of Home Economics.
He was also a member of various CNAA Boards concerned with the validation of first and research degree proposals during the period 1976–1988.
JIM WISE, NDO for Credit Accumulation and Transfer, has been seconded from Napier Polytechnic of Edinburgh where he has been Senior Lecturer in the Department of Mathematics since 1981.
He was involved in the Polytechnic's first CNAA Degree Course, Science with Industrial Studies, and is nowadays particularly concerned in the BA in Business Studies.
He has been a member of a number of college committees and has acted as Head of Department.
Administration Staff
LORNA McEACHAN has been appointed Administrative Office in the Validated Courses Section.
Lorna joined SCOTVEC in 1987 as an Administrative Officer in the Assessment Department with responsibility for courses in Business Studies.
She will now work with Anne Galloway in the Validated Courses Section.
SUSAN MacINNES, Administrative Officer — Curriculum, joins SCOTVEC from an assignment with the Property Services Agency Section of the Civil Service.
Susan is no stranger in education circles having worked previously with the Scottish Council for Education Technology and as a teacher of English in Strathclyde Region.
SCOTVEC Advanced Courses DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME UPDATE
issue number 8 June 1989
Phased Transition to New System
SCOTVEC's new system of Advanced Courses will be phased in over a three year period.
Starting in September 1990 batches of new courses will be introduced in each session so that from September 1992 all entrants will be enrolled on new-style courses.
The arrangements for the transition have been announced in a letter from  to college principals.
During the two phases of Pilot schemes, which were essentially experimental, detailed policy could only be formulated for the short term but, as the new system is becoming established, this letter is able to state policy for a longer period.
It also invites colleges to consult with SCOTVEC on the transition arrangements for individual courses.
The details of the transition were agreed by the Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee which has responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the Development Programme.
It is chaired by , who is Depute Principal, Napier Polytechnic of Edinburgh, and its members with their posts are .
The full text of  's letter to principals and its accompanying paper is given on pages 2, 3 and 4.
Seminar for Principals
Early in the summer term a seminar was organised jointly by SCOTVEC and the Association of Principals of Colleges (APC) to discuss the advanced courses development programme.
It was primarily designed for principals of further education colleges but the very influential group, representing more than forty colleges, which was welcomed at Hanover House by SCOTVEC Chairman, Peter Clarke, included a number of principals and directors of central institutions.
Essentially the seminar was an exercise in information exchange.
SCOTVEC staff briefed the principals on the latest developments and the principals reported to SCOTVEC on their experience in offering Phase i Pilots and in preparing for Phase 2.
Opening the seminar, outlined the rationale of the development programme and the approach being adopted.
He said that SCOTVEC and the colleges were involved as partners in a cooperative effort to develop the new awards.
The colleges took responsibility for the delivery of the new courses while SCOTVEC was the guardian of national standards.
He added that it was important that key educational objectives were addressed from the start.
For example it was much easier to incorporate provision for credit accumulation and transfer into a new system, when it was being set up, then to superimpose it on an established system.
, Principal of Fife College, gave the seminar his college's view of the problems presented and opportunities provided by the new system of validated courses.
His college had been validated under Phase 1 to offer courses for a Higher National Certificate in Information Technology which articulated with a Higher National Diploma and also two sets of Higher National Units, in Financial Services and in Enterprise Skills.
It was proposing to offer a number of other courses under Phase 2.
The development of these courses involved widespread consultation and had required a major commitment by college staff.
The formulation of a course for validation placed a greater burden on college resources than offering a centrally devised course but he felt that this was offset by the ability which a college now had to react quickly and flexibly to meet local demands.
Also college lecturers tended to be more enthusiastic about a course when they had participated in its development.
, Principal of Kilmarnock College and Chairman of APC, chaired the afternoon session.
It was devoted to the discussion of quality assurance, preparation of documentation, preparation for a validation event and the setting up of a college quality assurance mechanism.
The seminar concluded with the drawing together of the discussions at an open forum after which , Past Chairman of APC, gave a vote of thanks to all the contributors for a useful and informative experience.
Advanced Courses — The Future
Letter of 29 May 1989 to College Principals from SCOTVEC's Chief Executive
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEW ADVANCED COURSES SYSTEM BY PHASED TRANSITION
As you know, SCOTVEC and colleges have been engaged in an extensive development plan, the aim of which is to transform the approach to the Advanced Courses provision.
We are seeking to develop and Advanced Courses structure which is more flexible and responsive and which contributes to major objectives of wider access, credit transfer and articulation.
SCOTVEC's Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee, drawing on what has been learned from the phase 1 and phase 2 pilot courses, has now completed detailed discussions on the transition from the developmental phase to the implementation of the new operational system.
The outcome of the discussions is a decision to proceed from phase 2 of the pilot programme into the new system without the need for a third pilot phase.
Transfer of all courses into the new system will follow a planned three-year programme of implementation, with some students embarking on new-style courses in September 1990 and 1991 and all students embarking on new-style courses in September 1992.
The implication of this three-year transition is that the existing assessment and examination system will be phased out over a number of years, as courses are transferred to the new system.
Examinations will continue to be provided until the last candidates enrolled under the old system have completed the normal duration of their course.
Because the current courses will then be withdrawn, arrangements will be made to give students one opportunity, beyond the diet of examinations at which their course would normally have finished, to satisfy the conditions of award for the course.
In practice, that opportunity will be provided by the resit diet in subjects which currently have such a facility.
In subjects which currently do not, a resit will be provided as a special arrangement to precede the withdrawal of the course.
You will find a detailed account of the three-year programme, and the factors underlying it, in the attached paper and its Annexes.
It is proposed that the programme of implementation should be drawn up following a consultative exercise involving all colleges.
To that end, a proforma and supporting papers are also enclosed.
The aim of the consultation is to identify which courses will be transferred into the new system in each of the three years of the implementation programme.
Where you college is one of several offering a particular course, and that course is not already the subject of national development work, I would suggest that there are significant advantages to be gained from engaging in consortium development of unit specifications for that course, and I hope that SCOTVEC can provide support to such consortium development.
As part of our staff development and information dissemination activities, we have recently held seminars in Hanover House for staff of phase 1 pilot colleges and for all college principals.
The comments and suggestions made by college staff attending these events have proved invaluable in framing the proposals described in these papers.
I must again express my thanks to all those who have contributed to this exciting Development Programme, through response to the Consultative Paper, participation in pilot and consortium developments, contributions to unit writing groups and attendance at seminars.
I am sure you will agree that the aim of the development — to provide a more responsive, flexible and relevant Advanced Courses system — is very worthwhile and I hope you will share my view that the arrangements described in the attached papers will allow us to achieve our aims in a reasonable timescale.
Paper which accompanied the Chief Executive's letter
1.
BACKGROUND
SCOTVEC and centres have been engaged in an extensive development plan, the aim of which is to explore the issues which arose from the Consultative Paper of February 1987 (‘SCOTVEC Higher Education Provision’) and which were detailed in the Policy Paper (‘Advanced Courses Development Programme: A Policy Paper — March 1988’).
The Advanced Courses Development Programme has so far involved two phases of pilot courses, each phase having represented a stage in the progression from the current Advanced Courses system to a system based on the principles in the Policy Paper.
2.
IMPLEMENTATION
2.1 Following detailed discussion at the Council's Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee, it has been decided that SCOTVEC should now proceed beyond the pilot programme to implementation of the new system: it was felt that the work to date on the pilot courses has provided enough experience to confirm the adoption of the Policy Paper's principles as the basis of the new operational system.
Thus it is intended that there will be no ‘phase 3 pilots’ but rather that the development phase will end with the phase 2 pilots, to be followed immediately by progressive implementation of the new operational system.
First candidate enrolment in the new system will thus take place in September 1990, units having been prepared and validated during session 1989–90.
2.2 It would not, of course, be feasible to expect either centres or SCOTVEC to support the transfer of all existing courses into the new format in time for enrolment in September 1990.
Instead, it is proposed that a planned transition take place.
The length of transition has to strike a balance between being imprudently short and discouragingly long.
After much discussion, the decision is to make arrangements for a three-year transition, with batches of courses being transferred to the new format in time for student enrolment in September 1990, 1991 and 1992: in the latter year, all initial student enrolments will be for new-style courses.
2.3 The implication of this three-year transition is that the existing assessment and examination system will be phased out over a number of years, as courses are transferred to the new system.
Examinations will continue to be provided until the last candidates enrolled under the old system have completed the normal duration of their course.
Because the current courses will then be withdrawn, arrangements will be made to give students one opportunity, beyond the diet of examinations at which their course would normally have finished, to satisfy the conditions of award for the course.
In practice, that opportunity will be provided by the resit diet in subjects which currently have such a facility.
In subjects which currently do not, a resit will be provided as a special arrangement to precede the withdrawal of the course.
2.4 The detailed timescale involved in the transition to the new system and in the phasing out of the old are summarised in narrative and diagrammatic form in Annexes to this paper.
3.
FEATURES OF THE IMPLEMENTATION PROPOSALS
3.1 the major issue to be considered is the programme by which the transition can be achieved and, in particular, which courses will be identified for transfer during each of the three years.
In order that transfer can take place in a manner which allows colleges to progress rapidly if they wish, but at the same time make allowances for those who prefer to proceed more slowly, each college is being consulted on the rate of transfer appropriate for each course offered.
The details of the consultation are described in section 6 of this paper.
There are certain basic features of the transition which have to be considered: these are detailed in 3.2 and 3.3 below.
3.2 Implementation will require all courses to be specified in the new unit-based format, with candidates' performance detailed in terms of outcomes and performance criteria.
It is envisaged that over the transition period, a system of course structures will evolve which embraces unit specifications developed both nationally and locally.
Courses can therefore be grouped in four categories, depending on the way in which the majority of the constituent units were developed.
a
‘Nationally-developed Courses’ comprise nationally-developed units for the whole course or its core components.
b
‘Transferred Courses’ comprise units developed by centres, individually or as consortia, as a means of transferring existing courses into the new format.
c
‘New Courses’ comprise combinations of units either developed nationally or locally to create a new course, i.e. one which leads to a qualification which is substantially different from existing provision but which meets a defined local or national need.
d
‘Pilot Courses’ comprise units developed for phase 1 and 2 pilot courses and reviewed to ensure that the format of the new operational system is fully adopted.
3.3 In making detailed arrangements for phasing of the transition, it is intended that implementation will be arranged in such a way that all centres offering a particular course will transfer to the new system in the same year.
This will allow the phasing to follow a coherent pattern, to the benefit of both centres and SCOTVEC.
a
For courses in which all units, or core units, are undergoing national development of unit specifications, it is intended that specified existing courses in these and closely related subjects will be converted to the new format for candidate enrolment in:
b
For courses which are not listed in (a) as national developments but where the group of centres offering that course decides to engage in consortium development of the new unit specifications, SCOTVEC will support such consortium development, subject to the availability of resources, by:
contributing to the national process by which industry/professional needs are identified;
providing input to the development of the overall course framework, including the determination of the broad course competences, and input to the writing of unit specifications for core areas;
contributing to staff development.
These consortium-developed courses, and courses developed by individual centres, can be developed for candidate enrolment in either September 1990, 1991 or 1992.
c
For courses arising from phase 1 and 2 pilots, there will be a progressive arrangement, through review of validation, to bring the pilots into the new operational framework.
In most cases, phase 1 pilots will be reviewed during 1989–90 for a September 1990 start and phase 2 pilots during 1991–92 for a September 1992 start.
Each centre running pilots will be notified of the appropriate timescale and procedures for review of validation.
4.
DETAILED TIMETABLE FOR PHASED TRANSITION
To incorporate the various categories of course, it is proposed that the phased transition should consist of three years' batches of courses.
Batch 1 (September 1990 student enrolment)
a
Specified nationally-developed courses in: Unit specifications for core areas and some optional areas of these courses will be available at the start of session 1989–90.
b
Certain transferred courses identified by a consultation with centres.
Where a course proposal in Engineering, Business Studies and Secretarial Studies is being considered, submission into Batch 2 because of the availability, for that batch, of nationally-developed units in those subject areas.
c
New courses coming forward on the initiative of centres.
d
Reviewed phase 1 pilot courses.
Batch 2 (September 1991 student enrolment)
a
Subject to availability of resources for their development, specified nationally-developed courses in  Negotiations with funding partners (COSLA and SED) have been initiated to seek resources for the appointment of National Development Officers to produce core HN unit specifications in these areas.
Subject to availability of these resources, it is intended that these unit specifications would be available by June 1990.
b
Certain transferred courses (the specific courses to be identified by consultation with centres).
c
New courses coming forward on the initiative of centres.
Batch 3 (September 1992 student enrolment)
a
Remaining transferred courses (the specific courses to be identified by consultation with centres).
b
New courses coming forward on the initiative of centres.
c
Reviewed phase 2 pilot courses.
(There are no plans for national development of courses within batch 3 but it is hoped that resources will be available to allow SCOTVEC to support consortium development of courses).
Narrative and diagrammatic summaries of the timetable for phased transition are attached as Annex 1 and 2 respectively.
5.
VALIDATION ARRANGEMENTS
5.1 In considering the rate at which course proposals can be validated, the Advanced Courses Policy Sub-Committee recognised that there would have to be a range of validation models, each of which will be tailored to the course and the centre.
It is envisaged that the scope of validation will be greater in the case of a centre which is inexperienced at advanced course level or is submitting a proposal in a subject area new to that centre.
Where a centre is submitting a proposal for a course in whose subject area the centre has proven experience, a more devolved form of validation will be appropriate.
The underlying principle will be that centres will have maximum delegated authority which is compatible with the Council's responsibility to ensure nationally recognised standards.
5.2 It is anticipated that the annual cycle for processing applications for validation of new-style courses will be:
6.
CONSULTATIVE PROCESS
6.1 As described earlier in this paper, it is intended to seek agreement on the rate at which courses can be transferred to the new format.
The views of centres are therefore being sought on the year in which it is considered that candidates could be enrolled on new-style courses, for those courses which are not the subject of national development of units.
6.2 Each centre has received a proforma showing the courses for which it presented candidates in session 1988–89.
It also shows those courses whose units are being developed nationally.
With each proforma is a list of the names of other centres offering courses with the same title.
6.3 Centres are being asked to engage in consultation (and, if consortium development is thought to be possible, in consultation with other centres) and to complete the proforma showing the session in which the centre will be ready to enrol candidates for the new-style course.
Proformas are to be returned to SCOTVEC by June 30 1989.
6.4 Over the summer months, SCOTVEC will analyse the response to the consultation on the composition of course batches and will then send each centre, in late August 1989:
a
a timetable showing the complete phasing plan on a course-by-course basis;
b
documentation necessary for submission of the first outline course proposals under Batch 1 of the new, operational system;
c
unit specifications for units in courses which have been nationally developed and are included in Batch 1.
In addition, a restatement of the Policy Paper on the Advanced Courses Development Programme, modified in the light of experience of phase 1 and 2 pilot courses' progress, will be circulated early next session.
ROCK ON
Perth College of Further Education has featured in the educational press already with its National Certificate Rock Music Programme — now the first intake of the college's HNC Rock Music (Performer) is nearing the end of the course.
For those of us old enough to have been around at the time of the birth of rock ‘n’ roll, the idea of an advanced course in the music which made both us and our parents jump (but in opposite directions) may be hard to accommodate.
However, for the nine students who have progressed through from the college's National Certificate programme into the HNC course, it is all a very serious business.
As , the course tutor, observes, ‘rock instruments have found their way into common use in more and more schools and music education has now gained sufficient flexibility to allow pupils and students to train on these instruments.
Professional musicians in the commercial music field need an education which is directly relevant to the music they will be playing.’
Interest in rock music is much more wide spread among both listeners and performers than ever before.
And British rock music is admired throughout the world.
In this situation it seemed appropriate for the staff at Perth College to offer educational opportunities which would parallel those available in other music fields.
In the same way as the term ‘classical’ music is generally used to describe a wide range of musical styles, in the context of this course the term ‘rock music’is to be understood to mean a wide range of contemporary commercial dance-type music.
Over its four years, the National Certificate Programme has produced a range of performers and technicians in this kind of music.
Individuals have gone on to work in support of bands such as Bon Jovi, to take part in national competitions, to form club acts and to undertake the musician's bread and butter work playing in theatre bands.
Among those in the current HNC group, there are ambitions to start a studio, to form a band, and to pursue individual careers.
The course is likely to produce workers at all levels in the music industry of the future, from studio and session workers to stars.
As well as offering tuition in voice, synthesisers, guitar, piano, bass and drums, the course contains units in song writing and arranging.
Much emphasis is put on rehearsal time and, in particular, on band work.
In addition there is considerable scope for the Higher Tech end of the market with work in multi-track recording and video production.
Throughout the course the teaching and learning approaches combine the traditional and the innovative.
And there is considerable scope left for the talented student to exploit the potential of the course and the sophisticated equipment which has been put in to resource the HNC.
In other words, the more that students can bring to the course, the more they will take away from it.
If two words can summarise the experience of the HNC, they must be ‘practical’ and ‘intensive’.
Indeed it might be said that one year on this course is worth four or five years of experience in the field.
Not that going on the course takes you out of the field: a lot of time is spent on rehearsal and a lot of time is spent on performance technique.
For many of the students the course gives them their first stage experience and this is something which in itself produces a lot of concentrated work.
Entry to the course, as might be expected, depends largely on auditions.
Although the current intake came entirely from the college's National Certificate Programme, the aim is to broaden the entry.
The lecturers involved in the HNC course have a wide and impressive background in professional musicianship.
Indeed reading through their curricula vitae is like reading through a history of the past quarter century of popular music in this country.
The names which appear in their combined working lives range from Vince Hill and Kenneth McKellar to Bo Diddley and Gary Glitter.
In addition, almost every major musical of the past twenty-five years appears somewhere in the lists.
The star of the show, however, is not one of the tutors nor one of the students: it is a piece of musical equipment.
As anyone who has been to the college and visited the course will know, the main attraction in the HNC Rock Music (Performer) is the drum kit which featured in Tutti Frutti, that most Scottish, contemporary and successful of entertainments.
Phase 2 Pilot Courses
Update 3 reported the encouraging response by centres to SCOTVEC's invitation to submit proposals for Phase 2 Pilot Schemes and on the consideration of these proposals by Scrutiny Panels.
Each proposal was subjected to scrutiny to ensure that it was in accordance with the criteria set for Phase 2 Pilot Courses and as a result 96 submissions were adopted.
It is worth noting that of the course proposals which fell at this hurdle most were of a very high standard.
The schemes for inclusion in Phase 2 were selected to contribute to the exploration of particular aspects of the Development Programme.
Full documentation for successful courses was requested by 28 February and most colleges managed to meet this formidable deadline!
The Scottish Education Department undertook to review all of the adopted courses for FE85 approval by Mid-March and it is to the credit of Her Majesty's Inspectorate that the task was undertaken in such a short timescale.
Thirty-seven validations were conducted before the end of May.
In 36 of these, the submissions were wholly or partially approved and the courses will commence in the autumn.
A further 34 validations have been scheduled before the summer vacation.
As in Phase 1 the courses proposed cover a wide range of disciplines.
Courses as disparate as  have undergone validation.
Seven of the courses validated have been developed by groups of centres acting as consortia.
Each centre in a consortium undertook part of the development work which was co-ordinated by a committee comprised of staff from the member institutions.
Consortium developments include courses in Leisure Management, Built Environment and Engineering.
In addition to sharing the burden of course writing, members of consortia have found the exchange of ideas with colleagues from other institutions to be most rewarding.
Centres are to be congratulated on their hard work in putting together such an excellent array of courses.
It is to be hoped that their effort will be reflected in the number of students applying for these courses.
HND in Scientific and Technical Graphics
This unique course, which Telford College has been validated to offer in 1989–90, allows the student to study in depth and apply a range of problem-solving procedures to the design and communication of information through print and audio-visual media.
The course will develop a range of competences required by employers, together with the skills of versatility, adaptability and organisation.
It will also encourage the enterprise attitudes, logical, analytical and problem solving approaches, necessary in enabling students to find secure employment and career development in the area of visual communication.
An intensive, yet realistic, programme of study is provided.
This requires students to synthesise artistic and creative ability with a sound technological awareness to a level commensurate with the course in general.
Analysis of various briefs and case studies will involve students in developing an effective visual methodology, incorporating various graphic media processes, design formats and illustration techniques.
Utilising electronic organisation and desktop publishing will allow students to gain familiarity with current systems that can directly affect overall cost effectiveness of a solution; as well as providing the opportunity for evaluating the effectiveness of new technology, its commercial viability and its impact on the visual communication of information.
Students who successfully complete the HND courses will be eligible to become Diploma Members of the Chartered Society of Designers and the possibility also exists to continue studies at Edinburgh College of Art in the 3rd year of the BA (hons) in Visual Communication.
The HND in Scientific and Technical Graphics gives an entry to a rapidly expanding field.
According to‘The Sunday Times’ and ‘The Design Business Group’the design industry is the fastest growing industry in the United Kingdom and by 1992 it will be 40% larger than it is today.
Course content
The student will be involved in the development of skills and techniques related to project analysis and management; setting and attaining goals; assessing performance; instigating performance criteria and the development of oral and written articulation of work ‘in hand’ related to progress and development.
A range of interesting and realistic projects and case studies will provide opportunity for both practical and intellectual development.
The course is composed of HN Units in:.
Resources
Telford College has invested heavily in new technology related to visual communication.
Its recent acquisitions include:
a CAD/Desk Top Publishing Studio equipped with Apple Mac & IBM PC work stations and related laser printers and plotters;
a Television Studio & a Sound Studio located in a new media suite;
a Computer Typesetting, Graphic Reproduction & Machine Printing suite of work shops;
a Photographic Studio & Darkroom Complex.
Under construction is a new Drop-In Design Centre for students and staff with a design technician in residence.
Location
Edinburgh provides an ideal location for the study of scientific and technical graphics.
It has the most concentrated design community north of London and over 70 local companies were consulted on the development of this new course.
The city has more Chartered Designers working within the city boundary than the rest of Scotland has as a whole.
Industrial placement of students is not a problem — we have more offers of places than we have students.
Staff are also encouraged, as part of our staff development programme, to work in industry on a secondment basis for up to four weeks at a time.
Studying in Edinburgh provides a student with an opportunity to live and work in one of the most attractive cities in the country.
Residents enjoy a wide range of sporting and leisure activities which, together with a spectacular and panoramic countryside, contribute to a lifestyle which is the envy of most.
Catalogue of Pilot Schemes
Centres offering Phase 1 Pilots have been provided with a draft catalogue of advanced schemes which gives details of the schemes validated for session 1988–89.
One of the major purposes of its limited issue at this stage is to provide the centres involved with a list of the unit, course and centre numbers which they will require to use in competing student registration documents.
It is also, however, a trial run for a more extensive catalogue which is being considered.
It is intended that in future sessions SCOTVEC will publish a catalogue and associated HN Unit Specifications which give information on all its advanced provision.
Centres will then know what units have already been produced and may sometimes be able to avoid duplicating work already done by using existing units which suit their own local needs.
This will also assist in the rationalisation of provision.
The draft catalogue for 1988–89 contains 9 Higher National Certificates, 15 Higher National Diplomas, 1 post graduate Diploma and 5 groups of Higher National Units.
In addition to giving the numbers mentioned above, for each scheme the catalogue names the award, the units of which it is composed and the centre validated to offer it.
It gives an outline of the aim and structure of the scheme, the conditions of award and the credit value for each unit.
If appropriate the catalogue also shows the articulation between Higher National Certificates, Higher National Diplomas and Degrees.
SCOTVEC is currently undertaking work, financed by the Training Agency, to develop the existing national certificate catalogue unto a portfolio of catalogues which will classify modules in a variety of ways which are responsive to the needs of individual user groups.
It is anticipated that this approach will be extended to the advanced courses catalogue when it has been developed more fully.
As with all aspects of the Advanced Courses Development Programme, SCOTVEC welcomes suggestions for the improvement of the catalogue and hopes that feedback from centres will help to determine the most useful way in which the necessary information can be provided for all users in the future.
Staff Development Workshops
SCOTVEC has recently run a series of workshops for college staff involved in the preparation and validation of advanced courses for the 1989–90 Pilot Programme.
The first workshop, devised by  and  of Dundee institute of Technology, dealt with the course design and documentation.
Groups of college staff led by experienced chairmen considered a series of case studies designed to highlight the problems which they might encounter when preparing their own course submissions.
The second workshop, devised by , and  of Napier Polytechnic, was designed to prepare college staff for a validation event.
Participants were led through a series of ‘real life’ situations, which might be expected to arise during validation, by group leaders experienced in external validation.
The demand for places on these workshops was so great that both were held twice; allowing some 100 college lecturers and senior staff to participate.
Feedback from those attending was positive and it is intended that, after some refining, the workshops will be made available to all colleges.
The validation workshop was later modified for use with individuals who might be asked by SCOTVEC to act as our representatives on Validation Panels.
Those attending were given the opportunity to carry out the mock validation of a course which was defended by a very experienced course team.
SCOTVEC has presented one further workshop in this series.
Designed for senior college management it dealt with the design and implementation of internal quality assurance systems for colleges.
This workshop, prepared by a group of staff at Robert Gordon's Institute of Technology, led by , was held on 30 May and repeated on 6 June 1989 at Perth College of Further Education.
At present it is intended that the next series of workshops to be organised by SCOTVEC will concentrate on writing HN Units in competence terms, assessment in a criterion referenced system and the appraisal of merit in HN Units.
Update readers may wish to suggest other areas which should be considered.
SCOTVEC Advanced Courses UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 18 NOVEMBER 1990
GOING LIVE!
September 1990 saw the beginning of a new era as far as SCOTVEC's Advanced Courses were concerned.
The first candidates have now been enrolling for the new, operational system, following the successful completion of the pilot phases of the Advanced Courses Development Programme during 1988–90.
There has been a tremendous response to the new system.
Almost 250 course proposals from 58 centres were successfully validated: these were traditional courses being transferred to the new system and also a number of innovative courses in areas ranging from Countryside Recreation and Countryside Management to Modern Musicianship.
SCOTVEC is indebted to the numerous people from colleges, industry, business and commerce who have contributed to the development and validation of these courses.
This Update looks at aspects of the new beginning, from an individual view of the validation process to an account of how new national units are developed.
This page looks at developments in Management — an area in which there has been much developed nationally and for which SCOTVEC's new Advanced Courses have been ideally suited to respond.
DEVELOPMENTS IN MANAGEMENT EDUCATION
The Constable, McCormick and the Handy Reports indicated that British managers were considerably less well qualified and were seriously undertrained in relation to the UK's industrial competitors.
The Council for Management Education and Development (CMEAD) was established to plan ways in which this situation could be remedied.
One of the ways in which CMEAD hoped to address these criticisms was by encouraging the reform of management development, both in terms of its content and of its delivery, with a view to widening access to effective management education and development.
A major part of the reform was the Management Charter Initiative (MCI).
Although originally the aim was to promote Chartered Manager status, this aim is now being pursued independently by the British Institute of Management, with the approval of CMEAD.
CMEAD widened its membership and subsequently reconstituted itself as the National Forum for Management Education and Development (NFMEAD).
The National Forum, which still uses MCI as its operational arm and logo, is pursuing its aims by establishing three initiatives:
i
a Code of Practice;
ii
employer networks to support this;
iii
a progressive professional career pattern for managers.
SCOTVEC is represented on the national forum by Chief Executive  and on the Standing Committees by  and .
Initially a three level sequence of qualifications was envisaged viz junior, middle and strategic managers.
This was subsequently revised to add a first level of supervisory managers.
Final competences for the first three levels (supervisory, junior and middle managers) are due in October 1990 together with procedures for MCI endorsement of awards.
SCOTVEC had already started on the review of its management awards in response to Constable and Handy when MCI gathered momentum.
Fortunately the unit/credit format based on competences fitted well with MCI developments.
The Diploma in Industrial Administration was part of the first batch of national developments and was completed in the Summer of 1989.
Subsequently a nationally led consortium developed HN Unit Specifications for a certificate level award and National Certificate Modules will be used to constitute supervisory level provision.
All incorporated the latest versions of MCI competences, but since these will only be available in their final form from October, all will be subject to revision over two years.
SCOTVEC awards in Management based on MCI (the Lead Body) standards are:.
There is also a work-based ‘Certificate in Management’ and a range of specialist Management qualifications including Hospitality, Leisure, Arts and Quality Management.
MCI will shortly finalise the processes of endorsement and SCOTVEC will consult with users on how best to proceed.
Another MCI initiative is the Experienced Manager Project in which two Scottish colleges award credits for the HNC Management by means of the Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) process.
This is now an integral part of SCOTVEC procedures and the colleges concerned intend to offer two routes to the HNC — one via the HN Units and one via MCI Units.
Eventually all HNCs will be via MCI Units.
The HNC links directly with the new Post Graduate Diplomas and this feature is already being used in colleges to provide a clear career path for management development.
The HNC incorporates work-based assessment and, when MCI Diploma guidelines are published, a similar development is planned so that the wider competence base of the Diplomas can be used to support middle or functional managers.
PRINCIPAL TRIES ROLE REVERSAL
What could entice an FE college principal to spend at least one day per week out of college between Easter and summer 1990, at a time of year always administratively active and this year particularly critical with the preparation and prospect of delegation schemes and new College Councils?
Money?
Almost.
Foreign travel?
Almost.
A challenge?
Certainly.
I was approached by SCOTVEC to act on its behalf at validation events for the new HNC/Ds.
Within my college work, I had already taken the decision to devote more time and concentration to HNC/Ds; just because they work smoothly and efficiently and have a good reputation is no excuse for not keeping actively in touch with this area.
The SCOTVEC exercise gave me an ideal and welcome opportunity to spend some time on advanced course provision, to see how others saw it and, finally, to find out how other colleges approached it.
How do you ensure, for example, that your staff have the high-level teaching experience which comes with years of practice and training, and also up-to-date and personal familiarity with ‘the trade’ at a level which industrial and commercial representatives will find credible?
How do you adhere to the HN Unit Specification and yet provide at least a context which makes it fully your own college's HNC/D.
What opportunity should be open to full-tome students in terms of work placement or experience?
Was it worth it?
Some would say it would have been worth it if only to gain some insight into the arcane workings of SCOTVEC.
That is true, but only up to a point; I have found the procedures laborious at times but usually vital, and SCOTVEC's full-time officers invariably helpful and cheery.
The exercise brought home to me the need — and indeed the advantage — of establishing within the college a culture or ethos of total institutional responsibility for the quality of what we devise, offer and deliver.
Such attitudes should emerge from out National Certificate work also, and should apply across the college.
Simply trying to get it right for the ‘event’ is unlikely to be adequate, and correctly so.
At the validation event, the attitudes of commercial and industrial representatives gave an interesting foretaste of how representatives on new College Councils might approach their work.
With very few exceptions, they found the world of FE a little alien, but showed no adversarial tendencies; they were unanimous in their insistence on high standards and will help us attain and maintain these.
The task of working to achieve and maintain standards falls of course on lecturing staff, and the need for co-ordination in the college, particularly in the course team, cannot be emphasised too strongly.
I saw outstanding examples of team work with results impressive in their professionalism.
Some might say that sending in a college principal to validation events in order to advise on SCOTVEC policies is carrying things a bit too far.
I do not agree.
In the first place, I adhere to the view that SCOTVEC, despite its corporate status, has a public sector orientation which all of us in FE colleges should appreciate and respond to.
Secondly, I do not think it does a college principal any harm to operate in a different framework, see how others organise themselves and bring a principal's view to bear upon validation exercises — and possibly upon SCOTVEC itself!
STAFF DEVELOPMENT WORKSHOPS
It was reported in Update No 14 that SCOTVEC had commissioned a number of workshops — 10 in all — aimed at providing centres with further material to assist their staff development activities.
Since SCOTVEC personnel could not respond to requests from all centres to run staff development events for them, each workshop was developed as a pack of information, examples and activities for participants together with extensive support material so that centres or Regions can themselves organise and run the events.
Members of the Consultative Forum were asked to nominate people with experience of developing, using and evaluating staff development materials to take part in trial testing and the workshops were run by SCOTVEC Field Officers who had no previous experience of working with these materials.
The 10 workshops trial tested were of varying lengths but collectively the time required for completion was 6 working days so a considerable degree of commitment was required from all concerned.
After delivery, each workshop was evaluated by group discussion and individual questionnaires; in addition, a number of experienced staff development personnel were asked to read and comment on the tutor's materials.
A great deal of useful and constructive comment was received and the workshops are now being finalised.
As might be expected, comment varied widely from workshop to workshop and ranged across issues such as the exact interpretation of the wording of tasks, time allocated to tasks, value of tasks, applicability of generic examples to participants' own specialities and many others.
In discussion sessions it was not unusual for groups of participants to have strong and very different views about particular tasks!
In these circumstances a choice of material was developed for selection by centres and, where appropriate, adaptation for their own circumstances.
Participants reported that most workshops were very useful as they stood or needed minor modification.
Amongst the comments received were those from , a Further Education Officer with Tayside Region.
He observed that, ‘mixing participants with knowledge of staff development and unitised systems with staff with no previous experience allowed the views of both trainers and trainees to be obtained during the trial testing of the workshops’.
He felt that the workshops would be invaluable to centres and Regions in their staff development programmes.
Jim added that he was personally looking forward to offering the revised series in Tayside later in the session.
A copy of these workshops will be sent to centres later in the session.
1
Introduction to Competence and Standards
2
Functional Analysis, Standards and Course Rationale
3
Writing Outcomes and Performance Criteria
4
Interpreting Outcomes and Performance Criteria
5
Approaches to the Award of Pass with Merit
6
Introduction to Criterion Referenced Assessment
7
Preparation of Assessment Instruments in a Criterion Referenced Assessment System
8
Working with the External Course Assessor
9
Working in Consortia
10
Appeals Procedures
ACCREDITATION OF PRIOR LEARNING
Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) was featured in the Research and Development Update No. 13, March 1990.
APL is based on the premise that individuals can and do learn throughout their lives and that often the ensuing skills, knowledge and abilities are those recognised formally in qualifications.
A principle of APL is that individuals can be assessed for their competence without regard for time, place or method of learning.
In accrediting prior learning, the focus is on the outcomes or achievements of learning and not on the learning process itself.
Over the past year there have been further APL developments which have taken the model developed by the APL project at Telford College, reported in Update 13, as a starting point.
The basic operational model of APL is:
a
publicity to interest potential candidates in the service;
b
initial interview between the candidate and a generalist counsellor;
c
matching skills and knowledge to module descriptions (candidate and counsellor);
d
collection, sorting and presentation of evidence as a portfolio by candidate;
e
consideration of evidence by assessor.
An example of this process from the APL pilot project is that of a client who had worked in a laboratory for a number of years and was involved in setting up systems and software for recording and analysing data within a developing computer system.
The initial interview established that the client had a depth of knowledge and level of skill which could be used to claim credit, and the matching exercise established that the performance criteria in 9 computing modules appeared to be met.
The client collected evidence of his achievements in these areas and submitted a portfolio which was initially assessed by a member of the college APL team.
Further assessment in the form of a demonstration and interview at the client's place of work resulted in accreditation for all 9 modules.
The client has now taken up an appointment in computing.
The increasing importance attached to APL is indicated by the decision in Lothian Region to develop APL in all colleges; the initiative is supported by the appointment of a Regional Development Officer and the allocation of funding by the Regional Education Department.
The development has also been supported by a substantial staff development programme and co-operative work between the five colleges in the region.
The original pilot college, Telford, is now extending its APL Service from the three early pilot areas to all of its nineteen Teaching Groups.
In addition it is developing a Skills Audit Service based upon APL and a special service aimed at Employment Training Managers.
APL involves the accreditation of competence; the new SCOTVEC Advanced Courses, which are written in competence terms, are well suited to the provision of an APL service.
Various initiatives have emerged to capitalise on this system
for example:
Fife College of Technology, Glenrothes College and Lauder College have formed a consortium and were validated jointly to offer the HNC in Management.
Their proposal included the provision of an APL service for those seeking credit for previous learning.
Stevenson College also intends to provide APL within its recently validated HNC in Management.
Fife College of Technology and Stevenson College are also pilot centres in a project managed by the Management Charter Initiative — The Experienced Manager APL Project.
The aim of this project is to use the APL process to assess the management competences of a group of managers against the recently developed standards and to link their achievements to the HNC in Management.
The second APL Project managed by SCOTVEC has, as one of its objectives, the development of an APL service to meet the requirements of an employer.
Fife College of Technology, Glenrothes College and Hughes Microelectronics Ltd have been working to credit employees with HN Units leading to the HNC in Management and the HNC/D in Organisational Administration using APL.
Paisley College of Technology and IBM have jointly produced a part-time HND in Manufacturing.
The course is being offered initially to some 100 IBM staff and participants will have the opportunity to gain credit for their prior learning thus enabling the course to be completed in a shorter time.
SCOTVEC supports developments which allow greatly flexibility in the achievement of qualifications and has formulated a policy on APL which states the criteria which centres have to satisfy before they can be approved to offer an APL service.
For example, a centre must have at least one member of staff who is competent in APL techniques and there must be a plan to train all members of the centre's APL team; a central contact for APL must be appointed who will be responsible for organising APL within the centre and for liaising with SCOTVEC.
In order to ensure  compatibility with qualifications obtained by more traditional means, centres may only offer, through APL the same qualifications that they are validated to offer by other means.
From Mid-September 1990, Telford College, will be offering two HN Units:(i) Facilitation of APL and (ii) Assessment of APL.
These units will be offered on an Open Learning basis with tutor support.
The units are designed to support the staff development requirements set out in the SCOTVEC policy on the approval of centres for APL delivery.
Details of these HN Units can be obtained from  .
Further information about APL can be obtained from  
HNC/D IN VOCATIONAL STUDIES
During the pilot phase of the Advanced Courses Development Programme suggestions were received from a number of individuals and organisations that consideration should be given to the introduction of a new type of group award within SCOTVEC's portfolio of advanced courses.
It was pointed out that the modular nature of the new advanced provision lends itself to students choosing groups of units which, although having vocational relevance for the individual or a particular employer, do not satisfy the criteria for an existing HNC or HND.
The introduction of such an award at the HNC and HND level would allow achievement to be recognised by a group award whilst avoiding unnecessary proliferation of titles.
A consultation document was circulated to all Scottish Further Education Colleges and Central Institutions to obtain the educational perspective on such an award and to all members of SCOTVEC Sector Boards to gauge the industrial view.
Some 55 colleges and individuals replied but no clear consensus on the need for, or desirability of, such an award emerged.
Consequently SCOTVEC's Policy Committee decided not to initiate its development immediately but to keep the situation under review.
Since that time other factors including the progress made in the development and introduction of a CNAA Scottish Credit Accumulation and Transfer System, have revived interest in a general category of vocational group awards.
Thus the issue is now being considered further and comments would be welcomed by SCOTVEC.
Proposals for policy on this issue will be brought forward in the near future.
DEVELOPMENT OF HN UNIT SPECIFICATIONS
How a Course Specification was Devised
SCOTVEC is now about half way through the Advanced Courses Development Programme and almost completely at the end of the major national developments.
The Advanced Courses Development Programme has had two thrusts.
One, centred on college initiatives, required colleges to fully develop their own proposals, including HN Unit Specifications.
However, in a number of subject areas, SCOTVEC expected to receive similar proposals from large numbers of colleges throughout the country.
It was important in these subject areas that a coherent, national framework was maintained for the purposes of progression, recognition, credit transfer and articulation.
For these reasons, SCOTVEC embarked upon several major projects to write the HN Unit Specifications for .
In a number of other areas the national perspective was maintained either by mini projects which provided a framework within which colleges could operate and develop their units, or by SCOTVEC providing advice, assistance and initial leadership (together with on-going administrative support) for groups of colleges in consortium — so called Nationally Led Consortia.
Fundamental to the whole process was the transference to colleges of the maximum responsibility for course development and assessment, while maintaining the important framework of national comparability.
The major focus in writing HN Unit Specifications is consultation with users.
This was the major design feature of the new units — that they should represent the competences, knowledge, skills and understanding expected by the major users of an award.
For example, in the case of the HNC/D Accounting, the major users are employers, professional bodies and providers of degree level qualifications such as CIs and Universities.
It was important that expectations of the traditional awards should be sustained and that major transformations in the world of work or career patterns, both current and imminent, should be accommodated in the new HN Unit.
This was so important that for each of the national developments a full time National Development Officer (NDO) was seconded for a year from a college.
The work of the NDO was directed by a Steering Group on which all the major Accounting professional bodies were represented as well as private and public sector employers and educationalists.
The NDO had to establish a framework for the new awards to the satisfaction of the Steering Group.
This was only achieved after major consultations with employers, professional bodies and educationists.
It was extremely important that this framework had wide acceptability, as unit writers would be recruited to prepare HN Unit Specifications based on the framework.
To achieve this two seminars — one for employers and one for educationalists — were first held to verify the framework.
Representatives from every college in Scotland were invited to the latter.
The next stage was to recruit and train writers for each of the units identified in the framework.
Unit writers were almost all seconded lecturers from colleges.
Each unit writer was trained in the techniques of unit writing, but the major focus was to be the consultation with employers and each unit writer was recruited and briefed a consultative network of users to moderate his or her writing.
Unit writers were well aware that their HN Unit Specifications would effectively form the assessment contract between centres and SCOTVEC.
(One of the main findings of the pilot phase was that too detailed a specification could lead to impractical or excessive assessment regimes.)
After the HN Unit Specifications had been refined by the consultative networks, an initial edit was done by the NDO and scrutiny carried out by the Steering Group or a sub committee of it.
A questionnaire survey of a sample of colleges was also used to bring a college perspective to the final stages of the development.
Next came a SCOTVEC edit, to bring all developments into a house style, which itself was designed to reflect current UK developments.
The final stage was to confirm the edited version with the unit writers and to gain the approval of the Steering Group for the final versions.
The development had started in the summer of 1988.
The HN Unit Specifications were in the colleges by August 1989.
The next phase was for colleges to design the courses which would produce these outcomes and the assessments, management structures and internal quality assurance procedures.
During the design stage, consultations were taking place with, for example, local employers and funders.
SCOTVEC held an information session about half way through this phase, at Christmas 1989.
Representatives of colleges met the NDO and SCOTVEC staff and had the opportunity to raise issues with the unit writers.
Individual colleges then presented their proposals to SCOTVEC at the end of February for  as well as for courses devised by individual colleges and consortia.
Approximately 270 proposals were received which resulted in around 160 validation events.
These involved over 1000 people (on the SCOTVEC side of the table), mostly professionals and industrialists.
Most proposals were validated with conditions which reflected colleges' inexperience of the new Advanced Courses system and, sometimes, an over-cautious approach to their system.
Both of these characteristics will be overcome as experience of the new system grows, as colleges meet to share experience and to co-operate in quality assurance and as External Course Assessors provide support and feedback to centres.
Thus a process which started in early 1988 will see the first holder of an HNC in Accounting emerge in the summer of 1991, and the first holder of an HND in Accounting in 1992.
The process has involved a major co-operative effort, drawing SCOTVEC, industry and commerce, college staff and others together in a venture which ensures that those future HNC and HND holders have qualifications which are a passport to future success.
SCOTVEC gratefully acknowledges the help of all those involved in bringing this process to fruition.
ADVANCED COURSES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME — CENTRAL SUPPORT UNIT — FAREWELL
The Advanced Courses Development Programme Central Support Unit was established on a short term basis just over two and a half years ago with the task of co-ordinating the development of the new system of advanced courses.
Now that the new system of advanced courses is becoming well established the time has come for the work of the Central Support Unit to be absorbed into mainstream SCOTVEC Departments.
As from 1st September 1990 the new contacts in SCOTVEC are:.
.
who has been Senior Development Officer responsible for the Central Support Unit and co-ordinating the Advanced Courses Development Programme, is undertaking an evaluation of the programme and will be in contact with selected centres in due course.
SCOTVEC Advanced Courses UPDATE
ISSUE NUMBER 31 JUNE 1992
‘Well Advanced’
This edition of Update will be the last devoted exclusively to the Advanced Courses Development Programme.
It is the last because ACDP itself has almost reached its objective of transforming all SCOTVEC's advanced courses into their new modular format.
We are now validating and approving the last of the three batches of courses for the new system and, apart from a few special cases, this will mean that all students beginning an advanced course after the summer will be enrolling for a modular, rather than traditional, course.
This Update draws together some of the achievements of ACDP, reflects on some lessons learned and looks to the future.
The most obvious comment to make on the new-style courses, though, is that they look set to be a great success, if candidate uptake is an indicator.
That the programme has gone so well is a measure of the enormous effort put into it by a partnership of centres and SCOTVEC.
For out part, we want to pay tribute to the many staff, working on course development in their own centre and in consortia or working on secondment to SCOTVEC as development officers, validators and external verifiers.
Without your hard work, the development of the new courses could not have been such a success.
The reward for the hard work is that a much better system of advanced courses is now in place, giving better service to employers and providing candidates with many more opportunities, with greater flexibility and with greatly improved progression routes from National Certificate Modules all the way through to degrees.
Wider horizons
SCOTCAT and SCOTVEC
One of the key features of the new advanced courses was the development of planned linkages between HNC, HND and degree courses.
This is described in more detailed in the next article.
The new courses were designed to be achieved by accumulation of credits for a pre-determined set of Higher National Units.
At an early stage, we also recognised the potential of the new system, because of its outcome-based approach, to offer more flexible credit transfer between centres and between courses.
Such flexible approaches to credit accumulation and transfer were also being explored north and south of the border by CNAA, leading to formal systems of credit transfer known as CATS in the south and SCOTCAT in Scotland.
The basis of these systems was the allocation of credit points to parts of courses so that candidates could move from one course to another or from one centre to another and carry credit for past achievement, where that achievement was relevant to the new course.
After discussions with CNAA Office for Scotland and with the institutions in the SCOTCAT network, it was agreed that the new-style SCOTVEC advanced courses fitted well into the SCOTCAT model of credit accumulation and transfer.
SCOTVEC, as a member of the SCOTCAT network, agreed a framework to allow HNC and HND courses, and Higher National Units, to be given SCOTCAT general credit points.
The SCOTCAT network has since widened still further by the agreement of the senates of all Scottish Universities to participate.
For holders of HNC and HND awards, the agreement through which SCOTVEC joins SCOTCAT means that where planned linkage between an HNC, HND and degree has been designed, the HNC and HND will carry points towards that degree corresponding to year 1 and year 2 respectively of the degree course — this assigns to a maximum of 120 SCOTCAT points to the HNC and 240 to the HND.
A total of 480 points is usually needed for an honours degree.
Details of the formal agreement between SCOTVEC and SCOTCAT were sent to all centres.
Copies are available on request from the SCOTVEC Publications Unit,.
SCOTVEC and BTEC
The agreement between SCOTVEC and SCOTCAT significantly enhanced the opportunities for credit transfer for holders of HNCs and HNDs in SCOTVEC centres.
In the south, BTEC had also negotiated an agreement for recognition of their Higher National courses within the CATS network.
The CATS network is, of course, based on the different structure of higher education provision in the south and, in particular , on the three-year honours degree.
However SCOTVEC and BTEC had been engaged on a number of discussions on areas of mutual interest.
We therefore, decided to look at credit transfer between our Higher National courses.
This has now been achieved and a joint statement, highlighting mutual recognition based on each body's HND as the benchmark, has been published along with guidance notes for centres.
Copies of both publications have been sent to all centres.
The agreement reached between SCOTVEC and SCOTCAT members — and between SCOTVEC and BTEC — has added a further dimension to the flexibility and widened opportunities for candidates which are the hallmark of our new advanced courses.
The last batch
The spring and summer of this year sees the validation of the last main batch of courses for the transition to the new advanced courses system.
In consultation with colleges in 1989, we planned the changeover to the new system over three years and three batches, providing, we hoped, a timetable which was not too rushed but which at the same time allowed centres to progress at a pace which met their candidates' needs.
Batch 3 was intended to be quite small, in terms of numbers of courses.
But, just as with the other two batches, centres have gone well beyond just the transfer of the remaining old courses into the new system and have proposed a large number of innovative courses and units for validation.
Although our prediction had been for around 100 validations, based on the transfer of old courses, we will actually be involved in closer to 320 validations.
Among the courses transferring from the old system this year are the HNC and HND in public administration, social care and health care.
The new proposals being validated this spring and summer include an HNC jointly developed by SCOTVEC and CCETSW which contains within it workplace units covered in a placement.
These units, which are a subset of the whole HNC, lead to an SVQ award in social care.
New HNC and HND proposals have also been put forward in areas as diverse as sports therapy, golf course management, designer knitwear and stonemasonry.
The widening base
We always anticipated that centres would take the opportunity offered by ACDP to develop new courses — either courses in completely new areas, courses which combined related disciplines or new approaches to traditional courses.
We didn't anticipate, though, the scale of this innovative activity.
Table 1 summarises the types of submissions for validation.
The data for Batches 1 and 2 is complete and for Batch 3, the latest information is given.
The table shows the enthusiasm with which centres took the opportunity to go beyond straightforward transfer of old courses.
The result was that the boundaries of advanced courses expanded well beyond the traditional areas of science, technology and business studies.
New course development took place in areas of economic and employment importance, leading to HNDs in, for example,.
There were also interesting proposals to bring together relevant disciplines into ‘combined’ awards; the modular nature of the new advanced courses were particularly suited to this type of proposal.
Examples were HNDs in chemistry and business studies and in tourism and languages.
Another key aspect of the new courses has been the building in of planned linkages to degree provision.
Such planned progression was a feature of many of the proposals made by centres; the scale of this is shown in Table 2.
Again, the scale of development of planned linkages was unexpected, although it is a welcome surprise.
It is encouraging too that these links have not been restricted only to those centres which themselves offer both SCOTVEC advanced courses and degrees.
Although such linkages have been a key feature of the development work done in the Central Institutions, linkages have also been set up between HNC/D courses in Further Education Colleges and both CIs and Universities.
One very significant outcome of these linkages has been the opportunity to build exit points at HNC and HND level which correspond to the ends of year 1 and year 2 of degree courses.
This allows the centre to offer students, for whom the full degree programme may not be appropriate, the opportunity to work towards an end point at Year 1 or 2 which carries a qualification awarded by SCOTVEC on a national basis and which, through SCOTVEC's efforts in negotiating national recognition agreements for its awards, has currency in the employment marketplace.
In total, then, the base has widened very considerably.
In the old system of advanced courses, there were around 500 courses available for candidates' enrolment.
(This method of counting courses assumes that the same HNC on offer in three different centres counts as three available courses.)
With Batch 3 still to be completed, there are, in the new system, over 1,000 courses available for enrolment.
A further aspect of the new system, which has yet to be fully exploited by centres, is that the Higher National Units which make up the new courses can be taken individually by candidates, rather than in complete courses.
Although the bulk of candidates may continue to be those whose aim is to complete a full HNC or HND course, many, who are interested in retraining or improving their skill level in a specific area, might welcome the opportunity to study for just one or two HN Units.
The units in areas such as information technology, modern languages, European issues and management might be particularly attractive, packaged as ‘short courses’.
Theory into practice
In 1987, The Consultative Paper on Advanced Courses envisaged that a change to the new system would widen opportunity and enhance progression for candidates.
The very positive response to the proposals in the Consultative Paper, from every section of vocational education and training, showed that that view was widely shared.
The key question was whether, in practice, the numbers of candidates enrolling for the new system would live up to the high expectations.
It will be some years yet before the full uptake picture becomes available because the traditional courses are still being phased out.
Candidates who began under the traditional system will complete their course under that system and so it will be 1995 before the old system — and the examinations which were a part of it — finally disappear.
Meantime, however, the growth in uptake in the new system is proving very encouraging.
The figures are shown in Table 3.
The second column shows the stage which the Advanced Courses Development Programme had reached.
The candidate and unit enrolment data is cumulative in that, for example, the courses enrolled for in 1991–2 will include the new Batch 2 courses first validated for that year — but will also include candidates enrolling for the second cycle of Batch 1, the third cycle of Phase 2 pilots, etc.
The overall picture, with session 1991–2 yet to be completed, is very encouraging for SCOTVEC, because it indicates that the faith we had in the new system's advantages was well-founded.
For centres, it shows that significantly more ‘customers’ are being attracted into the advanced courses system.
Given that Batch 3 courses are still to start — candidates will first enrol for them in the summer of 1992 — it looks as if the number of candidates involved in advanced courses in any one year is going to exceed 30,000 when the steady stage is eventually reached for the new system — and that the number of Higher National Unit enrolments per year will approach 200,000.
If this proves to be the case, it will show that centres have grasped the opportunity offered by the new advanced courses to make wider access a reality.
Lessons learned
During 1990–1, Anne-Marie Chapman was deployed as a Development Officer to carry out an evaluation of aspects of ACDP.
She has written a very full report which will assist us with a review of advanced courses policy in the light of the development of general Scottish Vocational Qualifications (of which more later).
During her work, Anne-Marie visited seven centres chosen to represent various stages and levels of involvement in ACDP.
Almost 100 questionnaires completed by centre staff were evaluated and interviews conducted with 52 advanced courses candidates.
We are very grateful to staff and candidates of the seven centres for their help in this work.
Also in 1990, the Scottish Council for Research in Education was commissioned by the Scottish Office Education Department to carry out an evaluation of ACDP.
The outcome of this work, which was carried out just after candidates had enrolled for the Batch 1 courses, is still awaited.
We await this report with interest because it will also provide information to assist with future policy reviews.
Some points from the internal evaluation are summarised below.
Overall
The majority of staff who responded to the questionnaire were supportive of the new-style of advanced courses.
77% favoured the devolution of responsibility to centres which is inherent in the new system.
Respondents commented on the greater sense of ownership of the new courses, of opportunities to tailor the courses better to the needs of local candidates and employers, and of greater flexibility, particularly in assessment arrangements.
Of the 23% who did not approve of the devolution, some commented on the speed with which the new system had been introduced and of the lack of opportunity for staff development; others were concerned that localised development meant duplication of effort.
The HN Units
The comments on the quality of the nationally-developed Higher National Unit specifications were generally neutral, with 57% rating them as acceptable and even numbers rating them as better and worse than acceptable.
Among the criticisms voiced, there were comments on jargon in the specifications' language and on the need for more guidance on assessment and, especially, on merit.
Views expressed on the quality of centre-devised and consortia-devised HN Units were more positive than for nationally-devised units.
Comments stressed the need to allow adequate time to develop such units and to ensure that the units are looked at, and if need be edited, by colleagues.
Merit
Of all the areas covered by the evaluation, this was the one which attracted the most critical comment.
There was still a majority view (68%) that the inclusion of a merit level award was appropriate, although respondents stressed that the award of merit needed to be firmly rooted in identifiable and different levels of competence and not on comparisons between candidates.
Comments confirmed the motivational effect of the merit award and its usefulness in selecting candidates for progression.
Despite the majority in favour of merit, SCOTVEC's implementation of it attracted critical comment.
Points raised included the timing of the issue of the Guidance Note on Merit, the danger of variation in interpretation of the basis for merit awards and, generally, the feeling that SCOTVEC's policy was being developed during implementation of ACDP.
A view was expressed that merit would have been better attached to the group award, rather than to every individual unit.
Quality assurance
The work of the external course verifiers (now called external verifiers) was well-received.
85% found ECAs helpful in clarifying standards and 92% found the ECA role to be appropriate to a devolved assessment system.
The only major critical point made was that it is difficult, particularly in broadly-based courses, for one ECA to have subject expertise across the full range of units.
Assessment
The evaluation asked staff about the particular assessment instruments they used, and the frequency with which each was used.
The most striking thing about the results is the wide range of assessment instruments being routinely used by this sample of centre staff.
Although written testing is still in common use,(and it is appropriate that it should be for outcomes which are knowledge-based), other instruments such as projects, case studies and assignments were commonly used too.
Others such as role plays, simulation exercises, personal interviews and aurals/orals were used, but to a lesser extent.
The results confirm that one of the hopes for ACDP seems to have been achieved.
This was to change assessment of advanced courses from a system driven by external examinations to one in which assessment is driven by the nature of the outcomes in the course and can assess the range of outcomes desirable in vocational courses.
There were, though, comments from staff which indicated that assessment is still an area where further development work is needed.
The particular issues raised were of over-assessment and of a fragmented approach to assessment.
Both of these have also been raised in evaluations of the first six years of National Certificate's operation.
We will therefore be setting up a short-life, intensive research project to look at over-assessment, both to identity good practice and to review and reiterate work already done (for example, in the Innovative Approaches to Assessment Project reported in Update 11).
One key area to be addressed is the potential for integration of assessment — that is, to use a single instrument of assessment to assess several outcomes in the same unit or indeed outcomes across more than one unit.
Work being done in the development of general SVQs will be useful here.
For example, we expect the core skills included in all general SVQs to be amenable to an integrative approach.
To address the fragmentation issue, general SVQs will also feature an additional assessment, probably taken towards the end of the course, which will require the candidate to demonstrate that he/she can pull together the work across all of the modules which make up the general SVQ.
This additional assessment in general SVQs will also be used as the means to identify merit for the group award.
The lessons learned from the operation of this different way of determining merit will be carefully evaluated to see if it has potential to be applied also to HNCs and HNDs in the future.
Staff development
Staff in the sampled centres reported on their participation in a range of staff development events on ACDP.
The average number of events attended by each member of staff was four.
One the nature of the event, 79% had participated in an event designed to assist with the writing of unit specifications and 90% had taken part in ‘mock’ validation events.
Perhaps disappointingly, especially in the light of the quality auditing of centres, which is a part of SCOTVEC's new Quality Framework, only 28% of staff had participated in staff development related to their centre's internal quality assurance system, although 89% reported that their centre did have such an internal system.
Conclusion
Although it is always dangerous to extrapolate from a sample, the findings of the evaluation give rise to cautious optimism that the basis of the new advanced courses system continues to be supported by most staff, even if there is understandable criticism of individual aspects of the implementation.
It would have been surprising, given the scale and pace of the development programme, if some misgivings had not been expressed.
For SCOTVEC, the message from the evaluation is that some adjustments and refinements to the new advanced courses system need to be made.
We will address these very seriously, while also being alert to the danger of being too quick to introduce a further round of changes before the new system has fully settled down.
The future
The last five years have spanned the period from the publication of the consultative paper on advanced courses to the completion of the transition timetable by which all courses were transferred into the new modular system.
In the current year, the focus of major development activity has shifted into other areas with, for example, the development of SVQs and general SVQs, and the Quality Development Programme.
For advanced courses, the next few years should be a time to consolidate the positive achievements of ACDP and to adjust and refine as necessary, but not to initiate radical change.
The most important task will be to consider HNCs and HNDs in the light of the emerging general SVQs.
Our early thinking, at the moment, is that we should seek ways, but without major upheaval, to bring HNCs and HNDs under the ‘general SVQ umbrella’ because this would give those advanced awards a rightful place in the framework of Scottish Vocational Qualifications and at the same time simplify and clarify progression routes from introductory through to advanced qualifications and beyond.
In the immediate future, we will be issuing guidance on the ways in which the new-style HNCs and HNDs are to be reviewed — this guidance is necessary because some of the pilot courses and Batch 1 courses will soon reach the end of their period of validation.
In response to requests from centres, we are also developing guidance on how a centre can modify HN Unit specifications and on ways in which workplace activity can be given formal recognition as part of advanced awards.