

Crossing frontiers
This year's Annual Review sees John Martin and John McCutcheon taking over from Hugh Scurfield and Alistair Neill as Presidents of the Institute and the Faculty.
As actuaries we are professionally trained to make forward projections so we should also look at the future for our own profession.
This is a good time to be thinking strategically and finding new ways for our skills to be of service to the public.
We have the opportunity to take stock of our special techniques and their relevance to a changing world.
John Martin President of the Institute
John McCutcheon President of the Faculty
Actuaries have supervised and encouraged the growth of life insurance companies and pension funds in the past, and actuarial science is being increasingly applied in work for non-life companies and in investment modelling.
But these are only some of the financial institutions where actuarial skills could be relevant and we look forward to crossing the frontiers into non-traditional fields, for example the planning of capital projects.
There are other challenges for actuaries in the years ahead, closest to home in Europe.
The UK profession has flourished in a free market economy where much reliance has been placed on actuaries' judgement rather than on constricting regulations.
Our experience is therefore of particular relevance to actuaries in other European countries as the cross-border barriers are dismantled.
In recent years we have devoted substantial resources to reorganising our education systems in the UK and we see this continuing.
Education is required at two levels.
We must provide tuition for students and examine them to ensure that they reach the highest standards to allow them to practise as actuaries.
We are taking active steps to ensure that practising actuaries keep up with the rapid pace of change through a programme of Continuing Professional Development.
The UK profession provides an important educational service world-wide.
Currently, we have an exciting opportunity to influence the development of actuarial skills and thinking in the countries of Eastern Europe in particular.
In due course there may be significant business opportunities in these countries, but the immediate need is for educational help.
So far, we have had requests for assistance from Hungary, Poland, Russia, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria.
Our resources are limited, but we try to give as much aid as possible tot he nascent profession in these countries.
It is encouraging that these countries wish to follow our example but it also places a heavy obligation on us to offer this assistance.
In all of these activities the Faculty and the Institute, although constituted as independent professional bodies, will be working closely together as a single profession.
Institute of Actuaries Faculty of Actuaries 
A Significant Year
The past year has seen considerable activity within the profession, which in turn has a major impact on the public we serve.
One of the most fundamental areas concerns the introduction of new education and examination systems which will in future be handled jointly by the Institute and Faculty.
It is legendary that actuarial training is rigorous and difficult, but it is this depth of training which enables actuaries to take on the responsibility of advising on the financing of future payments involving billions of pounds for insurance companies and pension funds.
A thorough overhaul of the educational process will ensure that standards remain as high in the future as they have been in the past.
The need for irreproachable standards has been brought into sharp focus by the events concerning the Maxwell pension funds, which turned the spotlight on pension funds and the security they provide to members.
The profession has been considering ways in which the actuarial role can be strengthened to prove greater protection for pension scheme members.
Actuaries will be in the public eye much more in future.
In an important step which strengthens the actuarial role in life companies, a requirement for Appointed Actuaries of life offices to hold an ‘Appointed Actuary Certificate’ has been introduced.
To obtain and retain a certificate, an actuary will now have to meet specialist requirements including relevant experience and to maintain a programme of regular professional education.
This places the emphasis on regulating companies rather than products and offers a wider choice to consumers.
It formalises procedures which were already common, ensuring that the UK system of insurance regulation will compete successfully with other European regimes.
Indeed, the Appointed Actuary system may be followed in Europe and is being introduced in the USA and Canada.
The actuarial profession has its earliest origins in the UK and we have a clear objective of communicating with our professional colleagues in other countries.
We have made visits to actuarial societies in every corner of the globe and received many overseas visitors and we were struck by the similarity of the issues we face.
In Europe we have influenced the development of Directives from the European Commission which will affect the conduct of pensions and insurance business throughout the whole of Europe.
The Commission has welcomed the guidance given by the co-ordinated efforts of the various actuarial bodies in Europe.
At home, we have used the Actuary — the magazine of the UK Actuarial Profession — to communicate with our members.
For two years we have been refocussing the organisation of the profession and defining our key objectives.
This process is now bearing fruit in greater awareness of the work of actuaries and of how our skills are essential to the public we serve.
PENSIONS
Pensions Security
This has been a year when pensions have been very much to the fore.
In the UK, the assets in pension schemes are estimated to be over £300 billion.
There are 160,000 schemes, albeit many of them small, and there are about 12 million members in pension funds.
These are also some 5 million people with personal pensions.
Earlier in the year interest centred on the cost of equalising the treatment of men and women in schemes to comply with the judgment of the European Court of Justice in the case of Barber versus Guardian Royal Exchange.
If the judgment were held to be retrospective in its effect, the potential costs would, as the profession pointed out, have caused major difficulties for many employers.
Fortunately, the ‘Maastricht Protocol’, once ratified, should mean that the judgment will not be retrospective.
Later on, interest centred on the revision of the terms on which schemes can contract out of the State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme and the profession commented on the Government Actuary's proposals for the rebate in National Insurance contributions from 1993 onwards.
The most prominent issue of the year has been the question of the security of members' interests in pension funds in the wake of the Maxwell affair.
The profession had already been reviewing the role of the pension scheme actuary and this groundwork will be useful in responding to the calls which have been made for the professionals involved in pension funds, including actuaries, to play a stronger role.
One particular aspect is the need which has been suggested for there to be a named actuary for each scheme available to monitor the finances of the scheme on a regular basis.
The profession is considering the possible need to move to a system whereby such actuaries have to meet specific experience and ongoing training requirements as well as enhancing our mandatory professional guidance.
The profession has been pro-active in letting its views be known before and after the publication of the House of Commons Social Security report.
A related issue, because it is concerned with the protection of members' interests, was the implementation of Government regulations covering the protection of members in bulk transfer situations which is based on actuarial certificates.
In view of the difficulties experienced in practice, representation by the profession to the DSS has led to a review of the legislation.
A quite separate area of interest has been the question of actuarial advice on pensions in divorce cases where the law in Scotland requires that the value of pensions is taken into consideration and could be the model for a change in English law.
On the European front we submitted evidence on the draft EC Pensions Directive which provides for cross-border management of pension funds and cross-border investment of funds.
More recently, a long awaited consultation paper has been received from the DSS on the alternatives for equalising State pension ages.
In view of the interaction between State and occupational scheme benefits, we are pressing for an approach which allows flexibility in the choice of retirement date.
LIFE ASSURANCE
The Appointed Actuary — a role of growing importance
Actuaries occupy a central position in the UK life assurance industry.
This is particularly evident in the role of the Appointed Actuary.
Not only does he play a part in the management of the company, he is also a crucial element in the system of supervision by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Appointed Actuary has a responsibility to ensure that the company is financially sound and is able to meet the reasonable expectations of its policyholders.
The system has been extended by the introduction of Certificates for Appointed Actuaries.
These will be granted by the professional bodies in the UK to appropriate actuaries to ensure that the highest standards will continue to prevail.
Life assurance companies are complex financial structures whose main products, life assurance and pension policies, have a life of many years.
Unlike sales for a manufacturing company, the sale of a life assurance product is only the start of a long relationship between the policyholder and the company.
Manufacturing companies must analyse the profits arising for their shareholders and report these as they occur.
Proprietary life assurance companies are no different in this respect but it is very difficult to ascertain the amounts of profit arising from individual contracts and the exact period of time over which they can be said to have been earned.
The trade body for the insurance industry, the Association of British Insurers, produced proposals in 1991 for a new basis on which shareholders' profits from long term insurance business might be recognised.
These were debated at length but the actuarial profession did not find it possible to support them.
Nevertheless, actuaries are keen to find an agreed basis and look forward to the discussion of revised suggestions.
Following the Financial Services Act the range of information available on long term assurance products continues to develop.
Actuaries are asked to provide information on products and companies for prospective investors and their advisers.
This includes estimates of how the returns to policyholders have been reduced by the effect of expenses and charges incurred by the life assurance company.
Industry regulators proposed giving this information greater prominence and adding new features.
They asked the profession, among others, for its views.
In its reply the profession, while acknowledging its willingness to co-operate in the provision of relevant additional information, expressed concern that concentration on expenses and charges, while ignoring more important aspects of product and company selection such as the investment return, might not be in the best interests of consumers.
Takeovers and mergers continue to take place within the life assurance sector.
The profession has therefore established a working party to consider the actuarial information needed by the financial world for the proper evaluation of a bid for a quoted life insurance company.
This is an important subject which is likely to remain actively debated for some time.
GENERAL INSURANCE
The Actuary in General 1991 was a year notable for some very poor results for general insurance companies, which has highlighted the importance of both premium rating and claims reserving.
A developing issue for actuaries has been the question of the possible use of professional certification of reserves for general insurance.
Over recent years, actuaries have become increasingly involved in the assessment of the claims reserves for both companies and Lloyd's syndicates.
The statistical, financial and projection skills of actuaries are of particular relevance to this work.
The actuarial profession believes that there would be benefits for both directors and supervisors if there were a formal requirement for an actuarial certificate in respect of the claims reserves.
Actuarial Certification is to be required in Canada and the USA and both countries are moving towards the use of the Appointed Actuary system in general insurance.
Actuaries in the United Kingdom are ready and able to play their part, not least following the recent growth in the number of suitably experienced and qualified actuaries.
There are numerous areas in which general insurance actuaries are currently developing new techniques, for example, medical expenses.
Broken Down by Sex
Actuaries often break down populations for analysis by sex so it is only fair to apply the same process to ourselves.
The following table shows a surge in the number of female actuaries over the last decade an also demonstrates how male dominated we were 60 years ago.
It seems safe to predict (without actuarial analysis) that the proportion of female members of the profession will continue to grow rapidly.
EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS
Cross Channel Influence
Three substantive European Insurance Directives (Accounts, Non-Life Framework and Life Framework) have been agreed in the past year.
A fourth, less substantive, Pensions Directive is likely to emerge before the end of 1992 as Brussels makes a supreme effort, under Sir Leon Brittan's Commissionership, to bring Freedom of Services to the financial sector by ‘1992’.
These Directives could have a profound effect upon the value for money which insurance companies and pension providers can offer their customers, throughout Europe, in the years ahead.
As such, they are of vital concern to actuaries.
The UK profession has therefore been tireless, both directly and through the Groupe Consultatif, in seeking to influence the Directives and to promote the advantages of the British system.
Supervision on the principle of ‘freedom with disclosure’, supported by a strong actuarial profession in Government, in insurance companies and in consultancy, has served British companies well for many years.
The UK profession has lobbied the DTI, Parliament, the European Commission, the European Parliament, and national centres of influence by giving seminars in many of the European countries.
The Groupe Consultatif, representing 14 actuarial associations throughout the EC, has also fostered greater understanding of the substantial differences in the way insurance and pensions are conducted in the different countries.
More important, it has on several occasions presented to the European Commission solutions to technical problems with the Directives which have had the unanimous support of member associations.
These texts have been warmly received by the Commission and the work of the Group Consultatif has enhanced the reputation of actuaries in the Community.
Many British actuaries have actively supported the Groupe Consultatif in its work throughout this important period.
Actuarial advice should not be restricted by national boundaries.
So an agreement between the national actuarial association in the EC relating to the mutual recognition between the members of EC associations is currently being implemented.
Following the dramatic political changes in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, contacts between these countries and the UK are being developed.
Assistance is being provided from the UK in three specific areas: support for the fledgling actuarial education systems in these countries, arranging visits for actuaries from Eastern Europe to the UK to study our methods in practice and the secondment of UK actuaries to work in the countries concerned.
As the young economies in these countries grow it is important that life assurance and pensions services develop from solid actuarial foundations.
INVESTMENT/HEALTHCARE
A Question of Balance
Balance sheets are divided between liabilities and assets and much of the work undertaken by actuaries relates to the liabilities side.
For example, valuing the future payments due to pension scheme members or to policyholders would both fall into this category.
However, management of a life assurance company or a pension fund also extends to managing the assets and actuarial methods have a vital part to play in this area.
In recent years considerable research has been undertaken to build computer models of asset performance and returns and their correlation with liabilities.
This work is aimed at providing investment managers with better guidance on the asset distribution most appropriate for the needs of the fund concerned.
This helps to give better information on the risk/reward balance of various investment options and to assess the performance of fund managers.
Despite the developments achieved already, much work remains to be done in this area and it will have growing importance in coming years.
As in all the other fields of actuarial work, the profession has provided seminars and conferences for debate on new developments.
Healthcare
There is a growing requirement for actuarial expertise in Healthcare.
This will become more important as we see changes in the National Health Service.
The costs involved in private medical insurance schemes have been rising very rapidly compared with inflation generally.
The most difficult issue is providing for the costs of private medical care in retirement.
Where this is provided by employers it is important for the costs to be properly recognised and funded.
Insurance contracts for long-term care have recently been introduced to the market, and this will be an area of actuarial development.
Actuaries are well qualified to analyse the relevant statistics and advise on appropriate premium and reserving bases.
In a related field, the profession's Continuous Mortality Investigation Bureau recently published the results of several years' work on a study of claim rates under permanent health insurance contracts.
This has provided the statistics that are needed for a new approach to be adopted for setting reserves and premium rates.
FT-ACTUARIES INDICES
An important task undertaken by the profession is the preparation, jointly with the Financial Times, of the FT-Actuaries All Share Index and the FT-Actuaries World Indices.
These indices have an international reputation and require constant supervision and maintenance to ensure that they satisfactorily reflect market developments.
MEMBERSHIP
Actuarial Facts
What is an Actuary?
A good definition of an actuary might be ‘a person who is qualified to calculate risks and probabilities, and who applies these skills to financial and business problems, especially those involving uncertain future events such as life insurance and demographics’.
A more concise definition might be ‘those mathematical mandarins in life assurance and pensions’!
A Brief History
The actuarial profession traces its origins back to 1762, with the establishment of the first life office to run on scientific principles.
The success of this company led to a growth in life assurance business and the need for practitioners to meet informally to discuss matters of common interest.
These were formalised into the Institute of Actuaries in London in 1848 and the Faculty of Actuaries in Edinburgh in 1856.
These two professional bodies continue to the present day, with their members enjoying an equal professional status.
As professional bodies, they are responsible for laying down a code of conduct for their members with the ultimate aim of providing the highest standards of service for the public.
The Actuary Today
Although the greatest proportion of actuaries are employed by life assurance companies, a big and growing proportion are responsible for advising the large number of self-administered pension schemes.
Substantial numbers of actuaries are also employed in specialist investment firms, in industry, in Government service and in general insurance.
The Institute is a Recognised Professional Body under the Financial Services Act and a number of members are authorised through this route.
Further Information
If you would like any further information about the profession and the activities of the Institute and Faculty, please complete and return the enclosed card or contact: Bob Heyman, Institute of Actuaries , Donald Cormack Faculty of Actuaries 