

TUTORS' HANDBOOK 1990/91
Foreword
The profession owes much to all the good work done by the tutors.
Very many thanks for the contribution which you are making.
Our next generation depends so much upon you.
In spite of the many and exciting changes that are likely to take place with regard to syllabuses, teaching and learning methods, examining and employer support, a major source of student feedback will be tutors' comments on the tests submitted to them.
However good the format, the success of the courses depends on the willingness of members of the profession to act as interested and supportive tutors.
I am very grateful to all those who act in this capacity.
H H Scurfield July 1990  
Introduction
The aim of the Education Service is to provide an efficient system of tuition that will assist the student to pass the professional examinations.
The method of achieving this aim is primarily through the provision of a comprehensive set of correspondence courses, supported in some cases by oral tuition in the form of tutorials.
Central however to correspondence tuition is the marking of the students' test material.
A great responsibility, therefore, rests upon the tutor.
The primary function of the teacher is not so much to impart information as to help the student to assimilate the course of reading and lesson notes and to stimulate the questioning attitude of mind by every means at his/her disposal.
The level of tuition fees charged to students gives them the right to expect a professional standard of service, particularly with regard to test-marking; the Education Service is judged, to a considerable extent, by that criterion.
It is hoped that the level of tutors' honoraria fairly reflects their responsibilities to students.
However, the rewards which the tutors receive for their labours are not merely financial, but lie in an increased knowledge of the subject concerned, the regard and friendship of the next generation of the actuarial profession, and the repayment of the debt they owe to those who were their tutors and to their profession.
Instruction to Tutors
General
1.
On your appointment or re-appointment as a tutor you will receive at the beginning of the session:—
(a) The terms of appointment
(b) The current Student Handbook
(c) The current tuition course, including model solutions, for the subject in which you are tutoring.
(d) The current tutors' handbook.
2.
Marking procedures
(a) The first test submitted by each student is sent to the Education Service office where the student is allocated to a tutor, to whom the test is then forwarded.
(b) The student will be advised of the name and address of the tutor.
All subsequent tests after the first will be sent by the student direct to the tutor.
(c) You should return all marked tests to the Education Service office where the marks are recorded, and the test forwarded to the student together with the model solutions.
Tests which reach you after the deadline date for submission should be returned to the office unmarked.
(d) At the beginning of the session you will be provided with a Students Test Record Sheet, a specimen of which is attached.
You should enter the name of each of your students when the first test is received and maintain an ongoing record of the following information in respect of each test:—
Date when the test was received.
The marks awarded.
Date when the test was returned.
as illustrated on the attached specimen.
It is important that the Record Sheet be kept up-to-date in order that any queries may be readily resolved.
The completed Record Sheet should be returned to the Education Service office at the end of the session.
The tutors who hold tutorials and return corrected tests direct to students at tutorials, should notify students' marks to the Education Service office once a month.
(e) Students are required to submit tests for marking according to a pre-determined timetable; each test shows the latest date by which it must be in the tutor's hands.
Any test received after the relevant deadline date should be returned unmarked to the Education Service office.
(f) IN GENERAL A TUTOR SHOULD RETURN A TEST CORRECTED WITHIN SEVEN DAYS OF ITS RECEIPT and only in very exceptional circumstances should a test be retained for longer than two weekends.
If you experience difficulty in keeping to this timetable you should communicate promptly with Suzanne Pinnington (on extension number 227) at Napier House.
It is appreciated that you may, through no fault of your own, experience difficulty in returning corrected tests promptly but you must not allow a backlog of unmarked tests to accumulate.
GENERAL NOTES FOR THE GUIDANCE OF TUTORS
Since few actuaries will have had much practical experience of teaching before becoming tutors these notes have been prepared to give you some guidance towards helping students most effectively in the context of the tuition system.
1.
Correcting tests
As most tutors will be engaged in the correction of correspondence course tests submitted by students, this matter will be dealt with first.
In general, the only way by which you can become acquainted with the correspondence student is through the student's attempts at solutions and possibly by questions on specific difficulties.
You must therefore insist on clear and full answers so that you may understand the way in which the student's mind is working.
and correct him/her if he/she is not on the right lines.
When correcting a question, it is not satisfactory to give without comment, a mark such as 10/20; this only irritates the student and leaves him/her to guess the reason for the loss of marks from the printed solutions; and often the guess will be incorrect.
Students learn best from their own mistakes; they should be told when and why they have gone wrong, and how their approach to a problem should be redirected.
It may not always be possible to do this when a student writes an apparently nonsensical answer; and you should try to find out if this is because the student has not studied the subject matter of the test sufficiently, or whether the lesson notes have not explained the subject adequately to the particular student.
Suitable enquiry can usually identify the cause of the difficulty.
Fortunately not many students need this special attention, so that you can afford to make an effort when this situation arises.
2.
Model Solutions
You should not treat the printed solution as being the only authoritative answer to the question.
Very often, particularly in later parts of the examinations, the best solution is a matter of judgement and various approaches may be as valid as that in the solutions.
You should, in general, use the printed solution for illustrative purposes; thus an error of principle should be pointed out clearly on the student's solution, but if the printed solution expands and illustrates the point, then particular reference can be made to it.
A general comment such as‘see solution’ with no specific reference is not helpful.
Some printed solutions contain supplementary matter not dealt with in the lesson notes or course of reading, and reference should be made to this on the student's attempt at the question.
3.
Marking Standards
When marking essay-type questions, you should, where necessary, comment on style and presentation as well as on content.
Many students find difficulty in preparing adequate answers to such questions, as is apparent from examiners' comments.
The standard of marking to be adopted must be a matter for the individual, but as a general guide an average student should be able to achieve an average mark of about 70% in earlier parts, dropping to 65% in later parts.
To set too high a standard tends to discourage a student unduly; too lenient a standard, particularly if accompanied by few comments, may give a student a false idea of his/her examination prospects.
In general, unless the questions indicate the contrary specifically, all questions in a test paper should be regarded as of equal weight.
4.
Turnaround Time
You must ensure that there is no undue delay in returning marked tests.
Students want a rapid return of tests for three reasons: they like to feel that they are not being neglected and that correcting their work is considered important by the tutors; they want to see the result of their attempts while they are still fresh from their memories and they need to see the results of tests before attempting the next one, since tutors may well make comments which will help them to improve.
The Education Service attaches great importance to this matter.
In particular, you should normally return a test corrected within seven days of its receipt.
If you experience any problems in meeting this timetable, please let Suzanne Pinnington on (extension number 227) in the Education Service know as soon as possible.
When a suitable opportunity occurs, a tutor should encourage his students to send in tests regularly for correction, pointing out that this is the only way a student has of finding out whether he really understands a subject.
5.
Class Tuition
A proportion of tutors will conduct discussion or tutorial classes.
These provide an opportunity for the tutor and the students to respond to each other and to discuss problems in a way which is not possible with the normal marking of test papers at a distance.
6.
Tutorials
Each class will normally consist of approximately 10 students and will be associated with a specific test in the tuition course.
It will provide the tutor with the opportunity of dealing with points of difficulty encountered by students and elaborating on the subject-matter of the lesson.
When time permits part of the class may be given over to considering past examination questions.
Note; Where tests are returned direct to students at tutorials, the tutor should inform the Education Service each month of the marks achieved.
7.
Class Teaching
All students should be encouraged to take an active part and not merely listen passively to the tutor and one or two loquacious individuals.
Oral questioning, by making the students think for themselves and convey their thoughts with precision, can be an effective cure for vagueness and sloppy thinking.
Such questions will often generate discussion among the students generally and thus provide a useful means of stimulating their interest.
If a student asks a question to which the tutor cannot give a satisfactory answer on the spur of the moment, he/she should make no attempt to bluff but frankly admit ignorance, and, possibly with the help of the class, set to work to find out the answer, or else undertake to find the answer for the next class.
8.
Queries
Tutors are encouraged to refer to the Director of Education or the Staff Tutors any problems arising from the marking of tests etc. and any suggestions for improving the tuition courses will be welcomed.
Meetings of all tutors are arranged at intervals when they are able to raise questions concerning the general policy and practice of the Education Service.
9.
Conclusion
In conclusion, tutors are again reminded of their great responsibilities for achieving the high aims set out in the first paragraph.
It is essential that tutors provide a good service commensurate with the fees being charged to students and/or their employers.
Terms of Appointment as Tutor for 1990/91 Session
Name: Address: Course: Reference No
1.
Tutors are appointed under the authority of the Council of the Institute of Actuaries
2.
The initial appointment is for one year but may be cancelled in the event of a serious breach of the guidelines set out in the Tutors' Handbook.
The appointment may be renewed for further sessions.
3.
Tuition is carried out by means of correspondence courses, supported in some cases by classes during the session.
Although a major part of the work is concerned with the marking of tuition tests, tutors may also be invited to conduct Tutorial Classes, at which small groups of students meet a tutor at regular intervals, for Subjects 7–10 of the Institute examinations.
4.
Textbooks published by the Institute/Faculty are available to tutors free of charge for the subject in which they are tutoring on application to the office of the Education Service.
5.
Tutors will be paid an honorarium for the work done at a rate to be determined annually.
For the 1990/91 session the rates are:
(i) A test correction fee according to the scale —
Subjects 1–6 £11.70 per test corrected
Subjects 7–10 £17.50 per test corrected
(ii) A fee of £115.00 per tutorial class or discussion class.
The honorarium will be paid as soon as possible after the April/May examinations.