

Free to all student members of the Institute and Faculty
THE PRESENT TENSE?
FROM THE EXAMINATIONS DEPARTMENT
Examinations Results
April 1993 Examination Papers
These are now available, free of charge, to those members who sat them.
Please contact Marie Gorman in the Examinations Department, enclosing an A4 stamped addressed envelope.
Don't Forget
Past Examination Papers
With the introduction of the new syllabus it has been decided that the Specialist level papers and reports will no longer be sold to members.
From the 1st June bound copies of 7A, 8A, 9A and 10A will be available.
Unfortunately due to increased printing costs these will be sold at £6 per subject or £10 for papers and reports.
Mock Examination Papers
These will be available for members wishing to use them as part of their revision programme for the September examinations.
Counselling Service
This will be available for Subjects 4, 7, 8, 9 and 10.
Any wishing to use this service should remember that the format of the examinations will change in 1994, but it was felt that the service could still provide students with a valuable insight as to where they went wrong either in presentation and/or factual error.
Further details will be issued at a later date.
Cost: £220 per subject (7–10).
£150 — Subject 4
More information available from: Academic registry —
PREPARING FOR SEPTEMBER EXAMINATIONS?
TUITION IS AT HAND
Correspondence Courses
Marking and Non Marking
Re-marking of Tests—Subject 1–6
We have been asked to provide a re-mark service, one or two of you seem to think you didn't do too well in April and would like to submit reworked tests — NO PROBLEM SPEAK TO SUZANNE.
Revision Courses
We are proposing to hold a 2 Day Revision Seminar in August for those of you studying for the September examinations in subject 4 Institute & Part V Faculty.
Introductory Courses
We are proposing to hold Introductory Courses for subject A & D scheduled for September.
More information available from:
Education Office — Cindy, Richard or Suzanne 
INFORMATION
New Course Materials
Will be available from 1st August.
Study Opportunities
New edition out shortly
More information available from:
Education Office — Cindy, Richard or Suzanne  
THE FUTURE NOT SO TENSE
by Elisabeth Goodwin Chief Education Executive
THIS edition of the tuition Noticeboard is one of the last from the old AES.
From August 1993 the Actuarial Education Service will become a joint service of the Institute and Faculty.
This date, of course, coincides with the introduction of the new education strategy.
New detailed syllabuses have been produced, which set out the knowledge and skills that a student actuary has to master before qualification.
The final versions of these will be generally available soon.
They are intended to inform students what to study, teachers what to teach, and examiners what to examine.
The Education Office of the AES has produced comprehensive new tuition material for the new syllabuses.
Examples of these have been sent to employers, and it is hoped that they have had wide distribution.
The Examination Department of the AES has also been busy.
Specimen examination papers for the new syllabuses have been written, and packs will be sent to employers in a few weeks time.
The papers can be distributed widely amongst students.
I hope that I will have an opportunity to meet many students in the forthcoming series of meetings being held through the regional actuarial societies.
I will be pleased to answer questions and hear your concerns about the new education strategy.
One of the AES staff tutors will also be present to give further information on the AES tuition material and the associated tuition opportunities.
In addition the AES staff tutors are planning to visit the large employers to discuss the AES tuition material with students.
To celebrate the launch of the new AES we have designed a new logo and a new style for the AES publications.
We look forward to sharing this with you later in the summer.
LAUNCHING THE NEW AES
Your comments taken to heart!
To help use, identify and provide the services you want and expect.
We have undertaken a series of course evaluations.
Remember all those questionnaires!
They had a real purpose; here is a synopsis of your comments and our responses:
SUBJECT 8 (the guinea pig!)
We invited you to highlight, from a list of adjectives, how best you would describe the tone & style of the course.
Adjectives most frequently used were: clear, readable, interesting, stimulating.
ON THE STRUCTURE
Your choices were: easy to follow, straightforward
YOUR COMMENTS
More Self Assessment Questions
You will find a generous amount included in all the new course material.
4 ring binders, good quality but can't get the paper
New binders same quality, but 2 ring.
Abandon all courses except subject 8
Done!!
Excellent presentation & style
Thank you.
THE TUITION SERVICE (including tutorials, revision classes and test marking)
We invited you to highlight from a list of adjectives how best you would describe our tuition services.
Adjectives most frequently used were: useful, informative, relaxed, knowledgeable, clear, interesting, stimulating, encouraging, satisfactory.
ON TEST MARKING YOUR RATINGS WERE:
1st test arrangements — satisfactory to excellent
New arrangements to be announced
Notification of tutor — satisfactory to excellent
New arrangements to be announced
Turnround on tests — satisfactory to excellent
New standard
Communications — satisfactory to excellent
New guidelines to be announced
Test deadlines — poor to good
New arrangements to be announced
YOUR COMMENTS
More comment and guidance
I would like to know where I gained and lost marks
More contact would be helpful
Quick and sympathetic marking
Detailed marking good
There are both good and bad comments here.
What are we going to do about the bad and how do we propose to build on the good.
We will have new recruitment procedure, training days with educational input from the Chief Education Executive, continual monitoring and evaluation.
More contact — where possible we will provide contact numbers and times.
AND WHAT ABOUT VALUE FOR MONEY!
We are happy to report that 94% of our students evaluate our services as satisfactory to excellent.
Happy but not complacent — our aim must be 100% Good to Excellent.
THE NEW AES WILL AIM TO PROVIDE NEW STANDARDS
OUR AIMS ARE
Communications
a same day response to phone enquiries.
a 24/48hr reply to written enquiries.
monthly communications with student members and employers (using the AES tuition noticeboard).
Services
your orders met within 48hrs (or an explanation why not possible).
immediate acknowledgement of applications for face to face tuition.
Test Marking
a 7 day turnaround and procedures for complaint.
Training
regular training sessions and monitoring of all teaching and support staff.
Evaluations
on all services and products.
Employers
improved monthly progress reporting.
AND NEW PRODUCTS TOO!
Tuition Material
corresponding courses — tuition material and test marking.
non-marking courses — tuition material plus tests and solutions including the problem solver.
tests and solutions for revision purposes.
tuition material only.
modules (group of units, topic specific).
Face to Face
tutorials — winter and summer.
intensive revision seminars — winter and summer.
residential revision seminars — winter and summer.
examination technique classes.
in-house company training.
For New Students
new students' open days.
introductory courses.
Other Products
examination counselling in all subjects.
alerting service — free monthly to those taking AES tuition in subjects E–H.
past examination papers.
mock examination papers.
professionalism courses.
CPD courses.
Quite a comprehensive list, but if you can't see what you want, contact us; FLEXIBILITY is our key word.
WANT TO KNOW MORE?
THEN COME AND MEET US
We will be making presentations at the following venues during May and June.
May 10th Norwich Actuarial Society
13th Yorkshire Actuarial Society
18th Bournemouth Actuarial Society
19th Manchester Actuarial Society
20th Manx Actuarial Society
June 7th Edinburgh
8th Glasgow Student Society
10th White Horse Actuarial Society
16th Birmingham Actuarial Society
17th Bristol Actuarial Society
For further information on the above or if you would like to suggest additional venues speak to:
Pia Farr —
Stop Press
HELPLINE
We will be operating a Student Helpline from 1st July.
Qualified staff on hand to answer your questions and offer guidance on possible strategies for planning, and study options available.
SUMMARY
SO THAT'S THE NEW AES
Actuarial — education for the actuary of the future.
Education — we aim to offer a service to Actuaries.
Service — a service the profession is proud of.
The NEW joint service of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries.