

EDITOR'S DESK
Recognition is certainly a useful thing to have.
One of the particular benefits of receiving such an accolade as Scotmedia Magazine's Best Scottish Business Magazine 1993 is that it gives the chance to pay tribute to the hard work of the people you see listed in the blue panel adjacent to this as well as of the contributors and others instrumental in our success.
It's for this reason I've gone against my initial instinct not to blow our own trumpet on this at the risk of provoking more ‘bad loser’ comments from certain people (and let me stress I don't mean the runners-up) communicated to me.
Ho-hum, I can take it.
Recognising the importance of your staff's contribution is what management is all about.
In the case of managing risk, as the first part of our look at the subject (see page 34) makes clear, it means not only protecting the workforce from hazards but actively using its unique knowledge of the organisation to map them out.
Ignoring employees' own capacity to recognise, assess and minimise risk may well mean the risks themselves — the obvious physical ones (fire, explosion) and the more mundane and nebulous but often more far-reaching threats to business survival (financial or market-oriented)— are overlooked too.
The growing trend in directors' personal liability, which some would argue assumes a superhuman omniscience about what is happening within the company at all times, means an effective plan driving awareness and responsibility down through the organisation is increasingly essential.
When it comes to actual mishap the London Stock Exchange seems to have been particularly prone recently.
Yet the collapse of the Taurus settlements system project, at massive cost, turns out only to have been the latest in a line.
In Personal Finance, Ian examines the background to the search for a new solution.
Still, it's not all bad news.
As Tone Vine-Lott, managing director of Barclays Stockbrokers and new chairman of the Scottish Stock Exchange (and, as an IT man, nothing like the stockbroker stereotype), points out in Money Talks, the stockbroking game will still have changed out of all recognition in ten years' time.
It is said the reason why Taurus ran into trouble was a reluctance to step on anyone's toes.
The opposite seems to have been the case in the decision to shut down the Unlisted Securities Market and the resulting uproar: a failure to ensure all needs and requirements were still met somehow.
What the corporate finance community would like to see in the USM's place is the subject of Bill Millar's article in Corporate Finance.
Establishing a workable consensus is never easy, of course, especially when the proposals are particularly radical.
Having presented the far-reaching study produced by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland research committee on Auditing into the Twenty-first Century to a group of leading Scottish finance directors, we have to admit their reaction was hardly partisan (see Governance).
Yet at the same time they welcomed the way the study mapped out areas on concern, in relation to the respective responsibilities of company directors executive and non-executive, auditors and shareholders, much of which remain unaddressed even after the Cadbury report.
For that reason alone the study will have started to achieve its objective of generating further and fundamental debate on what continues to be an unresolved and unsatisfactory state of affairs.
After all, recognition can sometimes be even more than useful.
In terms of dealing with potential traps and deep-seated but dangerous anomalies, recognition that they exist can be nine-tenths of the battle.
MONEY TALKS
Peter Woodifield speaks to Tony Vine-Lott of Barclays Stockbrokers Ltd about his success in making it happen north of the border rather than in the City of London
STOCKING UP IN SCOTLAND
Ever since 1979 the Government has been trying to widen and deepen share ownership, but apart from privatisations, which have resulted in millions of people owning a few hundred shares in one or two companies, it cannot be said to have had much success.
Indeed, the opposite is nearer the truth as private shareholders own less and less of British industry and the institutions own more and more.
There are a variety of reasons for this, but one of them is that buying and selling shares is considered not only to be something for the rich but also to be very complex.
Stockbrokers are perceived to be wealthy and wear loud braces, and often the reality matches the perception.
But it need not be that way and there is evidence to prove it.
Some of the most compelling evidence comes from Tony Vine-Lott, the managing director of Barclays Stockbrokers Ltd, which has its base in the heart of Glasgow where 300 of its 500 staff work.
Only 50 of the remainder are in London, with the rest in Trowbridge, where Barclays stores the securities it is responsible for.
Unlike most stockbroking firms Vine-Lott cannot tell you how many clients he has, for the good reason that much of his business comes from the Barclays branch network, with the individual branch counted as the client rather than the individuals who buy and sell shares in the particular branch.
However, he can identify 70,000 clients who use the firm's nominee services.
Of these about 25,000 use the advisory service and up to 35,000 use the full discretionary service.
But it is the way that the Glasgow office operates that sets it apart.
A customer walking into a Barclays branch can leave within a few minutes having bought or sold such shares as he wants.
During this interview Vine-Lott demonstrated a typical branch-derived execution-only trade which took just 90 seconds from the call coming into BSL's Glasgow office to being completed, including confirmation from the customer that the price was satisfactory.
Nor was it done by some highly-paid red-braced executive.
Rather it was carried out smoothly and efficiently by a part-time ‘Glasgow housewife’.
‘They told me the regulators wouldn't allow it and that Glasgow housewives wouldn't be able to do it’, he recalls with a smile.
In fact they are highly competent and by taking advantage of the desire of some of them to work part-time he can use their experience as and when, for instance, they want to return to work after having children.
The 40 staff execute 3,500 trades a day on average, and Vine-Lott has set himself a target of more than doubling that in five years' time, including a considerable proportion on behalf of other institutions, such as the Halifax Building Society, for whom it is already doing work, as well as other brokers and banks.
Recent claims by Sharelink, which is about to be floated, to be the biggest private client stockbroker make him smile wryly.
‘Its turnover of £14m is less than half ours, and its profits of £3.5m are less than half of ours.’
Vine-Lott claims that the Glasgow Stock Exchange actually handles a greater volume of private client business than London.
Yet only five per cent of that volume comes from Scotland and a massive 70 per cent from the South-east.
There are three main reason why BSL is in Glasgow.
The first is that Glasgow still has a stock exchange — it is the main stock exchange outside London — while the costs are considerably lower, both in terms of office space and salaries.
The transport is also better, with the airport considerably closer than say it would have been in Manchester.
The main reason that Vine-Lott is not hung-up on the tradition of stockbroking is that he is not a stockbroker.
He was recruited from the computer industry, having worked for Honeywell and Wang where he was on the sales and marketing side.
‘The biggest switch was from corporate clients to retail ones, although this industry has gone through such a massive change from the quill pen to integrated telephone systems with computers.’
So for him the technology holds no  fears and he is always looking for ways to make the stock market more accessible to the ordinary man or woman in the street.
Already potential investors in BT3 can get key information from Barclays' network of hole in the wall cash machines.
Modern telephone technology is such that it is already technically possible for people to use touch tone phones from the comfort and privacy of their own homes to buy or sell shares at any time of the day or night — BSL already operates a night shift — and it will not be that long before Vine-Lott will be able to offer such a service.
The regulatory authorities have no fundamental objection to the concept provided BSL bears the credit risk.
As a technology expert Vine-Lott takes no pleasure in saying that he warned that Taurus, the paperless sharedealing scheme that had to be abandoned earlier this year at a cost of hundreds of millions of pounds was never going to work the way it was being developed.
‘I believe the fundamental design was flawed, it was far, far too complicated, it would have been very difficult to maintain.
It would have been a nightmare, it would have been horrendous.
We were never confident the system was going to fly, and towards the end it became clear that they would never recover the cost of the investment’.
As a result BSL never committed large amounts of money, although it was under pressure to do so.
Vine-Lott makes the point that as he wants to develop a private client retail system it is in his interest to simplify the system as much as possible.
‘If you want to borrow or lend money on a rolling settlement basis we can bundle it in with the service.
We are looking to make it simple for people.’
He is clear in his own mind about the reason why that is so necessary.
People have to invest their money and most years, whether in an era of low interest rates or high interest rates, they are likely to have some of their capital eroded by inflation, after tax is taken into account, if they just put it in the building society.
‘Investing in the stock market is one of the better ways of protecting your capital and getting some income.
Through PEPs they have made it much more of a level playing field.’
The commitment of Vine-Lott and BSL to Glasgow has resulted in his recent election as chairman of the Scottish Stock Exchange, the first non-Scot and first non-career stockbroker is a reflection of BSL's commitment to building a securities industry in Scotland.
‘We have been very very supportive of the exchange and all the operations that have been going on.
I have been on the council for three or four years, perhaps one of the more outspoken ones.’
If he achieves his ambitious growth targets it is bound to mean more jobs although it is highly unlikely that they will grow at the same rate —‘but it would be fairly substantial and it would be in Glasgow’.
He is also pleased enough with his experience to recommend Glasgow to other would-be employers.
While much of BSL's own growth will be organic, Vine-Lott plans to help it along by introducing new products.
‘There are a lot of exciting things we have got lined up which we were not going to launch until we launched Taurus, but we will come out with these products.
Stockbroking will be very different in ten years’ time, and it has changed totally since I started.
A very small percentage of our business is done in a traditional way.’
PERSONAL FINANCE
Seeing red over Taurus
Ian Harper reports on how the latest fiasco in designing systems to facilitate the Stock Exchange has left fund managers and brokers looking for yet another solution to their needs.
In the past couple of decades, Britain has managed to slither from one high technology debacle to another.
The key project names that spring to mind include Chevaline (the home-grown multiple warhead ballistic missile) and System X (a new generation of computerised telephone exchange).
If they worked at all, they were late, had huge cost overruns, failed to live up to expectations, and lost out to their rivals' more carefully thought through systems.
To this list we can now add Taurus — a system which was intended to automate the transfer of ownership of company shares in a way analogous to the transfer of money in the banking system and which collapsed spectacularly in March after countless delays and problems.
Currently, Britain has one of the least attractive share settlement systems of   any major stock market.
It is slow, with the process of exchanging shares for cash taking up to three weeks, and it is cumbersome, with each share sale requiring a whole series of costly paper-based administration procedures.
It was in the context of the threat these problems posed to the pre-eminence of London among international stock exchanges that Taurus was conceived.
The intention was to allow London to leapfrog its rivals into a leading position.
According to the Institutional Fund Managers Association (IFMA)— the trade body representing all the key institutional traders, the problems of the existing system can be summarised as follows:
Cost.
The existing settlements systems, which involves banks, custodians, registrars, paper share certificates and so on is expensive by international standards.
Settlement delays.
There is currently no rolling settlements system and all trades are settled once every fortnight.
For the big institutional investor, this means that money — which could be used to carry out other share trades — is tied up unproductively.
Significant involvement of third parties, which increases the potential for errors, reduces security, and leads to increased costs.
In short, while it is good for third party service providers, it is administratively inefficient for investors, brokers and companies and ties up capital needlessly in the securities system.
Further more, it falls well short of the target set by the influential think-tank of former policymakers, the Group of 30, for a three-day (T+3) rolling settlement system.
Taurus was intended to solve all of these problems by implementing a computerised book entry system for recording changes in share ownership and eliminating paper altogether in a process known as ‘dematerialisation’.
But as it turned out the solution was to prove one of the biggest problems of all, mainly because Taurus aimed to accommodate not just the users in the shape of the institutions and individuals which buy and sell shares, but also those with a vested interest in the existing system — the banks who make considerable money from their roles as registrars and custodians.
Consequently, there was some shock but no great surprise when on 11 March it was announced that Taurus — after more than a decade of planning and more than £400m in development costs — was to be scrapped.
Faced with seemingly insurmountable technical problems, which could have consumed at least as much cash again without any guarantee of success, the decision was taken to start from scratch with a far less ambitious system to keep London, if not ahead of, at least on par with, its competitors.
What went wrong?
According to, chief investment manager at  Scottish Equitable: ‘One of the reasons Taurus failed was because a lot of banks make money not just as custodians but as registrars.
The problem is that Taurus tried to be too nice to everyone and didn't tread too hard on the banks’ toes.’
So where to now?
With the demise of Taurus, the Bank of England stepped in and established a Task Force with responsibility for overhauling the London settlements system.
This is the third time the Bank has been obliged to step in because of the failure of the Stock Exchange to deliver.
The first occasion was in the early 1980s when it and the Stock Exchange spent three years trying to develop an automated settlements system for the gilts market before the Bank took over total responsibility for the project in 1985 to develop what has become the highly effective Central Gilts Office.
The second occasion was in the mid-1980s when the Bank had to step in after banks and discount houses failed to complete London Clear, a project to automate settlements and transactions in the money markets.
The upshot was the central Money Markets Office.
Days after the Taurus collapse, the Task Force, established under the auspices of the Bank's Financial Markets and Institutions Division, invited comments from interested parties.
The key submissions came from the IFMA and a joint submission from the Royal Bank of Scotland on behalf of most of the major institutions including the  and .
Their priorities are virtually identical — the rapid establishment of a secure settlements system based on the removal of costly paper movements coupled to the phased introduction of rolling settlement which is competitive with the systems of other key financial centres and which can ultimately meet the group FO 30's recommendations for a rolling three-day settlement system, T+3.
The settlement periods of London's major competitors are currently T+5 in New York, T+3 in Tokyo and T+2 in France.
Unlike Taurus, which aimed to embrace both institutional and private shareholders, the proposals to the Bank's Task Force concentrated on addressing g the needs of only professional institutional investors.
Pure retail business involving small shareholders would remain outside the system for the foreseeable future.
According to senior securities adviser at the Royal Bank of Scotland, while this would mean formalising what is already a de-facto two-tier market, it is unlikely to find many objectors among the ranks of private investors.
He said: ‘The Sids of old have been given their share certificates and they are reluctant to give them up.
As such, the private investor has not been keen on Taurus.
So leave them outside.
Their needs can then be addressed separately though not ignored.’
As a first step, the institutional users want the rapid but phased introduction of a secure rolling settlements system aiming to cut the cycle to T+3 eventually, but initially to T+10 then to T+5.
This may be achieved by developing a centralised share clearing house which, initially anyway, would be based on an enhancement of existing systems — specifically, the Stock Exchange's Talisman system adapted to rolling settlement and the Institutional Net Settlement System.
To remove the paper from the system — and so eliminate the huge cost of shifting paper about — current thinking advocates the establishment of a centralised depository alongside the clearing house, where stock certificates would be held and ‘immobilised’, although not eliminated or ‘dematerialised’ as originally intended with Taurus.
Such a system exists in New York in the shape of the Depository Trust Company, and would probably require a ‘nominee’ and one possibility is to expand the use of the stock Exchange nominee company, Sepon.
While such a set-up would probably be established under the auspices of the Bank of England, the main users in the shape of the institutions envisage that in due course they would take over ownership.
In short the collapse of Taurus — where the name of the game was not to upset vested interests — has paved the way for a compromise where there appears to be a general acceptance of the IFMA view that: ‘the solution to the problems are presented with a view to satisfying the requirements of the principal users, not third party service providers.’
It is a pity the needs of users did not rank too highly before £400m poured down the drain.
CORPORATE FINANCE
Floating an effective alternative
With the imminent closure of the Unlisted Securities Market, the fund raisers and their advisers are demanding a replacement.
Bill Millar investigates their needs.
It's beginning to feel like an age old question, or certainly one that has been hanging around since the dark ages.
How do smaller companies meet their capital raising requirements, particularly in emergence from recession; particularly in the face of venture capitalists, many of whom have become more renowned for risk averse than risk taking strategies; particularly in the face of clearing banks' policy which does not exactly involve them rushing to throw loan finance about as they emerge from one of the most traumatic periods in their history; and particularly in the face of the closure of the Unlisted Securities Market (USM) with no successor currently in sight?
It might well be argued that the USM, now containing some 900 companies with a market capitalisation of less than £50m, has long outlived it usefulness.
There were 87 flotations on the USM in 1988, 67 in 1989, 47 in 1990, ten in 1991, six in 1992 and none in the first quarter of this year.
But its disappearance will be of serious concern to the growing medium-sized business needing a serious injection of equity to continue to fulfil its potential and also the venture capitalist who may always have seen it as a desired exit route for an investment.
On the other hand, there is no doubt that the USM's distinct identity has been eroded since 1990 by convergence in the regulation and cost of joining the Official List and the USM.
It isn't so much that the ultimate disappearance of the USM itself is particularly jeopardising the potential market for smaller companies.
Rather, it is that its demise has again thrown the need for a trading market for the small and medium-sized growing company into the full glare of the spotlights.
‘I think the disillusionment with the USM is a little unfair,’ said , partner in Morton Fraser Milligan and the only Scottish representative on the companies committee of the CBI.
‘One of the things that has been said is that it's actually very difficult to get a purchaser for your shares on the USM even though in theory it's an open market.
‘But the same could be said for a number of less actively traded companies on the full list.
Also, recession has undoubtedly taken its toll.
The market is less active, people are less likely to take risks with things they know nothing of in the hope of growth so perhaps the recession has affected the USM more severely than people have given credit for.
If we'd had a boom economy over the last five years, the Stock Exchange would never have thought of phasing out the USM.’
But there is also no doubt in his mind that an alternative must be found for the smaller company.
‘There must be a way of doing it without the costs of a full listing.
These are  probably in the region of half a million pounds at the moment, which does not bode well for the company which may be trying to raise half a million pounds of equity.
The CBI is saying to the Stock Exchange, look, this really is not on.
It is saying, and I think everyone agrees, don't abolish this until you've thought it through and either provided an alternative or done it again in a different way.’
The call for an alternative market for the smaller company is growing, and growing louder all the time.
At the end of May,, the minister for small companies, called for a greater sense of risk and enterprise in any new market which might succeed the USM and, in emphasising the importance to the country's economy of smaller-company activity, pointed out that companies with fewer than 20 employees had helped to create 350,000 new jobs between 1989 and 1991.
The proposed closure of the USM, though not before the end of 1996 (it will remain open to new entrants until the end of next year) has thrown sharply into focus the debate on how smaller companies find a way of closing the much quoted ‘equity gap’ which they and their advisers have long argued makes it harder for them to raise any significant degree of long-term capital other than debt finance.
It's an important debate.
Small and medium-sized companies are, after all, still the big companies of the future.
As , partner with KPMG Peat Marwick, said recently: ‘While, as the recession comes to an end and business confidence translates into better prospects and increased sales, companies will need more funding, banks still remain very nervous and companies will seek to bolster their equity base.
Going public is an ideal way of doing this for the right company, but, unlike in the mid-1980s, it will not be an option for many smaller companies with most flotations now capitalised at over £25m.
‘It may well be inappropriate for such smaller companies to join the main stock market,’ he continued, ‘but that doesn't solve their funding problem.
There is a gap between development capital, which has an important part to play, and a full flotation.
It must be hoped that the continuing discussions on a second market can produce a viable middle option.’
The call for an alternative to the USM is for a proper long-term solution to the trading of smaller companies, possibly comprising the creation of one or more tiers to the Official List.
It has come after years of various cobbled-together options, with one of the louder voices being that of a City lobbying group, the City Group for Smaller Companies (CISCO) which argued that the proposed closure of the USM before a proper alternative was thought out showed a lack of concern, particularly for the problems faced by companies coming to the market for the first time.
CISCO is seeking division of the Official List into segments with categories of companies set up according to their market capitalisation.
In April it called for a three-tier market, including an international equity market made up of the top 350 companies, a national market for most of the remaining companies listed on the Official List and the USM, and an enterprise market with minimum requirements for those companies not on the Official List, the intention being that those companies in the enterprise market should comprise higher risk operations.
A few days later, the Stock Exchange announced details of the working party which it is intended should lead the debate over the future capital raising needs of smaller companies, including a possible successor to the USM.
Its remit includes addressing the needs of businesses ineligible for either the Official List or the USM but which were not able to raise sufficient finance on a long-term basis elsewhere.
The working party, chaired by , chairman of Low & Bonar, Watson & Philip and a member of the board of the London Stock   Exchange, is also required to define the scope of the financing problem, assess potential investor interest and recommend whether or not an alternative market is the right solution.
‘The financing of small, growth businesses has always been an important national issue, made all the more important by the effects of economic recession,’ said .
‘Yet many now face a reduction in their financial backing at a time when they are still ineligible to join a public market.
‘It is obviously crucial to the UK's economic recovery that smaller companies should have access to development capital.’
It would certainly be in the interest of the clearing banks were an alternative market to be formed.
‘Although I would say that it's primarily in the interest of that segment of business itself,’ said , general manager and deputy treasurer of the Bank of Scotland, ‘everyone has a complementary role to play’.
He finds it sad that the USM and fund markets have not developed in the way that they were expected to at the outset.
‘In fact, I think it's gone to the other extreme in that it's more and more difficult for companies in that classification to raise any equity whatsoever.
We've never curtailed our lending policy for the right transaction.
In a lot of these situations, you have to decide whether it's an equity need or a debt need.
I think where the dilemma emerges is in finding equity for an entity that may have had its balance sheet shot to hell in the recession but may now have a strong future to go forward on.
But getting the institutions to support some sort of restructuring has become difficult if not impossible.
‘It's terribly important that a proper alternative market for the smaller and medium-sized business is now found.
It's imprudent for the bank to take the traditional senior debt gearing beyond prudent levels or that endangers the whole.
That's where there is a complementary role for equity and senior bank debt to create a properly structured entity.
So there has got to be a source of equity or semi-equity instruments available.
And there is a gap right now.’
The Stock Exchange smaller companies working party is not expected to report until autumn of this year.
In the meantime, some clues to the requirements of the UK business community may emerge from a nationwide survey being carried out with hundreds of quoted and unquoted companies, by accountants, KPMG Peat Marwick.
Businesses will be asked for their views on liquidity, the need for a second market and what they would expect from having some marketability.
It should also throw up interesting data on regional differences and preferences as each area, including Scotland, will also be surveyed as a distinct entity.
‘I think it's critical that a solution is reached which enables companies, that are not of sufficient size to go onto the full list, to have some marketability,’ said KPMG partner,.
‘I think the full list would lose its stature if it was just to open its doors to everything.
But I feel that for the smaller and medium-sized companies which are looking to get either some form of institutional funding or some liquidity in their share, it's very important that there is a second market in some form.’
Few would disagree.
It is to be hoped that the Stock Exchange smaller companies working party will come up with sensible, practical and workable proposals.
For, of course, no matter what it decides, it will still have to comprise a desirable process for the market makers and it will still be up to investors to risk putting their money into the companies concerned.
And that is another matter entirely.
TECHNOLOGY
OFFICES USING REMOTE CONTROL
Neil Fitzgerald investigates the growing phenomenon of telecommuting and its huge impact in the outlying regions.
Working from home used to have a slightly pejorative ring to it.
It was the sort of thing said about someone who was unable to come into the office or, worse, for disciplinary reasons was prevented from doing so.
Not any more.
New technology has already enabled an ever-widening range of jobs to be moved out of the office, allowing staff to carry them out from their own homes with obvious benefits in terms of reducing office overheads as well as enabling businesses to recruit from an additional pool of people who, because of location in remote rural areas or conflicting domestic responsibilities, might otherwise be ruled out of employment.
Although ‘teleworking’ might be considered to be an old idea — anyone who has done the odd bit of paperwork at home while keeping in touch with the office by telephone can be said to have been doing it — the opportunity to have computer-aided design, back-office and data entry work carried out full-time away from the office has widened immeasurably.
The Highlands and Islands of Scotland have become an ideal testing ground for this form of work, some of it extremely high-level.
But the experience and achievements being gained there could also have far-reaching impact on the sort of work that will remain inside an organisation's premises.
For some time the technology required even for what may seem advanced types of activity at home could be fairly basic.
‘In terms of hardware, you just needed a couple of PCs and a good modem with ample error correction to use a standard telephone line,’ said , a former director in a large Home Counties-based software company who last year gave up commuting weekly from his home in Drumnadrochit, near Inverness, to set up his own business, Software Technology, developing customised local networks software for the clients of large original equipment manufacturers.
That the program-crunching is done for him by people in Breslau, Poland, who re-transmit the results back to his office in Invernessshire for checking before sending down the line to his customer in the Thames Valley, shows that the supposed imperfections of two apparently notorious national telephone systems in fact present no real obstacle.
He now plans to have, in addition to his Polish workers, teleworking staff throughout the Highlands and Islands to provide technical support and develop new products.
Elsewhere, Highlands and Islands Enterprise (HIE) estimates there are already over 200  people teleworking in the region.
Among these are four who have started working for Canan, a commercial arm of the Gaelic College based at Bahal Mor Mostaig on Skye which provides media translation, subtitling and transcription services and other support, including work for the Gaelic TV output of ITV and independents selling to it and the BBC.
Commercial manager  said that finding and training the right people was not a problem.
‘Basic computer keyboard skills have to be there — we wouldn't want to go the lengths of having to train them on that — but training on our specialist software means bringing them in for a week and we'll probably bring them in every three months to keep updating them.’
Again, with 386-megabyte computers, diskfax and modems ‘it isn't difficult to set up a valuable resource you can tap into at any time’(he sees ample scope for expanding not only into other languages but building on expertise already gained in mailshot databases and distribution) and British Telecom has been ‘very responsive’.
Indeed, in a partnership that has cost British Telecom £19m along with £5m from HIE, the existing infrastructure in the region has been significantly upgraded with the installation of advanced equipment at over 60 of its telephone exchanges.
At the heart of this is the introduction of an Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) system which not only allows fast, cheap transfer of data along lines that are free of interference but also voice and data transmission at the same time rather than using two separate lines.
The benefits in terms of reliability and speed are dramatic enough — reckons that what took 20 minutes to send down a line can now take a tenth of the time.
But it also provides solutions to some of the vestigial problems perceived with teleworking.
A major one is the perceived lack of contact and cohesion between staff and supervisors.
Over and above the residual discomfort of managers used to being able to see bodies in seats around the office and to address them face-to-face, the teleworkers themselves can feel similarly cut off.
When, in a major exercise, Rank Xerox switched a number of specialised staff to operating as teleworking freelance consultants (involving setup costs of just £1,300 per head and achieving savings in office expenses of £17,500 per worker in the first year of operation), sending instructions by electronic mail was not enough: a ‘gossip line’ was introduced so that they could keep up on office news.
BT went a stage further in its experiment, just completed, involving ten staff from its directory enquiries centre at Inverness who over the past year have been operating from home.
Using the additional capacity on ISDN lines, they were able to set up video phones, involving a small camera on the top of the VDU while receiving pictures superimposed on the screen, to converse face-to-face with supervisors and other staff.
Although BT said they were continuing to look at the results of the experiment, initial findings included the fact that not only was BT satisfied with productivity achieved but the staff themselves were only too sorry to see it end.
The possibilities in using this technology are growing rapidly, not only in terms of face-to-face contact between managers but as  pointed out, in academic and training uses with the incorporation of voice and white board electronic screens for demonstration purposes.
As  said: ‘The technology is all there, all it needs is the imagination and push to make it work’.
With what it reckons to be a higher proportion of ISDN lines per thousand of population compare with anywhere else in the UK, HIE clearly hopes to see a rapid  expansion of inward investment and other forms of economic development on the back of teleworking.
As , chief executive of Kyle and Lochalsh Enterprise which supported the setting -up of Canan, said: ‘In areas  where the population is ageing, this could well help to keep the younger people there.’
Of course, not all jobs would be suitable for teleworking.
Apart form requiring a certain amount of self-discipline from those doing it (and when the legality of remote logging of work-rate seems doubtful under the health and safety laws for VDU operators), the tasks which seem capable of being gone this way seem to boil down to two types: self-contained project assignments (computer programming, report writing, design) and batch-related clerical work (data entry or telesales).
The higher-level, task-related interactive project work that seems to prevail inside the office would, if it were to be done by teleworkers, require workflow management tools that ‘are still in their infancy’, according to, systems integration consultant with Glasgow-based specialists Iain Graham Consultants.
A project manager has to be able to look over people's shoulders electronically to check the work is going to meet specification and if not, will it affect the deadline.
Of course you can buy accounting systems with workflow management tools that can deliver a screen to you by mail for interactive questions and gathers data automatically to update the accounts.
‘But what should happen is that the workflow should be built into the software so that it automatically decides what needs to be done, by whom and when, then sends it to the relevant person, noting the deadline, and recording outstanding requests.’
Coincidentally, is also involved in this field of pro-active software which, apart from directing documents to a particular in-tray, ‘can identify overloads and even balance the load more effectively’.
Indeed, both he and Valentine see the needs of teleworking providing additional momentum behind the delivery of solutions that would have an equally telling effect on the use of technology that would still go on inside the office.
‘If you look at something like raising a purchase order, what it tends to involve is combining bits of paper from different departments and only at the very end is a computer entry made — which is not a massive improvement on all-paper systems,’ said .
‘Whereas with workflow management the document could find itself round the company to the right person — everyone has a PC on his or her desk — and you not only outsource a lot of the data entry work but get rid of the paper.’
As  said: ‘The kind of technology used to implement teleworking, brought into the standard office, would bring substantial improvements in productivity, punctuality and efficiency.’
GOVERNANCE
Shaking up the lines of control
Bill McInnes outlines radical proposals for auditing roles and responsibilities into the twenty-first century, and overleaf we gauge the business reaction as finance directors join in the debate.
A radical shake-up in the structure of the auditing profession aimed at bridging the public's expectation, Auditing into the Twenty-first Century, published by the research committee of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland (ICAS).
The discussion document, which focuses on the audit of listed companies, is the outcome of a major research project by the committee.
In the document, it explores its perceptions of the public's expectations of the reassurances provided by external audits and of the independence, accountability and legal liability of external auditors.
The committee believes that the public expects external audits to have a role in protecting the interests of shareholders, creditors, pensioners, employees and the public generally by providing them with reassurances that:
the financial statements are right;
the company will not fail;
there has been no fraud;
the company has acted within the law;
the company has been competently managed;
and the company has adopted a responsible attitude to environmental and societal matters.
In the discussion document, the committee gives its opinion on the extent to which the provision of these reassurances is the responsibility of boards of directors, the extent to which it is the responsibility of external auditors and the extent to which these reassurances cannot be provided by either boards of directors or external auditors.
The committee also explores what it believes to be the public's expectations in regard to the independence, accountability and legal liability of external auditors within the present corporate governance framework.
Within that framework the committee believes that it is not clear, firstly, whether external auditors are independent of the directors of the companies they audit, secondly, whether external auditors should be accountable to a wide range of stakeholders or only to primary stakeholders, and, thirdly, for what and to whom external auditors are financially liable if they fail in any of their duties.
Furthermore, external auditors are left with a very difficult decision as to whether they should report to a third party if they suspect the directors of a company are involved in fraud or other illegal activities.
During 1992 two major projects were published which are relevant to this project.
The first was the Cadbury report on the financial aspects of corporate governance and the second was the Auditing Practices Board's paper on the future development of auditing.
The research committee agrees that there will be benefits from many of the recommendations made in these reports but believes that changes of a more fundamental nature are required to improve the effectiveness of auditing in meeting the public's expectations.
The ICAS research committee's proposals are outlined below.
These proposals are aimed at providing the public with more reassurances than are provided at the present time as to whether boards of directors have fulfilled their stewardship responsibilities.
The proposals also aim to overcome the present problems relating to the independence, accountability and legal liability of external auditors.
The committee recognises that the changes it proposes will not be implemented without a change in legislation.
Given the present public concern about the effectiveness of auditing, the committee believes that appropriate legislation is required as a matter of urgency.
The research committee comprises chartered accountants working in industry, commerce, public practice and academia.
It is chaired by , a practising auditor, a member of the Auditing Practices Board and chairman of the Accounts Commission in Scotland.
Proposing big changes for the future
Each board of directors should report:
(a) whether it has established and maintained management information systems and internal control systems that are sufficiently reliable and relevant to provide the board with
(i) the information necessary for the preparation of financial statements which give a true and fair view, and with
(ii) reassurances that, inter alia, the opportunities for fraud and other illegal acts are minimised;
(b) whether the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company at the period end and of the profit or loss for the period then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with company law; and
(c) whether in the board's judgment, given the trading environment in which the company is operating and expects to operate, adequate financial resources are available to enable it to continue in business for at least 12 months from the date the board approved the financial statements.
To provide a board of directors with reassurances that its management information systems and internal control systems are sufficiently reliable and relevant each company should establish and maintain a strong internal audit function under the direction of a chief internal auditor.
To ensure that the internal auditors have a significant degree of independence within the company the chief internal auditor should report to the chief executive and to a financial reporting and audit committee  (FRAC) made up entirely of non-executive directors.
The FRAC should approve the appointment, and the termination of the employment, of the chief internal auditor.
If each listed company has a strong team of internal auditors much of the detailed work in today's external audit will have been done by them.
There seems little point in repeating all of this detailed work.
For this reason a change of name is proposed from external auditors to external assessors.
It is envisaged that a large proportion of the work of the external assessors will be judgmental in nature.
The external assessors would have responsibility for reporting their opinion of whether a board of directors had fulfilled for stewardship responsibilities outlined in the first proposal listed here.
To heighten the sense of commitment of the partner in charge of the external assessment, the assessors' report should be signed in his or her own name on behalf of the firm of external assessors.
To ensure that the external assessors are independent of, and are clearly seen as being independent of, the directors of the companies they assess, an audit review panel should take responsibility for the appointment, and the termination of the appointment, of the external assessors.
The panel should also take responsibility for agreeing the remuneration of the assessors.
The audit review panel would be completely independent of the directors and would have responsibility for the supervision of the assessment process on behalf of the shareholders and be responsive to the needs of other stakeholders.
The panel would have responsibility for counselling the external assessors on whether they should report to a third party when they suspect that the directors of a company are involved in fraud or other illegal activities.
The external assessors should be financially liable only to the shareholders and only for damages that reflect the assessors' degree of fault.
A difficult pill for the FDs
Perhaps it's a true measure of the viability of the proposals by the Cadbury Committee and complementary work by the Auditing Practices Board.
For all the apparent scepticism levelled at these bodies from other quarters, the senior financial officers canvassed for their views of the ICAS research study found little to question in its setting out of the existing problems and the responsibilities for central elements of corporate governance.
The comment from , Scottish & Newcastle's finance director, was typical: ‘I think it's a very important concept that the board through management is responsible for seeing that internal control works and for the day-to-day detection of fraud, while the auditors also have a responsibility where it is material and affects the annual accounts.’
But where they and the study immediately differed was where, as , group finance director at John Menzies, said, it ‘set off on a diverging track’ from what they perceive is already best practice albeit only among the major companies.
The first, obvious area was in the redistribution of workload between internal auditors and what would be the external assessors.
The essential point was that, in those major companies with a active internal audit function, it already had enough on its plate.
‘Our internal auditors already work closely with the external auditors,’ said , still acting finance director for Scottish Power having also been promoted to chief operating officer, electricity supply.
‘The scope of their work is approved by the audit committee and covers value for money, audit and many other functions.
I wouldn't say what is proposed would lessen the amount of work our external auditors have to do.’
Nevertheless, some baulked at the idea of having to take on what was perceived as a statutory audit role.
‘It really is too much to expect them to do that,’ said .
‘From a practical point of view, they are still dependent on their company for career progression and cannot have the independence an external auditor would have nor would they necessarily have the technical expertise if they conducted a statutory audit only once a year.’
, director of research at ICAS and editor of the study, conceded that there can ‘never be total independence but, in being responsible only to the chief executive and the financial reporting and audit committee, there could be relative but strong independence’.
As for the internal auditors' role, ‘they're not expected to do a full statutory audit but a great deal of the detailed work which, carried out on a continuous basis, would greatly increase the probability of detecting fraud.’
It would be this additional reassurance that would tip the scales in favour in any cost-benefit analysis, he argued.
Nevertheless, in the view of , finance director of Caledonian Bank, ‘the cost of an internal audit function to a smaller company would be horrific’.
,
Invergordon Distillers' finance director, agreed.
‘If you consider that out of the 1,800 listed companies the top 200 account for 85 per cent of the equity market by market capital, and that once you get to the next 100 companies like ourselves they already have comparatively few qualified people in the finance function, the addition of equally qualified internal audit people looks like overkill.’
conceded  's point that whatever savings in audit fees might be made by bringing the detailed work in-house would probably be exceeded by increased overall cost.
‘But the public would be provided with greater reassurances and there should be a lower incidence of fraud and other illegal acts.
We would argue that the benefits exceed the costs.
‘The question of whether all listed companies should be included was discussed by the committee but — and it's a hard line, perhaps — if the directors can't fulfil the responsibilities of stewardship expected of them, then perhaps they shouldn't be listed companies.’
though this a bit rich and observed that it was the study's authors who proposed, in effect, to remove directors' responsibilities for judgmental matters and vest them in an omniscient panel of assessors.
The solution to another point raised by  (’ Where are the people to   come from to fill what will be the lonely, and apart from particularly large companies, unexciting role of internal auditor?
If you're saying auditors unlikely to make it in practice then the idea's doomed anyway’) was pointed to in a comment from .
‘The sort of judgmental work that the study suggests the external assessor will do will be of a much higher standard requiring people at no less than partner or senior manager level.
It would have profound implications for the auditing profession.’
confirmed that what was envisaged was, as  identified but not without some reservations, a restructuring of the profession with future practitioners gaining their experience among and coming up from the ranks of the newly created cadre of internal auditors.
The reservations were, however, as nothing compare with those about the proposal for an audit review panel.
All questioned how its role could add to that newly reaffirmed by Cadbury of non-executive directors on audit committees, and who would be found to sit on it.
described it as ‘creating extra bureaucracy [and]new confusion’.
For , ‘trust between a company and its external auditors is very important and interposing another committee between them will only make the relationship fraught’.
suggested the panel could be heavily exposed if the assessors failed in some way and litigation was threatened, ‘especially if the executive management had warned against selecting them’.
On non-executive directors' role, commented that ‘in a unitary board both executive and non-executive directors are responsible for the board decision and the board as a whole is responsible when wrong decisions are made.
Consequently the committee believes that non-executive directors will not be perceived by the public as being independent of the executive directors, hence the need for the audit review panel.’
Also, selection would be a matter of agreement —‘it's not intended to be a matter imposing a choice on the board’.
Finding candidates to sit on the panels would not be a problem, not least among those moving out of the auditing profession itself.
Meanwhile, however, its independence would be instrumental in addressing another aspect of independence which some felt the study quickly passed over — that of audit from other services provided by the same accounting firm.
‘We didn't see why a company should be deprived of the use of an auditing firm's consultancy and other services,’ said.
‘But before that happened, it would have to get the permission of the panel which would have to consider very carefully if that affected the independence of the audit.’
The study's conviction that creating the panel met the need to dispel finally the belief that auditors were clients of the company, not he shareholders, was still not shared by the finance officers.
‘Auditors have responsibilities to the company as well,’ said.
‘After all, it pays the bill,’ said .
pointed up the risk that the panel may have to respond to shareholders demands to make the company spend money on more external work: ‘While most shareholders will act responsibly, anybody who has attended an AGM knows there will always be someone with a bee in his or her bonnet.’
It all seems to come back to that point of cost-benefit.
As  suggested, the codes of best practice put forward by the Cadbury Committee still need to be put onto a more formal basis and helped to work.
‘There's still a lot that can be done with that before we get to having to establish what would effectively be private sector mini-Audit Commissions’, said.
At the very least, however, unpalatable though the proposals may at present be, they may prove more acceptable than the alternative already foreshadowed by Sir Adrian Cadbury should his own committee's voluntary code fail to command compliance — the even more unpalatable prospect of governance by legislation.
SPECIAL FEATURE
QUALITY SCOTLAND
‘We're in the business of culture-changing,’ says , chief executive of the Quality Scotland Foundation, explaining the drive behind this non-profit making, independent organisation's work to make a commitment to quality a recognised national characteristic of Scotland.
In working towards the growth of a total quality culture it seeks to impact on all aspects of Scottish life, encompassing corporate responsibility and individual quality awareness both of which it believes are fundamental to long-term Scottish success.
‘Total Quality Management has to be the management style of the future,’ explains.
‘quality does not mean expense and luxury: it means reliability and service, and satisfying agreed requirements — it is the key to operating on a world-class level.’
The Quality Scotland Foundation, chaired by , was formed in late 1990 by a group of prominent Scottish Businesses who recognised the need for a survival strategy for Scotland for the nineties and beyond, focusing on the quality issue for economic, commercial, environmental and social development.
These founding companies, the names of which are listed opposite, already had a reputation for quality products and quality customer service and, as such, recognise the benefits of a quality culture.
They were also prepared to work together, sharing expertise and developing resources and techniques for continuous improvement, not for individual company gain but for the greater benefit of Scotland.
As  explains: ‘The primary reason for promoting a positive quality attitude is that it enhances Scotland overall and the secondary effect is that it enhances each company as well.
‘There has to be quality leadership by example.
We are seeing a great cultural change among those companies who are demonstrating the importance and benefits of total quality management.
There is an emphasis on sharing information, exchanging knowledge and experience.
This leads to an openness as companies realise the necessity of quality improvement for the wider business community.’
This openness is fundamental to the total quality culture that the Quality Scotland Foundation espouses as it firmly believes that, by bringing together people with expertise in the quality field to help and advise those who wish to make a commitment to it, attitudes can really begin to change.
Since its formation these founding companies have been joined in the Quality Scotland Foundation by other like-minded organisations, all keen to promote a quality-conscious attitude not only in their own businesses but throughout Scottish life.
The Foundation is always looking for others who can demonstrate an equal commitment to total quality to join it as full members, affiliates or subscribers.
Indeed, ‘the key to our strength lies in the  involvement of our members,’ says .
‘They guide the action and provide the skills of the Foundation.’
Business involvement in the quality process means commitment from the highest levels which is why the Quality Scotland Foundation is targeting executive management in Scottish companies.
‘Signals have to come from the top,’ explains , ‘and chief executives and managing directors have to be hearts and minds behind it.’
The Quality Scotland Foundation provides practical help and leadership by example to all types of company, ranging from large corporate players to small growing businesses, the common denominator being an awareness of the importance of quality.
A small team manages the essential functions of development and day-to-day administration of Quality Scotland and an assessment panel drawn from senior management in the founder companies advises on membership issues.
The organisation has developed an assessment package which enables  members to determine their quality positioning against internationally recognised role models and it runs common interest working parties where member companies can work together solving problems of quality progression and sharing knowledge and experience over such issues as benchmarking and the cost of non-conformance with quality.
The Quality Scotland Foundation also organises an Open Days initiative which gives members the opportunity to learn through the direct experience of others.
Additionally, member companies have access to numerous seminars, training courses and conferences organised on quality issues.
The Quality Scotland Foundation works with the young as well, bringing the quality message to schools and training organisations.
It plans to provide work module material to primary schools to help teachers put the quality message across to children; and is supporting a Scotvec approved quality module for fifth and sixth year secondary school pupils.
It also recognises the quality work in the companies run in schools under the Young Enterprise scheme and is now offering junior membership of the Quality Scotland Foundation to those which demonstrate awareness and commitment to quality principles.
There are many quality initiatives already under way in Scotland which are proving effective at local level.
The Quality Scotland Foundation aims to enhance these by providing a focus for lobbying and promotion.
It has already addressed many opinion formers throughout Scotland, has discussed its activities with many prominent organisations, and is developing close working relationships with local Quality Forums established by Scottish Enterprise and with Local Enterprise Companies.
The Quality Scotland Foundation is also exploring how to raise quality awareness by working towards the creation of a new extensive awards structure in Scotland to recognise achievements in this field.
Wide-ranging though the Quality Scotland Foundation's work is, its commitment to the promotion and demonstration of the benefits of quality to the advantage of all who live and work in Scotland is fundamental to all it does.
It's a long-term strategy for the future of Scotland and everyone who is dedicated to quality and has the nation's interest at heart is invited to join them in their important work.
RISK MANAGEMENT
BEYOND THOSE OBVIOUS HORRORS
Managers do not only need to prepare for the dramatic disaster which may occur but should also try and assess the risk potential of those crucial everyday activities, says Neil Fitzgerald.
As much as individuals presented with a constant stream of video nasties, organisations can experience a steady dwindling in their capacity to be shocked.
For many, the very phrase risk management may have been a switch off even before the experts started whipping up the campaign with the emphasis on the disaster scenario — terrorist bombings, sinking oil tankers, fraud, kidnap and computer fires.
However, senior management almost by definition is a matter of assessing and taking business risks on a daily if not hourly basis and even those momentarily brought up short by the mention of such dramatic events will rapidly discount them as extremely low in league of likely threats to be confronted.
As one consultant said: ‘We may have overdone it to the extent that, apart from in certain industries, risk management may well already be regarded as old hat.’
Yet there are strong financial and commercial arguments why, ignoring the hype, any management should take a cool, business-like approach to assessing and where possible minimising the risks that could damage their operations in terms of liability claims, disruption of output or direct financial loss.
For a start, there is the cost of what has traditionally been the principal means of covering risk — insurance.
As everyone knows, the insurance industry's recent experience of its very own crisis scenario has led to, if a particular line of cover has not been among those withdrawn because of poor claims records, dramatic increases in premiums.
In addition, any company intent on controlling expenditure should be examining how much it should be laying off risk in this way when, as Drew Hardie, divisional director of Willis Corroon in Edinburgh, points out, ‘insurance is a cost-plus product with a substantial proportion of premiums — say, 30 per cent or 40 per cent — used by insurers to meet their own overheads’.
The latter is a major reason for continued interest among non-insurance companies in setting up their own captive insurance subsidiaries.
Another is that it opens up the risk financing options available.
The fact remains that, quite apart from being outside the capabilities of smaller companies, losses still have to be funded from the organisation's own resources.
Whichever route is taken, they all point the same way.
The apparently irreversible trend in the insurance industry, in common with others in the financial services sector, to move away from high-risk, low-return business and focus on specialised, value-added lines (stop-loss insurance, financial insurance to  smooth the impact of a single year's sudden loss on the balance sheet with repayment over subsequent years, and so on), means that organisations must look on insurance almost as a last resort after exhausting all the possibilities of minimising risk cost-effectively in-house.
Controlling risk is still the first priority and they can do a substantial amount themselves.
This relates to another principal issue in managing risk, whether or not insurance is taken out; which risks are likely to affect an organisation?
The relative importance of, say, a lapse in hygiene and a breach of the Financial Services Act will obviously vary depending on whether you're a food manufacturer or a stockbroker.
Meanwhile, however, familiarity can breed contempt and even the most apparently mundane of activities can have far-reaching consequences if something goes wrong.
It's for this reason that the setting up of a risk management group is considered the essential feature in the first step to control: identifying the risks relevant to a specific organisation.
‘People have tried to make it sound complicated and sophisticated but pulling it together is really just hard work involving a lot of discussion,’ said Robert Ure, associate director with Sedgwick in Scotland.
‘The point is that the people inside the organisation are clearly the best at knowing what it does and it is vital to harness that inside knowledge through a multidisciplinary team.’
Apart from the managing director who, it is felt, should be at the initial meetings, which disciplines should be represented on the team will vary to some degree from industry  to industry, according to Hardie.
‘For example, in a utility company engineering will be important but in a financial services business computers play a much more vital role and so someone from the IT department will be essential.’
The presence of a health and safety officer would also seem to be a prerequisite.
While there has perhaps been a tendency to over-emphasise health and safety issues in risk management at the expense of others, the weight of legislation in this area has led to the appointment of someone in this role almost as a priority.
Not least, the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992 which require not only that any organisation employing more than four people must record the results of a health and safety risk assessment and for all employers to implement measures needed to minimise or eliminate hazards identified in their own assessments, but that (other than sole traders and partnerships) a ‘competent person’— defined as someone with ‘sufficient training and experience and knowledge or other qualities’— is appointed to help implement compliance with all H&S legislation.
It may also be useful to have a risk management consultant in for the first few meetings, if only to kick-start the process and provide a few, objective ‘what if?’ questions.
‘While people inside are very good at identifying problem areas they're not very good at following through to measure the full likely impact,’ Ure said.
The tendency to see only as far as the limit of particular function.
Hardie cites the famous case of Perrier and the contamination in its bottling plant.
While the immediate concern was naturally to halt production and ensure the process was clean, ‘the company was very fortunate that its competitors were unable during the disruption to step up their own production rapidly and strip away its market share.
It's frequently the case that where this happens the company never regains its market position and can ultimately go out of business.’
This ability to see beyond the short-term impact to the bigger picture and where the real risks are is vital not only in evaluating the cost of possible outcomes but in then categorising the risks.
In his book, Operational Review, Ken Impey, former head of internal audit at Reed International, sets out the typical broad headings under which an organisation could classify its different risks: ‘disastrous’(threatening damage which it could not expect to survive), ‘seriously damaging’(materially weakening it but from which it could expect to recover) and ‘unlikely to be material’.
These are then sub-divided into high, reasonable and low probability.
The threats can then be compare against these rankings under two distinct headings — unavoidable and avoidable — and appropriate action clarified.
Any unavoidable threats with potentially disastrous consequences, and any with serious consequences and more than low probability of happening, would require preventive measure, protection, insurance and contingency planning as essential courses of action.
Avoidable threats with the same consequences and probability levels would, on the other hand, require strict disciplines for avoidance, preventive measures and consideration of contingency planning should they arise anyway.
Threats which have potentially serious consequences but low probability of happening, and those whose impact is unlikely to be material, would require protection and preventive measure if they are unavoidable, or avoidance and preventive measure if avoidable, so long as these are cost-effective.
Otherwise, the risk should simply be accepted.
It's here that outside help will be most useful, in the form of the technological, financial, environmental and other expertise of specialists with the risk management consultancies including those of the big insurance broking companies, in evaluating and recommending appropriate action for specific risks.
Yet even when all this implemented, the job is far from over.
‘Organisations move on, diversifying, moving into new activities, restructuring,’ said Hardie, ‘and they have to be alert to new risks.’
Which is why, as well as keeping the risk management team on a permanent footing, the most important appointment to it is its head, carrying out the crucial task of continually monitoring and coordinating activities across the organisation.
‘It's vital to have a communications network running through the team and the ideal would be for the team leader to be consulted before any part of the business gets involved in any new activity and so can recommend whatever risk management measures are necessary including any special insurance,’ Hardie said.
Views differ as to what sort of background that person should have.
Only larger companies can stretch to having a full-time risk or insurance manager.
Short of that, again because much of   the legal requirements in risk management so far have centred on this area, the manager with responsibility for health and safety could be a candidate although that would mean extending beyond his or her traditional expertise in physical hazards.
Coming from the other direction, the internal auditor is said by some to have the right background in systems of control by may be, at least initially, too much focused on the, albeit increasingly onerous, financial and computer issues.
For Ure, however, special expertise is less important than the essentials of contact and clout.
Because accessibility and mobility around the organisation are essential, ‘you should go for the most generalist person you can get’, he said.
‘And they must have the authority, backed by the full weight of top management, to make sure things get done.’
At the same time, however, Ure warns that the team is not there to handle day-to-day risk management and the general belief is that the more responsibility for that is pushed down to line management, the better.
It's here that Impey, in his book, sees a particular role for the internal auditor in acting as tutor and guide to all line managers in assessing their own systems and controls, and identifying areas for improvement, as part of their annual operational review.
Building on this, targets and benchmarks could be introduced that could overcome the lingering tendency to see risk management as simply an overhead (’ even though, ‘Ure said, ‘it costs nothing to sit down and work out threats and actions’).
Over and above setting a brief for the risk management team to identify, analyse and evaluate all risks that could impact on the balance sheet to a greater extent than, say, five per cent of gross profit, Ure recommends it could also be given the task of tackling risk areas where the organisation suffers continual losses.
These, while not being serious, can still be a sizeable drain on financial performance.
Performance standards could be set for the team based on a percentage reduction in those losses over a set period.
In turn, similar financial disciplines and targets could be set down the line, ‘rewarding and punishing individual operations according to risk performance’.
Certainly, according to Hardie, ‘in the case of allocating insurance premiums on particular lines of cover when setting individual budgets for the following year, head offices could look at their operating units’ past claims records and load them on the poor performers while even awarding the equivalent of no claims bonuses to the good ones.
‘That would be a very useful way to get across the point that risk management isn't a negative process but can genuinely operate as a positive contributor to the bottom-line.’
Board's neck on the line
When things go wrong, liability is more and more falling on company directors, with their own personal wealth at stake when they get sued, Neil Fitzgerald reports.
If, as the experts argue, board-level commitment is essential to ensure that effective risk management is driven through the entire organisation, the impetus for this is set to come from a not entirely welcome quarter.
Directors' personal liability for the errors and omissions of their companies is not exactly a new problem.
As far as health and safety is concerned, Les Bell, Scottish region director and head of the UK professional and financial division of Sedgwick, said, ‘directors have been personally in the firing line for some time’.
Subsequent legislation and regulation have only supplemented the 1974 Act that made directors, managers and other officers liable to prosecution where they have consented to or have connived at the committing of any offence or where an offence has been caused by neglect on their part.
Then there are the personal perils for breaches of companies legislation which are not only manifold but, supplemented by the Insolvency Act and, where relevant, the Financial Services Act itself amended by the 1989 Companies Act, threaten to catch the unwary at every turn.
In the latest edition of The Company Director: Powers and Duties, published by Jordans in association with the Institute of Directors, authors Peter Loose, John Yelland and David Impey lament that ‘whatever the virtues of its contents, the Companies Act 1989 has left the efforts to consolidate companies legislation in tatters.
‘If [the searcher]is a lawyer, private publishers supply annually updated texts which are almost up to the minute when purchased and databases which are at least adequate.
What the layman is supposed to do the authors do not wish to contemplate.’
The quasi-legal requirements of the Cadbury code of practice and new auditing and accounting rules, putting the responsibility on directors not only to satisfy themselves that adequate systems and controls are in place and that the business is a going concern but to declare this, compound the risk.
However, of much more concern to Blythen Jenkins, head of corporate affairs with the IoD, is the tendency ‘in all legislation where the liability of the company is involved, such as environmental or consumer protection, to have a little paragraph in it saying liability shall be assumed by the directors and officers of the company’.
For him, the trend represents a contradiction of the growing pressure to make greater use of non-executive directors especially as it requires a far heavier burden of detailed knowledge of company's activities from what are still essentially part-timers.
In essence there has never been  a distinction between the respective responsibilities of executive and non-executive directors.
What's new is that the old defence, that a director did not ‘knowingly or willingly’ allow something to happen   has been eroded and, Bell said, ‘directors will have to show specifically and beyond a shadow of doubt they could not know what was happening or that they had minuted their protest’.
A typical example is of the large, London-based public company with a warehouse in South Wales where obsolete stock was not properly stored one Friday evening and radioactive material drained from it into the local river.
It came as some surprise to the board when they were informed that, although it seemed unreasonable for them to have to know what was going on, they could be made liable for the damage.
It might also have disturbed them to know that in such circumstances what is still a fairly new and effective lifeline for them would have been ruled out — insurance.
Although directors and officers' liability insurance has been available in the UK since the 1930s, it has only come into wide use in the last few years.
Doubt about its legality was finally resolved by section 310 of the Companies 1989 Act which said companies may protect their directors and officers from the costs of liability for negligence, default, breach of duty or trust so long as this is declared in the annual directors' report.
Take-up has stemmed partly from the wish of those companies trading internationally and particularly in the highly litigious US to protect their directors and partly because, as Willis Corroon's Drew Hardie said, ‘when directors who had had this cover then moved to other companies they asked for it to be part of their new contract’.
Now, he said, while small companies are able to take advantage of small but cheap schemes such as that operated by the IoD, there are also very few major companies that have not taken out this type of insurance.
Take-up is lower among medium-sized companies ‘perhaps because they feel their profile is too low to attract many claims or that their shareholding is so tightly controlled they won't come up against too many disgruntled shareholders who are the main source of claim in this country.’
That said, any which are operating subsidiaries in the US might care to note that, for all the strictness of securities laws over there, a survey in 1990 found that more than 60 per cent of claims come from sources other than shareholders.
Fortunately, the level of civil claims overall in the UK is a lot lower than in the US which is why at present premium rates are considered relatively cheap.
But this and the extent of cover is in danger of changing.
The sort of protection currently offered covers damages for conflict of interest, negligent misstatements, acting beyond the scope of authority and authorising excessive borrowing, failure to supervise others to whom responsibility has been delegated, unauthorised payments and failure to make statutory payments, and errors of judgment not only of negligence.
For obvious reasons, it does not cover, for example, wrongful acts for personal profit, fraud or dishonesty.
Less obvious is the fact that while ‘sudden and unforeseen’ environmental damage (such as resulting from a burst pipe) is covered, ‘gradual’impairment isn't.
The rationale, however, for that is clear: while insurers are willing to concede that accidents will happen, events developing over a long period of time because of a lack of concern for the potential hazards should not be allowed to.
As such, it is a sign, if not  of the times, then of things to come.
Legislation apart (including the European fifth company law directive which, although still in draft form since 1972, with its proposals for unlimited liability and confusing two-tier boards continues to be a major issue of concern to the insurance market, according to Bell), the expectation is that the number of outstanding court actions will increase the frequency of civil claims against directors in the coming years.
If so, then premiums will rise and exclusions will proliferate.
Already the atmosphere is such that companies such as Chubb Insurance Company of Europe is advising client directors to make concerted efforts not only to be familiar with all aspects of their companies' activities but to take prudent action at the boardroom table: right down to ensuring all documents are prepared ‘with the expectation that they will be scrutinised at a later date by others who are looking for evidence of wrongdoings’, that detailed minutes are taken, and that they should vote against any proposal rather than abstain because abstention could be construed as approval.
That final point says it all.
According to Hardie, one of the main reasons directors and officers liability insurance is taken out is to cover the costs of long, time-consuming legal cases.
Even if the insurance market allows that to continue to the same extent, it will be small compensation to the director who abdicated in the first place an increasing responsibility to him or herself to ensure that necessary controls and preventive measure were in place to prevent a risk turning into a reality.
PROPERTY
Drastic turn of the cover
As terrorist attacks on commercial property increase, business has to rethink its insurance needs, Ken Houston explains.
It is ironic that office building should have become the latest indirect victims of IRA terrorism through increased insurance premiums because, historically, the record of claims made by landlords or tenants has been extremely good.
This has been particularly true of recent years, in, say the 15-year office building boom which succeeded the sudden end to the penultimate property crash of 1973/4.
During that period, dearer rents were not entirely ploughed into higher profits for the development companies and institutional landlords.
Although tenants were prepared to pay the higher rents demanded, they also had greater expectations of the building they were contracted to occupy.
This meant that new buildings would often incorporate, for example, safety-oriented features such as computer-controlled fire alarm and sprinkler systems which not only reduced the risk of fire but, when fire did break out, ensured it was containable until the emergency services arrived.
But it was not only the fire risk that was minimised.
Improved heating and ventilation and plumbing systems also reduced the threat of water damage (through, for example, burst pipes in winter) and with greater emphasis placed on security (the aged night watchman with torch being replaced by teams of professional security guards) the risk of theft and vandalism was also reduced.
Another important factor contributing to the lower-risk insurance element was that, quite simply, buildings that have been put up in recent years have been much more structurally   sound  than those constructed during the '60s and early '70s.
This was partly due to the development of improved building techniques but was also because — until, that is, the recent property crash — growing rental income and lowering yields encouraged developers and landlords to think of new offices as investments that would increase in value year on year.
So offices were built to last.
But this good housekeeping has been swept aside by the latest wave of IRA terrorism aimed at commercial targets on the mainland, one of the repercussions of which has been that, from 1 January this year, landlords and/or tenants have been required to take out a separate insurance policy to cover their buildings against terrorist damage.
Previously, their fire policies would have covered any damage caused by terrorism.
Meanwhile, the Government has stepped in to underwrite the cost of bomb damage to shore up confidence in the British insurance industry and the reputation of the City of London as a world financial centre although that, ironically, may encourage just as much as it may discourage the IRA.
The terrorists know that by hitting commercial buildings and their insurers they are also hitting at a British Government faced with potentially huge underwriting costs even as it is desperate to find ways of bringing down the public sector borrowing requirement.
And if a commercial building which suffers multi-million pound damage also happens to be a ‘prestige’ target, then so much the better.
The situation whereby damage to commercial buildings caused by terrorism was covered by the insured's standard fire policy was one that was unique to Britain and the new ruling brings this country into line with continental Europe where the terrorist risk has, for a number of years, required additional cover.
With policyholders now required to take out a separate policy in addition to the normal fire cover, income from additional premiums will be paid into a pool which will be used to fund claims and the Government will reinsure the pool.
An insurance company will not be required to enter the pool if it does not wish to do so; membership of the pool will be voluntary.
Neither will the commercial policyholder be forced to take extended cover against terrorism if they think the risk is negligible.
For example, a solicitors' practice operating out of High Street, Falkirk, may feel it has a lot less to fear from terrorist attack than, say, one in the City.
There is, however, one compulsory element: where a number of properties are insured under a block policy it will not be possible to insure some of the buildings and not others — the additional cover must be taken out on all, with landlords apportioning out the additional costs.
Just as in household insurance, the additional premiums will be based on the sums insured and the location of the building or buildings to be covered.
Properties with a zone 1 location will be treated as high risk and as well as taking in all the London postcodes, zone 1 will include the G1 and G2  postal districts of Glasgow city centre and the EH1 and EH2 postal districts of central Edinburgh although, perhaps surprisingly, not EH3 which takes in several New Town offices and the area around which the new financial and conference centre is being constructed.
The central postal districts of six other major cities, including Birmingham and Manchester, will be similarly classified.
So-called target risks — such as Government or municipal buildings, main railway stations and airports — and, perhaps, buildings in the vicinity, will be treated individually and in zone 1 a weighting of up to 50 per cent may apply.
, a senior member of the British Insurance and Investment Brokers' Association (BIIAB), admitted the increased terrorist threat was causing the industry grave concern.
‘It is a worrying phenomenon which I think is a reflection of the times in which we live.
However, we welcome the back-up given by the Government; there is still not a part of mainland Britain today which is uninsurable.’
Commercial owner-occupiers and tenants on conventional 25-year, full repairing and insuring leases will have a right to feel that life has dealt them an unfair hand in the wake of the new threat.
The low insurance risk, up to now, of commercial buildings in the centres of Edinburgh or Glasgow is shown in the fact the insurance element (previously including terrorism cover but now, of course, excluding it) of a rental ranging from £16 to £26 a sq ft could be as low as 25p a sq ft .
‘An examination of the claims record of commercial property is pretty good,’ said  of the chartered surveying firm, Richard Ellis.
‘This is particularly true of offices, although properties like warehouses and night clubs obviously have a higher-risk record.’
Meanwhile, in the wake of the new ruling, commercial lawyers are advising landlords to re-examine the insurance elements of the leases taken out by tenants, who would normally be single-occupancy tenants.
‘Insurance is an increasingly significant element in the costs of building ownership and occupancy and the new approach by the insurers will undoubtedly make it even more significant,’ said  of Biggart Baillie & Gifford in Glasgow.
‘The provisions of existing and newly drafted legal documents will have to be scrutinised for potential exposures.’
It was, he continued, more important than ever to ensure that leases were well-drafted so as to make landlords and/or tenants fully aware as to whether or not their insurance policies covered damage caused by terrorism.
There was, he added, a danger that exclusions might come about not deliberately but simply through inertia or administrative error.
MANAGEMENT PROFILE
REVEALING NUMBERS
Coming from the same background as those on the front line gives Tony Davidson of Provincial Insurance a mission to explain all the business's activities, says Neil Fitzgerald.
In the way they work and their finances, general insurance companies are unusual creatures.
Private ones are even rarer beasts, especially those like Provincial, Europe's largest, which operate from a headquarters nestling in the gateway to the Lake District, in Kendal.
After all this it should not be surprising to find as well that the man in charge of Provincial's finances is also responsible for strategic planning and overseas operations spanning Kenya, East Asia and Australia.
After all, said Tony Davidson, ‘I'm not the traditional finance director’.
A Scottish-born CA and fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants he may be but, apart from a brief initial period in a practising firm and then Lothian Regional Council, before coming to Provincial three years ago he had fairly rapidly made a successful impact in senior general management in retail banking, with TSB in Scotland.
By then, at the age of 43, he was already number two to the then newly appointed chief executive , as executive director of TSB Bank Scotland and director of sales for Northern region, TSB Bank — directly responsible for the overall performance of 503 branches in Scotland and North-east England and for strategic planning, marketing and sales development for the North.
Whether or not he would eventually have become chief executive is academic: the move to Provincial seems to have met a need to apply what is generally considered to be the sharp mind and highly effective set of skills of this simultaneously affable and well-organised character to a more absorbing challenge.
And bringing his experience of dealing with and understanding those at the front end of retail financial services with him.
When he came into the Provincial's small executive team under managing director  in June 1990 life was tough for the industry as a whole after the storms and other claims-raising disasters.
Davidson emphasises above his own role in Provincial's response a team effort, not only in the sense that he had to delegate a great deal in such a  multi-faceted role — although ‘logically planning goes together with finance and not only did we have the capacity to take on overseas but control of subsidiaries fits too’— to his deputies, and , but that the whole company was involved.
‘Coming in as an outsider probably helped as a bit of a catalyst but really it was the fact that we were at the bottom of the underwriting cycle and everyone was looking to improve results and build up market share.’
The effect, even at this early stage, has been impressive — a turnround from a £19m loss in 1991 to a £21.9m profit in 1992.
The attack has been two-pronged.
‘Traditionally, because the company has focused on lower average premium business, the cost ratio has been higher than some,’ Davidson said.
As a result of a concerted campaign, which included replacing nine area offices with four regional ones and which is still continuing, a clear six  per cent was slashed off the 1991 cost base, bringing the cost ratio down from 19.2 per cent to 15.9 per cent in 1992.
Meanwhile moves were made to tackle the other end of the equation.
‘We went through all the lines of business we write — there were over 100 — and removed those that weren't profitable such as multi-tenure commercial property — a terrible risk — and unoccupied premises.
It didn't do much for our top line.
Net premiums grew just 3.4 per cent, in spite of rates hardening.
But the effect on the bottom line was dramatic.’
The solvency margin (shareholders' funds as a percentage of written premiums), advanced from 50.9 per cent to 59 per cent, one of the highest in the industry.
A drawback of being a private company is limited access to capital ‘so we also have to look to investment income as a way to increase shareholders’ funds for development’, Davidson said.
But an even greater advantage of being private is, according to Davidson, the ability to take a longer-term view of its business performance.
‘Elsewhere short-termism has had a terrible impact on the industry with quarterly reporting and the fear of doing anything that might affect the share price,’ he said.
Whereas Provincial can unflinchingly take what will be a brief reversal in its planned, steady reduction of the expense ratio this year as it assimilates the Prudential's commercial business and the long-term benefits of having a direct sales force for the first time, 190,000 policies to add to its existing 800,000, and with them premium income of £70m.
Key to all this has been one of Davidson's major responsibilities, the development of a highly sophisticated system of strategic, operational and individual business plans and performance monitoring and review.
Two factors that have influenced the way these have been developed are the principle that Davidson believes in, that ‘what is measured gets done’, and his experiences in dealing with boards and managers at the coalface in retail banking.
‘I don't agree with those who say there are some things that aren't quantifiable,’ he said.
‘Take the claims function.
It might be argued that the only thing you can measure is the claims ratio.
Yet you can also measure the number of open files, how much correspondence is still waiting to be answered, the rate at which telephone calls are answered within the department, the initial claims against the settlements and therefore the gain or loss on estimates.
Unless you really attempt to measure all that there's no way you can properly improve performance.
‘People do like knowing how they're performing and so much in an insurance company was considered ‘immeasurable’.
Whereas now we have put in a culture of performance, measuring against standards, and this year are bringing in performance-related pay.
And, building on the company's traditionally paternalistic culture, it's gone down pretty well.’
Essential to this is making the measurement and reporting of performance against plan meaningful — and that goes as much for the board as the managers.
Looking back on his earlier career, he said: ‘Banks used to be terrible at monitoring their own costs and profitability.
They're now very good at it but the insurance industry is ten years behind.
There are some household name companies whose boards still don't get monthly results.
‘At the same time, you can't just give a heap of numbers.
I agree with what  [the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland president]said in a recent issue of CA about the importance of non-financial performance measurement, and you've got to set it in the context that managers and the board can't exist on just an analysis of the general ledger.’
Provincial's board now receives a monthly 20-page package incorporating the key financials, economic indicators and a branch activity report but also market intelligence from each of the 20 branch managers, ‘saying what the local market is doing and suggesting any good business to be done.
While it's still not a big weighty tome it gives a fuller picture of what we're doing and where we're going.’
Similarly, in shaping the format and means of communicating plans and performance down to managers, ‘having run the retail operation at TSB I appreciate the needs of the front-end operation and the importance of giving people the information that really matters to them with the right commentary.
‘I do feel that financial managers have done themselves a disservice by just giving the numbers — you have to stop, take the managers through them and be an integral part of the operation.’
For this reason, on top of the operational plan for the coming year, a more detailed one is produced explaining individual accounts, the outlook and resources, ‘so ensuring that every underwriter has a clear idea of what the company's strategy is and, more importantly, why we're doing it.
And anyone can write into the managing director who is committed to answering within three days.’
In the same way, key performance indicators set up for each function are reviewed quarterly against its business plan with relevant managers ‘but it's not a dull, dry event: it's when everybody pulls together, discussing everything that's happening in great depth and giving managers the opportunity to explain to directors why they're falling short, the constraints and obstacles, and so achieving agreement with the figures and the indicators used,’ he said.
For Davidson, the cost in terms of senior management time has to be looked on as ‘an investment: you can't afford to spend less time on it.
You can't do without a closer interface and people getting together.
‘The danger otherwise in many companies is of top management being cut off from people right at the front end.’
PRACTICE MANAGEMENT
Working in the right mind
To keep the edge in a highly competitive market, professional firms must listen and respond to client needs.
Linsay Harrow looks at how one firm puts customer care into practice.
Client care, at its most basic and in common with a great many practice development concepts, is the application of common sense: giving the clients what they want, putting the client first and, above all, asking clients for their views on what constitutes good service.
Yet this can be a difficult concept for many professionals who regard clients as at best an intrusion on, and at worst an irritation in, their working day.
Why do the professions have this attitude to client care and service?
They are, after all, in a purely service-oriented business which relies on personal relationships and the client's satisfaction for its survival.
In fact, this attitude is not unique to professionals but is common throughout business in the UK.
We equate service with menial tasks; we are not educated in service management and we lack good examples or models of service excellence.
Against this background, firms have to improve their clients' satisfaction, and the question is invariably how one starts a client care programme.
First of all, the concept of service excellence has to come from the top; the partners have to be fully supportive and client care must become an integral part of the organisation.
It is also important to think of client care as an ongoing and evolving process: it is not a ‘quick fix’ which can be put into place and forgotten.
A slogan which proclaims commitment to ‘total quality’ or client care that is not backed up by people committed to client satisfaction and excellent delivery of services is a waste of time.
Pat Lockett, who is the partner responsible for marketing and client care in Ernst & Young's Glasgow office, regards client satisfaction as ‘the reason why we exist’.
About two years ago, the firm carried out a customer satisfaction survey which highlighted the need for a more structured approach to client care.
‘With a strong market leadership position,’ said Lockett, ‘we must do as much as we can to maintain it and client care is the most important element of our success.
Strategically, we need to understand what the clients are thinking to be able to deliver the services which they want.’
In the past, Ernst & Young in Glasgow operated a ‘Quality Service Programme’, an internal system for examining the services which the firm was providing and evaluating how well the firm was performing.
The missing element, however, was input from the clients themselves, so it began to develop a client care programme.
‘The market has changed,’ explained Lockett, ‘and we have to operate now as businessmen in a much more competitive market.’
The national marketing team in London was thinking along the same lines as the Glasgow office on client care and so the decision was reached to use Glasgow as the pilot for a national client care programme
Although there has been consultation throughout all stages of the programme's development, the team in Glasgow, which includes Elaine Wardrope, Ernst & Young's marketing manager in Scotland, as well as Lockett, has run the programme day-to-day and dealt with the detailed implementation of the programme.
They decided to involve a consultant in the development of the programme and selected Graham Hooley, professor of marketing at Aston Business School, who has worked with Ernst & Young on other projects.
The initial plan for development of the client care programme was in three stages: firstly 19 in-depth interviews were conducted with representatives drawn from a broad spectrum of Ernst & Young's audit, tax and consulting client base spread through PLCs, owner-managed businesses and the public sector.
This served to identify the criteria important to clients in the provision of accountancy services and determine how well Ernst & Young were meeting them.
Following this initial research, a questionnaire was designed for each of the core services of audit and tax which was sent to either the chief executive or finance director of 100 client companies.
Survey recipients were asked to complete a three page questionnaire.
Question one asked respondents to indicate what was important to them when they received accountancy services, using a seven point scale which ranged form unimportant to essential.
Among the 22 factors listed were: the right technical skills to the job; good understanding of the client's business; being proactive; being able to introduce business leads and having access to international resources.
The next question used the same factors and asked how Ernst & Young compare to the respondent's expectations.
This was followed with four shorter questions regarding overall quality of service rating, level of satisfaction, expectation of change in use and immediate concerns.
Twenty follow-up interviews were then conducted with selected questionnaire respondents.
‘We created a virtuous circle,’ said Lockett, ‘since the act of instituting the questionnaire in itself demonstrated to clients that we cared about them and their requirements.’
It also, of course, raised expectations which demanded a fast reaction, so a system which demanded confirmation that responses had been made by partners or managers to issues or weaknesses which were identified was developed.
One of the strengths of the   questionnaire was that it facilitated discussion between Ernst & Young partners and managers and their clients, highlighting areas of which the firm was unaware and identifying the clients' priorities in the services and provision of services it received from Ernst & Young.
Every client of the office will receive a survey during a three year rolling cycle.
To do the project justice and allow time for the respondents' concerns to be dealt with, this amount of time is required rather than sending all surveys out in one block.
As well as helping the firm to identify immediate, specific concerns from individual clients, the survey enables the firm to provide the most appropriate service overall, since it identifies the clients' generic priorities and allows the firm to refocus its services with those priorities in mind.
‘There is little point in offering a Rolls Royce,’ said Lockett, ‘if the client is looking for a Montego.’
In general, the right technical skills and professional standards, understanding of the clients' needs and requirements, keeping to deadlines, prompt responses and regular communication before, during and after a transaction were the factors most commonly identified as important.
‘This programme will help us to keep on improving the quality of our service,’ explained Lockett.
‘It is an immensely valuable management tool since it is our clients talking to us — no-one can refuse to accept what they say.’
‘On the whole, the reaction has been very positive,’ said Wardrope.
‘We have now to build on the satisfaction our clients have expressed with our service and move up a gear to create delight in their view of us.’
Since research tells us that one in four clients are dissatisfied enough to stop doing business with a professional firm, it would seem advisable for every practice to follow the Ernst & Young model and ask their clients how they feel, particularly as research also shows that an unhappy client will tell nine other people of his or her dissatisfaction.
Once there is a clear, up-to-date understanding of clients, then a successful service strategy, effective service delivery and client oriented people within the firm can start to be developed.
LAW
Quicker to confess for less
Our legal correspondent looks at the possibilities of and the background to plea bargaining, one of the issues covered in a recent Government consultation document on improving the delivery of justice system in Scotland.
There is growing interest in the possibility of introducing a formal system of plea bargaining and discounts into the systems of criminal law in the UK.
The system, with formal judicial intervention, has worked successfully in the US; it operates informally but without full judicial approval in England and Wales; but at the present time it obtains not at all in Scotland.
A year ago a working party of the English Bar Council produced a report on efficient disposal of business in the Crown Court.
It made a number of recommendations for a more disciplined and concerted pre-trial regime, suggesting that a defendant should be given credit for a guilty plea, particularly where there is saving of public expenditure and time, and that there should be a more vigorous policy on credit for pleas of guilty either by way of reduction of length of custodial sentence or the passing of some alternative to custody.
The earlier the plea is indicated, the greater the credit should be, with a minimum discount of 30 per cent, save in exceptional cases.
A judge should be obliged when passing sentence to state what the sentence would have been but for the plea of guilty.
Another Bar report, this time on long fraud trials, published in January this year, suggested the formal introduction of plea bargains, and found that the practice was approved by most members of the Bar and of the Judiciary.
But a plea for formalised plea bargaining by Bar Council chairman, was strongly repudiated by his successor,, a strong civil rights activist, who told the Criminal Law Solicitors Association conference, ‘I can think of no greater avenue for injustice than plea bargaining’, which he described as mixing ‘quantum with liability’.
said at a press conference in May that he had some misgivings about a formal sentence bargain, but thought it would be possible to devise a procedure which would be acceptable.
About the same time the lawyers' organisation, JUSTICE, published a report that sentence bargaining was abhorrent per se, because many persons might come under pressure to plead guilty when they ought not to do so.
, director of the SFO, said that the introduction of plea bargaining would be ‘the single most important reform’ which would speed up the disposal of cases.
Conditions under which plea bargaining might take place included a payment of substantial fines, restoring cash to the victims of fraud, full cooperation in the investigation and giving evidence for related cases.
All this variety of opinion, assessment and recommendation will be considered by The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, which is due to report this month.
The general sentiment among lawyers is that the Commission is likely to favour plea bargaining if sufficient safeguards can be built in.
Assuming that the Commission makes recommendations acceptable to the Government, then there will not necessarily be a delay before the legislation is introduced as it is accepted that sentencing bargaining can be introduced in England and Wales simply by a Practice Direction from the Lord Chief Justice, or in Scotland by an Act of Adjournal in the High Court by the Lord Justice General.
The expression ‘plea bargain’ is actually something of a misnomer.
In its simplest form, plea negotiation is practised properly and regularly in Scotland both in the High Court and the Sheriff Court.
When an accused faces a number of charges, it is very common for the defence advocate to offer a reduced plea to a number of the charges, provided others, often more serious ones, are dropped.
The Advocate Depute may or may not accept this; he may well consult with the senior police officer in the case, the injured party if there as a witness, or in very serious cases, with the Crown office in Edinburgh.
He has to weigh up the possibility of a conviction for something, as opposed to the accused walking free.
There is also the pressure of time, when he knows there is a long list of cases still waiting to be tried at that particular circuit.
The one thing that is missing, and prevents the system working effectively, is the absence of participation by the trial judge.
In Scotland at any rate, the judge will not give any   indication of the sentence he has in mind on any particular pleas, and this obviously limits the effect of bargaining.
In England there is quite a bit of unofficial ‘sentence bargaining’, as it might more appropriately be called.
In the past, counsel sometimes had discussions with the judge in chambers when an indication of likely sentence could be given in the event of certain pleas being offered.
The accused would not be present, and misunderstandings sometimes arose between judge and counsel, or between counsel and client, resulting in the accused often receiving a sentence which they thought they had not bargained for.
The alternative is to have the whole process done in open court, with the defendant there to hear what is actually said.
This would limit frank discussion, and might well inhibit the judge in saying anything, and  does not favour the practice.
Indeed the Court of Appeal has strongly disapproved of judges telling a defendant what the sentence would be if he were to plead guilty.
Part of the system of plea bargaining involves a discount for an early plea of guilty, if prosecution costs and time are saved.
Discounts are regularly used both in US and English courts.
The English Court of Appeal has given guidelines on sentencing and the amount of discount which may be allowed in appropriate cases.
The general practice is that a discount of up to one third should be allowed from a sentence but may be limited when the protection of the public is required, when there is a ‘tactical’ plea, or when an offender is caught red handed.
The position in the Scottish courts is different.
The High Court in Edinburgh does not lay down sentencing guidelines, and in a case in 1987 ruled that the practice of giving a discount for a plea of guilty was objectionable, because it involved offering an accused person an inducement to plead guilty early, and disabled the judge from exercising his discretion fully and freely in any particular case.
Nevertheless, judges often give reduced sentences on a plea of guilty where there are mitigating circumstances, or where the need for young children to give evidence in court is avoided.
It seems likely that the ever increasing costs of the administration of our legal system, in particular the cost-efficiency of the courts, will force the Government to early implementation of any recommendations from The Royal Commission later this summer to formalise a system of plea bargaining, with such safeguards for the individual as may seem necessary.
CITY DIARY
New rules jeopardise fair play
It is 1996, and two men are sitting in a posh City of London restaurant.
One of them discreetly asks how the other's business is doing.
The second man smiles, wags his index finger and picks up a copy of his company's annual report.
He reads: ‘1995 was another highly encouraging year for your company.
Turnover was up ten per cent a t£2.1 billion and pre-tax profits increased 21 per cent to £256m…=’
Fantasy?
Perhaps not.
Back in the summer of 1993, the City is seething with unhappiness about the latest proposals from the Government and the Stock Exchange on the disclosure of price sensitive information by quoted companies.
Their threatened crackdown on ‘brokers’ lunches’and the ‘massaging’of analysts' profit expectations has drawn protests from companies, institutional shareholders and brokers.
Landmarks in the new puritan trend on company financial information have appeared thick and fast this year.
The trial and conviction of top Scottish analyst  on insider dealing charges was one.
A second was the Exchange's wrist-slapping of London International Group.
An LIG employee had telephones several City analysts and encouraged them to lower their profit forecasts for the year — a typical, if somewhat blatant, case of the widespread practice of massaging.
Proposals in front of the Government would require conversations between quoted company and outsider to avoid mention of anything that might be of interest to investors.
Anything that might alter investor sentiment, no matter how small, will have to be announced to the Stock Exchange, displayed to everyone simultaneously on the Exchange's Topic screens.
Hence the scene in the restaurant with the company director forced to say only what is contained in his annual report.
The motivation for the Government is that its insider dealing laws have caught a disappointing haul of rule-breakers.
In recent years prosecutions have been thin on the ground, but the problem still exists — and the authorities want to market London as a spotless international financial centre.
Institutional shareholders complain that all too many bad news announcements by companies are preceded by ‘mysterious’ slides in their share prices.
So is the new strait-laced thinking the way forward?
Not if it means that company directors are literally unable to talk sensibly to outsiders.
Where would you draw the line?
If a company chairman described trading as ‘bad’ in his address to the annual general meeting, and then later told an analyst it was ‘very bad’, and if the analyst then advised clients to sell, would that be inside information which should have been the subject of a further statement to the Stock Exchange?
Making it hard for directors to talk to outsiders will also do nothing for the cause of good management.
Companies surely benefit from being quizzed about their strategies and from a free flow of ideas with the market.
And investors benefit if companies are clearly, not hazily, understood by the City.
It would not even create a truly level playing field.
Private investors would only be in an equally good position as institutions if they owned Topic screens and could get through on the phone to their broker as quickly as the big fund manager.
Arguably if the market is less well informed because analysts, investors and journalists cannot talk to companies, then the share price is even more likely to be way out of line and the real insider dealer can reap big profits.
Better to limit the changes to two.
Force companies not to massage profit forecasts, and instead, if they want to change City expectations, put out a short statement on Topic.
Such statements would quickly become commonplace.
Meanwhile there would still be room for outsiders to show initiative in asking interesting questions of companies, and coming to their own conclusions.
The second change would be to make the insider dealing law more effective.
This might include shifting the burden of proof so that defendants have to satisfy the jury that they were sure they were not trading on illicit information.
There may also be more room for professional bodies to discipline those whose conduct has not come up to expected standards but where proving dishonesty in a court would be hard.
TAX
TAX MATTERS
Finance Bill under fire
Leading professional bodies laid into the 1993 Finance Bill.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants and the Institute of Taxation all attacked the length and complexity of the bill, much of which was considered unnecessary.
ACCA highlighted measures concerning the private use of company vans as an example.; They also criticised the lack of adequate time for consultation.
Nevertheless they all expressed serious concern at a number of proposals in the bill which limit the appeals process and in particular the rights of the taxpayer to appeal only where it can be proved that the commissioners have acted unreasonably.
, convener of ICAS's tax practices committee, said: ‘The right balance between the taxpayer and the revenue departments should be preserved.
The measures in this bill affect taxpayers’ rights and are contrary to the Taxpayers Charters.’
Finance Bill tightened
Meanwhile amendments were made to provisions in the Finance Bill aimed at tightening certain provisions.
Among these, any hopes of engaging in a little avoidance to mitigate the effects of the new regime for company cars coming in in 1994, based on list prices, by delaying the fitting of extras until after delivery, were dashed.
The price for tax purposes will now include any accessories added to a car after it is made available to an employee, unless these were made available on or before 31 July 1993 and excluding those worth less than £100.
The price will include delivery and fitting where appropriate.
Discussions will continue on replacement accessories and cars.
On the taxation of relocation expenses, a statutory formula will now convert any of the new £8,000 exemption of removal expenses and benefits from tax that is unused into a number of days to reduce the period for which the tax charge on low or no-interest bridging loans is made.
It was also made clear that existing tax reliefs on international travel costs made as part of a relocation package will be available in addition to the £8,000 exemption.
The provisions for capital gains tax relief for entrepreneurs were also amended to extend the relief to gains arising from the sale of quoted shares where the qualifying entrepreneur held them when they were unquoted and allow him or her to claim relief when they receive shares in another company in exchange for unquoted shares in their own.
But the Government also brought in amendments to curtail the practice of capital loss-buying, restricting the set-off of capital losses brought into a group.
Meanwhile, belatedly in keeping with its stand on law and order, it tabled a new clause that disallows, in computing taxable income, expenses which themselves constitute the commission of a criminal offence.
Wholly, exclusively and legally…=?
Reaction to surplus ACT plan lukewarm
Government proposals to solve the unrelieved surplus advance corporation tax problem suffered by companies with overseas operations were given only a guarded welcome.
A special regime for international headquarters companies enabling them to pay foreign income dividends (FIDs) from foreign source income without paying ACT ‘should bring benefits to the UK economy’, the Institute of Taxation said, but the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and wales said it was unlikely to attract many new companies.
On the more general scheme allowing companies the option to pay FIDs, where ACT would be also paid but unused surpluses would be repayable if the FIDS came from foreign profits, the ICAEW said it was not generous and unnecessarily complex.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland said that among restrictive provisions to be addressed, carry-forward facilities should be provided and ACT on FIDs should not be paid at all, otherwise it was simply an interest-free loan to Government.
It also expressed concern that the proposals simply passed the problem onto another business sector — the exempt international investor.
‘A fair solution justifies taking the cost to the Exchequer rather than playing pass the parcel with taxpayers,’ said , convener of ICAS's international tax committee.
Transfer of insurance companies' long-term business
‘Mixed fund’ assets which partly back taxable life assurance business and partly exempt pension business will qualify for deferral of corporation tax on chargeable gains when a life assurance company transfers all or part of its long-term business to another company, according to a new Inland Revenue statement of practice (SP 7/93).
The Revenue said questions had been raised about whether these assets qualified for deferral if all other conditions were met and, while it could be argued they lie outside the scope of the provisions, ‘the better view was that they are within them’.
Unitary tax sabres rattled
The Treasury instructed the Inland Revenue to obtain information from California-based companies in the UK on the probable impact of retaliatory measures which would be taken in the first instance against them if the US Government fails to resolve the continued burden of unitary tax on foreign-owned companies in the state by the end of the year.
The move was announced by Norman Lamont towards the end of his tenure of the Chancellorship.
Under existing UK tax legislation, the right to tax credits payable under the double tax treaty to US companies can be withdrawn and one option could be to start with companies based in California where the state tax authorities have been allowed to tax foreign-owned companies on a formula-apportioned share of worldwide group income.
Replies deadline on VAT enquiries
The ten-day deadline for Customs replies to VAT enquiries set out in the VAT Charter Standard has been extended to 30 working days for more complicated issues.
Customs said that while in many cases a final answer can be sent within this deadline, letters requesting advice on more complex issues ‘may need longer consideration’ and in such cases it may only be able to send an acknowledgement within the ten days.
Indexation allowance
The retail price index was re-referenced to make January 1987 equal to 100 and equivalent to 394.5 on the former index.
In order to calculate the movement between acquisitions prior to 1987 and later disposals, the index figure prior to 1987 should be divided by 394.5.
Thus, the recalculated index for March 1982 is 79.4.
Where the relevant movement does not span the change in reference date of January 1987, the indexation factor is calculated in the usual way using: where RD equals the retail price index for the month on which the disposal occurs; and RI equals the retail price index for March 1982 or the month on which expenditure was incurred, whichever is the later.
Developments in the UK incentives' field over the last month have focused mainly on policy announcements rather than on changes to particular schemes of assistance.
For example, a White Paper has been published detailing the Government's future science and technology strategy, following the first review of science policy since 1972.
Of particular interest to the incentive field is that responsibility for the administration of the LINK initiative, under which support is provided to stimulate collaborative research in key areas of science and technology, will be passed to the Office of Science and Technology.
There will also be easier access, especially for small and medium-sized companies, to innovation support programmes.
Also, technology transfer schemes will be further developed.
The latest news on the revised Assisted Areas map is that it has still to be sent to the European Commission for approval; it is not known how long this process will take.
A provisional timetable has, however, been given for the Government's review of travel-to-work areas (used as the basis for the Assisted Areas which are targeted for regional assistance).
The new TTWA boundaries will be calculated using information on commuting from the 1991 census calculated using information on commuting from the 1991 census of population.
These statistics are due to be released at the end of November 1993.
Revised TTWAs, including maps, should be circulated for comment six to nine months later.
On a more specific note, grants have been recently reintroduced to help with the costs of essential safety improvements for fishing vessels.
Grants will be paid at the rate of 30 per cent of eligible costs for vessels above 12 metres and up to 33 metres, and at ten per cent for larger vessels.
At the time of writing, two major developments in the European incentives' field are still under discussion — the negotiation of the next (Fourth) Framework Programme for research and development, and the outcome of the reform of the Structural Fund Regulations (which govern the operation of the European Regional Development Fund, the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund and the European Social Fund).
According to recent press reports, the Employment Department is opposing plans to broaden the remit of the European Social Fund (ESF).
The Commission proposes to reform Objectives 3 and 4 of the Fund, which are currently devoted to training the long-term unemployed and young people.
A new Objective 3 would combine the functions of the existing Objectives 3 and 4 and would also aim to facilitate the ‘integration of those socially excluded from the labour market’.
The new Objective 4 would concentrate on the adaptation of workers to industrial change and changing production systems.
The Employment Department's objections are said to concern the new Objective 4 — arguing that the changes will reduce the amount of money spent on training the long-term unemployed.
The Commission's aim of reskilling workers before they become unemployed, and smoothing their transition into alternative employment is also objected to by the UK Government, as it is seen as industrial policy in disguise.
The UK is one of the major beneficiaries of ESF assistance, receiving between 15–20 per cent of the total ESF budget allocation in recent years.
ESF support for employment measures and vocational training schemes is channelled either through Government-funded programmes, such as Youth Training, or through various intermediary public sector and voluntary organisations, such as local authorities, the higher education sector and LEC's.
Remaining with the EC, calls for proposals have been issued for two major research and development programmes — the Environment Programme and RACE II (Communications Technologies).
The deadlines for submissions are mid-July and early September respectively.
BRIEFING
BUSINESS
The MBO will get through
While the rate of management buyouts has slowed down with the recession those that were launched in Scotland had a good record of being completed.
Price Waterhouse surveyed 120 companies across Scotland of which a third were reckoned by the respondents to be appropriate for an MBO.
Of these 21, or over half, had considered an MBO in the last 12 months, 15 of these actually started and the result to date is that nine were completed and three are still in progress.
According to, corporate finance partner, it was not surprising that a quarter of all respondents said the recession had affected their consideration of an MBO.
But for those that had a strong belief in their own capabilities and therefore proceeded, shortage of funds was no problem and they were likely to succeed.
Offices lead an upturn in returns
It may be a measure of the state of the property market these days when offices are said to have shown the greatest improvement in May with capital growth ‘improving’ to minus 6.4 per cent, combining with stable yields and rental values to give a total return for the year to date of 1.5 per cent , according to the latest Richard Ellis Scottish Monthly Index.
Rising capital growth also helped the retail sector retain its high return of 10.9 per cent, again with rentals holding steady.
However, industrial property total return dropped back slightly to 9.6 per cent, the result of capital growth dropping back 0.3 per cent on the previous month.
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Fact sheet to clear up home income cases
The Securities and Investments Board put out a fact sheet to help any remaining investors who have grounds for complaint about their home income schemes but have so far taken no action.
Home income schemes involved using funds obtained via a mortgage to be re-invested to pay off the loan and provide additional income.
Concern about the way they were marketed led to their withdrawal.
SIB said that although a large number of investors have received redress there may be others who are not aware they have reason for complaint or of how to complain and may be eligible for compensation.
The fact sheet sets out the characteristics of these schemes and concentrates on investment bond schemes which caused particular problems for some investors either through bad advice or not being adequately informed of the risks.
It is available from SIB which has also set up a Home Income Scheme Help Desk.
Two firms declared in default
The Investors Compensation Scheme (ICS) declared on 2 June one Financial Intermediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association firm and one Securities and Futures Association firm in default.
The SFA firm, David Coakley of Manchester Mews, London W1, was authorised as a dealer and fund manager in futures and options until 15 December 1992 when the SFA placed an intervention order on it.
It went into voluntary liquidation on 7 May.
The FIMBRA member, Marlingham Financial Services which operated from Mowbray House, The Broadway, Devizes, arranged life assurance and pensions and sold home income plans.
Its authorisation was suspended on 23 April and was placed in liquidation on 30 April.
Since the ICS started in August 1988, 95 firms have been declared in default.
Extra time for training and competence
The Securities and Investments Board indicated that ‘slippage’ may be necessary for some regulatory bodies to give members enough time to put new training arrangements in place and discussions will take place in the near future.
The Investment Managers Regulatory Organisation had already said that, as a result of responses to its own proposals for individuals in member firms to be trained up to and tested on a certain level of competence, it was having to reconsider them with an obvious impact on its meeting its 1 January 1994 deadline.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland told its members that discussions between the three chartered accountancy bodies and SIB on applying similar training and competence requirements to members of recognised professional bodies were also still continuing.
IMRO Ombudsman's workload up
After the previous year saw a fall in the number of cases involving disputes with members of the Investment Managers Regulatory Organisation handled by the Investment Ombudsman, the number increased by over 50 per cent in 1992/3 according to his annual report.
Many factors may be responsible for the increase, the Ombudsman,, said, notably the extra publicity given to the scheme by IMRO and the effects of the recession.
‘Investors who are making money tend not to complain, no matter how fed up they are with their advisers,’ he said.
He remained critical of some promotional literature which, he said, should be written from the point of view of what the first-time investor might construe it to mean.
However, the quality of factfinds and contemporaneous notes is improving, he said.
Of the 92 cases resolved during the year, only three had to go to informal arbitration as opposed to agreed settlement.
Indeed, only five out of the 330 complaints brought since the scheme started have required arbitration.
As in previous years, the cases' outcomes were split 50–50 between advisers and investors.
The largest amount paid was £10,000.
COMPANY LAW
DTI launches studies to reduce company law complexity
The Department of Trade and Industry announced that it was setting up working groups to examine the scope for changing some of the most complex areas of company law.
The groups, comprising business people, lawyers, accountants and DTI officials will take over from where the review of parts of the 1985 Companies Act announced last November left off.
Areas to be examined include what barriers may prevent greater use of company voluntary arrangements, the potential to reduce the number of Companies House filing requirements, what simplifications could be made to the law affecting private companies, the law on groups of companies, disincorporation, and the restrictions on companies helping people to buy shares in them.
After examining their specific areas, the working groups will help prepare initial discussion papers for wider public consultation, will consider the results of this and develop where necessary more specific proposals on which the DTI will issue a further consultation paper.
ACCOUNTING
Adjusting for hyperinflation clarified
When and how consolidated accounts should be adjusted to cope with distortions when incorporating operations in economies affected by hyperinflation was clarified in an abstract issued by the Accounting Standards Board.
The ninth consensus of the ASB's Urgent Issues Task Force requires adjustments to be made when the distortions are such as to affect the true and fair view of the accounts.
In any event, adjustments are required where cumulative inflation over three years is approaching or exceeds 100 per cent and the operations in the hyperinflationary economy are material to the group.
The abstract also discusses acceptable methods of eliminating the distortions.
It is effective for accounting periods ending on or after 23 August 1993 although earlier adoption is encouraged.
FRED6 tackles merger accounting
Proposals aimed at confining the use of merger accounting to the ‘relatively small number of cases which are true mergers’ were published by the Accounting Standards Board as Financial Reporting exposure Draft 6.
The move aims to end a long-standing abuse which was not resolved by its predecessor, the Accounting Standards Committee.
As , chairman of the ASB said: ‘Merger and acquisition accounting produce radically different reported profits and group balance sheets both in the year of the transaction and for several years after.
What makes things worse is that at the moment a company acquiring another can often choose which method to adopt.
‘Merger accounting has sometimes been used artificially to boost reported earnings by including the full year's profits of a subsidiary acquired late in the year.’
FRED6 states that five criteria would have to be met for merger accounting to be used in the future.
These relate to how the roles of each party to the combination are portrayed, their involvement in the selection of the combined entity's management, their relative sizes, whether shareholders receive consideration other than equity in the combined entity, and whether they retain an interest in the performance of only part of it.
In all other cases, acquisition accounting, with the acquired entity's results included in the acquirer's profit and loss account only from the date of acquisition, would have to be used.
FRED6 stipulates disclosure requirements for both mergers an major acquisitions to enable users of accounts to understand the full impact of the combination on the continuing profits of the new group.
‘The ASB recently tabled proposals to close off the acquisition accounting loopholes and this heightens the need to tighten up merger accounting rules now,’ said.
Comments on the draft are invited by 30 September.
New legal opinion backs standards
A counsel's opinion by Mary Arden QC, now as the Honourable Mrs Justice Arden the only female judge in the High Court of Chancery, provided even greater legal authority for compliance with accounting standards as a requirement for accounts to give a true and fair view.
The opinion was provided as an appendix to the Accounting Standards Board's ‘Foreword to Accounting Standards’.
The document, which was developed from an exposure draft issued by the ASB in July 1991, explains the authority, scope and application of accounting standards as well as setting out the procedures under which standards are issued and their relationship to international accounting standards.
The ASB also published with the Foreword an exposure draft of a foreword carrying out the same role for Urgent Issues Task Force abstracts.
The opinion, which comes ten years after a joint opinion by Arden and Leonard Hoffman QC and which supersedes it, not only concludes that standards are likely to be accepted as authoritative by the courts but that they are likely to accept that that compliance with abstracts of the UITF ‘is also necessary to meet the true and fair requirement’.
Uncharitable SORP
Various accounting bodies and organisations criticised the Charity Commissioners' draft revised statement of recommended practice on accounting by charities, SORP2, for being too complex for the many small charities that would have to comply with it.
The National Council for Voluntary Organisations said that while much of the SORP was appropriate to the needs of larger charities, it feared those with incomes of less than £100,000 a year may ignore it because of the extra administration, cost and complexity it involved.
The NCVO was supported by submissions from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England & Wales and the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants which warned that compliance with the existing non-mandatory SORP ‘has not been terribly high’ and questioned if it was reasonable to ‘subject these entities straight away to a very demanding set of new accounting rules’.
Voluntary assistance in preparing and auditing accounts could become hard to come by.
The NCVO is pressing for a simpler SORP and for the timetable for compliance to be extended to mid 1994 to allow charities more time to prepare.
AUDIT
Ancillary auditors' competence to be tested
Principal auditors will have to consider the professional competence of other auditors used during an audit, under one of the second tranche of audit standard revisions issued for public comment by the Auditing Practices Board.
The requirement is contained in a draft Statement of Auditing Standard 510.
Under another draft, SAS 500, the previous optional procedure for external auditors to consider the activities of and gain a sufficient understanding of an internal audit function in planning the audit becomes a requirement.
Draft SAS 470 sets out existing guidance in the new format including consideration of whether disclosure in financial statements is fair and the aggregate effect of uncorrected misstatements, while draft SAS 520 extends the scope of guidance in assessing other people's work to include experts employed by the auditors.
SAS 510 on other auditors' work also extends the scope of existing guidance to all circumstances where these are involved, not just group accounts, and requires auditors to consider whether their participation is sufficient to enable them to act as principal auditors.
Finally, draft SAS 100, the statement on the objective and general principles, sets out an overall summary of the objectives of an audit, discusses the concept of ‘reasonable assurance’ and requires auditors to comply with ethical principles including integrity, professional competence, objectivity, behaviour and confidentiality which are not specifically addressed in current UK and Irish guidance.
Deadline for comment is 30 September.
Non-audit payment disclosure proposals
Views were being sought by 30 July on a proposed change in the 1985 Companies Act to exempt from disclosure in client company accounts payments for non-audit services made to companies which have become associates of an audit firm solely because it has gained voting rights in them in an insolvency appointment.
In a discussion document published on 11 June the Department of Trade and Industry also sought views on extending this exemption to areas where the auditor's only relationship with an associate company providing non-audit services to a client is as a trustee.
The Government feels that the disclosure regulations, which came into force in October 1991, place too onerous a task on auditing firms and clients in monitoring payments to associates which at the same time are unlikely to impair the independence and integrity of the audit.
Audit forms with insolvency practices can acquire numerous associates as currently defined because in an insolvency appointment they are entitled to control 20 per cent or more of a company's voting rights.
INSOLVENCY
‘Cowboy’ practitioners warned
Insolvency practitioners were warned to keep their houses in order ahead of a new regime of Department of Trade inspections due to start in Scotland this month.
The warning came from , president of the Insolvency Practitioners Association at the Scottish conference of the Society of Practitioners of Insolvency.
Random inspections undertaken in England and Wales last year were said to have found more than half the sample failing to comply with statutory requirements.
The DTI visits examine compliance with legislation and systems of internal control and include tests covering administrative records, lodging of receipts and payments, remuneration and maintenance of financial records.
PROFESSION
Salaries news poor but recruitment brighter
Salary increases in the accountancy profession were on average two per cent in the private sector last year, the lowest in 25 years.
But green shoots were reported to be visible in job vacancy trends.
According to Robert Half and Accountemps, based in the South of England, a newly qualified in Greater London can now expect a starting salary of £28,000 in commerce and industry and up to £26,000 in public practice.
A finance director in a medium-sized company would earn up to £75,000, an internal auditor up to £60,000 and a tax specialist up to £70,000.
However, while Accountancy Personnel estimated similar average pay increases of around two per cent, it is also noted student recruitment and partnership prospects for qualifieds were on the up and redundancies were falling in public practice, and some demand for specialist skills and pro-active commercial skills in commerce and industry.
Meanwhile the public sector was intensifying training opportunities to attract and develop accountants for new roles notably in health.
Focus from TV
Accountancy Television has started a monthly video service, Professional Focus, aimed specifically at practising firms' training requirements.
Each video contains training modules from ATV's Business Account programmes.
Full training materials are supplied, it said.
Recent topics covered include audit regulation, FRS3, VAT compliance and penalties, and Pay & File.
Annual subscription is £375 plus VAT.
Further information is available from Accountancy Television    