

Short-term Secondments: a study of educational transitions
Paquita McMichael, Janet Draper, Bill Gatherer
Secondment of staff between different sectors of the educational system can offer benefits to individuals and organisations.
In 1991–92 the authors carried out a study to explore the experiences of staff on secondments.
The aim was to draw together good practice and make recommendations to enable organisations to manage secondments effectively and provide secondees with the support necessary to enable them to contribute fully to their new jobs and to their old, once they returned.
WITH THE INCREASING EMPHASIS on exchanges between various educational sectors for purposes of professional and curricular development, the time has arrived for a closer look at individual experiences of these secondments and at their management.
Building on the 1988 study by Gatherer and Edwards (Spotlight No 11) on exchange of staff between colleges and schools, this study extended the inquiry to a wider range of teacher secondments: from the Scottish Office Education Department, the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum and the Regions.
This allowed us to explore the process of secondment more generally, from first approach to application up to the point of departure some six to 23 months later.
We looked for common features of experience and found a wealth of high points as well as significant low points.
Using reported experiences, we aimed to draw together good practice and make recommendations to the organisations on how best to manage secondments so as to help secondees adapt more rapidly to their new jobs and, in due course, to the return of their former posts.
We expected to gain insight into what these transitions mean to the individuals undergoing them so as to find ways of offering them understanding and support.
Finally, we looked for ways of making secondments as effective as possible from the outset.
The study explored the experience of secondees as they prepared for secondment, adjusted to it, stabilised within it and finally departed from it.
Over eight months 50 individuals were contacted.
All 50 responded to a questionnaire inquiry and of these 20 were interviewed.
The secondees came from varied backgrounds: 6 from SOED (including the Curriculum Advice and Support Team) 11 from SCCC, 23 from local authorities (Central, Lothian, Strathclyde) and 10 from colleges.
There were 22 men and 28 women; 46 came from promoted posts, 17 being headteachers, nearly all from primary schools.
Most became college of education lecturers, or development officers at either national or regional levels.
We made use of an analytic framework derived from research by Kelly (1980).
The model of Gains, Losses, Attachment and Detachment (GLAD) is presented below:
Based on an aspect of attachment theory which emphasizes the relationship between a sense of security and willingness to explore and venture into new domains, this framework allowed us to examine secondees' experiences during a period of transition.
We looked at the gains and losses (the pleasure and pain) associated with the process of detachment from one job and attachment to another.
This framework had the advantage of pointing up particular events in the process which would be improved by more careful management by ‘sending’ as well as‘receiving’employers.
THE FIRST TRANSITION: INTO SECONDMENT
Attachment Gains: benefits from the secondment
All the secondees expected and experienced professional development, which might include intellectual challenge, a gain in experience and an opportunity to work with a wide range of people, establishing nation- or region-wide contacts.
Most of them felt pleased to put their interest in a subject to good use, and anticipated calls being made on their strengths.
About a third admitted to a desire for career enhancement.
Detachment Gains: benefits from leaving existing jobs
Many secondees had been a considerable time in their pre-secondment posts and were looking for variety.
The secondment provided a change and the chance to move on.
Nine were more powerfully motivated by a wish to escape from their present job, and expressed relief over leaving it.
Attachment Losses:: disadvantages in the move to the secondment
Though some secondees had been directly or indirectly approached about a secondment, most of the secondees had applied for jobs and were delighted with the prospect.
In the event, they found that the secondments had costs.
There were few formal induction procedures and almost no training.
The absence of training posed a serious threat to the self-esteem of secondees who, for the first time for example, found themselves teaching adults (students in colleges or experienced teachers in workshops).
Others found themselves struggling to plan development projects.
Some had to learn by trial and error.
A further difficulty lay in the social context of the secondment.
Secondees had usually come from supportive school staff groups.
Some (40%) found, at times, that the new job was carried out in isolation and without team support.
Secondment could be a lonely and even desolate experience, inducing guilt if too many questions were asked.
It was, however, mitigated where there were established mentoring arrangements, regular briefings, or the secondees' formation of their own support groups.
Clarity about their role presented another problem: secondees had hoped for a job description, clear role definition with well defined tasks and clear line management responsibility.
The majority were disappointed:
I find that people at that level of education are so busy chasing their own tail with the enormous amount of work that comes their way…that the planning for a secondee would come at the bottom of the heap.
This produced difficulties in settling in.
Half of the secondees struggled with finding out about the nature of the job and how the administrative system worked.
Taken together, these attachment problems indicate the need for measures to encourage a speedy adjustment, such as:
well considered induction procedures, which may include specific forms of training
the integration of newcomers into ongoing groups (often focused on curriculum development)
the provision of mentoring or at least regular briefing meetings.
Detachment Losses
As might be expected, secondees were aware of having lost the cosiness of the familiar and expected.
Secondment was full of uncertainties and the need for continual adjustments.
At least at the beginning it lacked social support, usually freely available in the schools from which secondees came.
A PERIOD OF STABILITY
Four secondees were still struggling to settle-in some six months after their appointment, but most secondees adjusted within three months and went on to enjoy the scope to shape their jobs, to use their expertise and to become part of a team.
They began to feel a sense of ownership of the work and revel in its challenges.
THE SECOND TRANSITION: TO A NEW JOB OR BACK TO A PREVIOUS ONE
Before long, however, conscious that their secondment was at most 23 months, secondees began planning for departure, some within a year of appointment.
The fact that many made inquiries so early in secondment suggests an anxiety about the future that made for insecurity rather than stabilisation.
Some felt under stress for many months.
When their secondment did come to an end, 22 returned to their former jobs, 7 continued their secondments, 14 moved to another employer and 7 entered entirely new jobs.
At this point we take up the experience of those who returned to their former jobs.
For them it was a case of ‘re-attachment’ to the former post and detachment from the secondment.
Again, we make use of the GLAD framework to reflect on their experience.
Detachment Gains: benefits from leaving the secondment
Some felt relief at no longer having to ‘fit the job’, a situation more often found amongst staff who stepped into the shoes of a departing college lecturer.
There was also an escape from the uncertainty attached to development jobs.
Detachment Losses
Despite relief in return to the familiar, there was also a sense of loss.
This was due to no longer having the flexibility and autonomy most secondees had enjoyed, and the involvement in the wider world which had particularly pleased them.
(Re) Attachment Gains: benefits of return to former post
Nevertheless there were compensations.
These secondees returned to the comfortably known, and, having gained skills and built on their strengths while on secondment, they were ready and eager to put their new knowledge into action.
For some this was possible and they were able to initiate new developments in their schools.
(Re) Attachment Losses: disadvantages of return to former post
We found many secondees deeply disappointed, however, by their re-entry into school.
A secondment creates appetites which cannot be sustained when the work is finished.
Problems abounded:
Returning to a job which they had already ‘used up’ or which had lost value in their eyes
Having moved on while others had not changed.
The main feeling I had when going back was of déjà vu, of stepping back two years in my life.
An example I quote is of two particular members of staff who had been there a long time, and so, when I walked into the staff room, they were in the same seats.
They had not moved, either mentally or physically in the last two years.
I felt that I had moved on; my attitudes, my experiences had moved on.
Having to adapt to changes in the school and to undergo a second deskilling.
The failure of school and colleagues to recognize and use their recently acquired skills.
Staff resentment of their secondments, perceived as ‘swanning around’.
The disappointment and real distress experienced by many returners, despite their pleasure in renewing contacts with former colleagues and pupils, suggests that their needs should be given careful attention, which would include:
Planning for departure by the secondee, the secondment manager and the former employer (within the region or the school)
The recognition and use of the skills and strengths developed by secondees so that these are not wasted
Individual or group counselling for returners when and if required.
CONCLUSION
All in all, secondments were richly rewarding and a great source of satisfaction to the secondees.
All but a few would advise others to seize the chance and profit from it.
Our cautionary comments and suggestions are offered to ease the transitional processes of attachment and detachment in order to improve them both for the individual and the organisations involved.
This paper is based on research carried out in 1991–92 and supported by an SOED grant.
Further details are contained in the research report Short Term Secondments: an examination of the experience of an occupational transition in education which can be obtained from: Paquita McMichael, Department of Social Science & social Work, Moray House Institute of Education, Holyrood Road, EDINBURGH EH8 8AQ.
Price £3.00
COPYRIGHT
SCRE Spotlights may be photocopied, for use within your own institution.
Copyright 1993 The Authors.
The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SCRE.
Printed and published by the Scottish Council for Research in Education, 15 St John Street, Edinburgh, EH8 8JR, January 1993