

Training and School Board Members
Nick Arney and Pamela Munn
Among the aims of school boards, introduced into the Scottish educational system in 1989, was giving parents and other members of the community closer involvement in the running of schools.
Training materials were prepared from which boards were free to choose according to individual needs.
This brief report is based on a study of the response of boards to the materials and training provided.
The research found that take-up in the boards studied had been low.
This paper identifies and discusses factors which influenced take-up and ways in which more advantage might be taken of the training support available.
The study was specifically about school boards, but the finding are relevant also to the planning of training in other fields, especially where volunteers with varied knowledge of existing concerns and varied understanding of their responsibilities are involved.
When, in 1988, the School Boards Act provided for almost all education authority schools in Scotland to have their own boards, major aims were greater involvement of parents in school affairs, increased contact between school and the community, and the progressive freeing of education authorities from routine school administration.
From the outset it was envisaged that board members would require training to carry out these functions and a range of training materials was developed.
Following the introduction of the training materials, the Scottish Office Education Department (SOED) commissioned research into the extent of participation by school boards in training and how the training was viewed by the members.
The research project, which lasted two years, had three related strands.
At the first stage the priority was to get a snapshot of the provision and take-up of training as boards came into existence.
At this stage 100 board members and one official from each education authority were interviewed.
This was followed by in-depth studies of fifteen boards to provide more detail.
Finally, a survey of 1000 members from 250 boards was undertaken.
Over 520 members replied to the survey questionnaire which represented a response from 200 out of the 250 boards.
The research found that the take up of prepared training material occurred in only half of the boards studied.
Common reasons for this lack of take up were:
members were most interested in running their own school and tended to see more general materials as not immediately relevant
time for training was difficult to find because training made additional demands on already busy people
members believed in an apprenticeship model of learning — learning ‘on the job’
board members were unclear about the precise function of school boards and therefore about how training could help them fulfil these functions
members were confused by the sheer volume of the SOED materials.
On the other hand the research showed that training could be valued and programmes could be maintained, if certain characteristics were in evidence.
These were:
the leadership of key enthusiastic individuals
a sense of cohesion and purpose within the board
a view of training as important to personal development
a strong sent of shared concerns and responsibilities with the community in which the school was based.
The functions of school boards
The functions of school boards, defined by the 1988 Act, fall into two categories.
Firstly, there are certain formal administrative powers.
These are limited (although boards can take on additional functions through negotiation with their education authority).
They include: approval of the headteacher's plans for use of the capitation allowance; participation in the selection of senior school staff; and control of the use of school premises outside of school hours.
The second set of  functions relates to boards being pivotal between school, parents and community.
Responsibilities here include: encouraging contact between the school and its community; receiving reports from the headteacher and education authority; and having the right to raise any matter for consideration by the headteacher or education authority.
The training plan
Considerable effort and expense were employed in providing information and training to help boards get established.
The Scottish Office produced a manual and a guide to legislation and support structures were set up by central government and education authorities to provide information and to respond to board queries.
A training budget was established for each board and boards were encouraged to make one of their members responsible for coordinating training.
Training materials were developed by the Scottish Office in collaboration with colleges of education.
These consisted of two sets of materials.
The first was a training pack of twenty units designed for individual boards to use and when they saw fit.
The topics covered fell under three broad heads: links with parents and the community; schools in operation; and boards in operation.
The topics were supported by video tapes.
The second set of materials was used in area training.
These were modules, which covered the same broad topic heads in greater depth.
The providers of these training modules were the education authorities and colleges of education who offered a number of area sessions which could be attended by individual members from boards.
With both sets of materials interactive methods were encouraged.
Those who designed the materials were aware that boards would be operating in a wide variety of contexts and that members would come from a variety of backgrounds.
The main duties and responsibilities of the board provided a general framework but training developers had little to go on beyond this.
They did, however, anticipate that boards would bring together people likely to have different views about the purposes of boards.
They therefore wanted to encourage dialogue and to provide members with a range of objectives for their boards to help them establish a plan of development.
The materials also attempted to embody generally accepted features of good practice in adult training — boards were encouraged to work as teams; the principles of learning through practice and participation were emphasised; relevance both to members' own previous experience and to real board tasks was highlighted; and the material was designed to make it easily understood by all board members.
In addition, education authorities offered induction courses.
Some also organised meetings for chairpersons and for training coordinators to help them with their new roles.
The take-up of training
Thus boards were able to draw from varied training material.
This was backed up by each board being sent this material as the board was established.
Further, from the outset, they were encouraged to set aside time during meetings to devote to a training topic.
It was also made clear to them that their training budget could be used to buy training from any supplier.
As far as we know, very few boards took advantage of this opportunity, relying almost exclusively on education authorities and colleges of education.
As the material prepared by the Scottish Office was so extensive, it was expected that the use of this would form a major part of boards' training activity.
However, on being established, boards were faced with a mass of information to digest, and a number of tasks in relation to setting up the board, for example, agenda setting, standing orders, the board budget and ordering of equipment and stationery.
They were also keen to find out how their own school operated and often became involved in practical matters directly affecting their school, such as mounting a campaign for school repairs and refurbishment.
Within this context setting a pattern of training sessions was not seen as a high priority.
Few clear-cut working plans for training sessions were established at an early stage, although attitudes varied.
In some instances boards decided that working on board business was sufficient training, whilst at the other end of the spectrum a combination of approaches was used, including the SOED units, talks by members of staff, school visits and attendance at area training sessions.
The time spent on training also varied from fifteen minutes to well over an hour.
Within all this variety there were, however, certain discernable features.
Within-board training
The evidence from all three stages in the project points to a tendency for those boards which carried out training to concentrate on ‘within-board’ activities.
The most common form of this was something perceived as directly relevant to the school or to the board's immediate concerns, such as a study of school attendance rates.
The demand on headteachers was heavy.
Over three-quarters of the respondents in the survey had taken part in a discussion led by the headteacher.
Nearly half the respondents had also received a talk from another member of staff.
Two-thirds had attended a school visit which would have required organisation by senior school management.
Such contributions were highly valued because the members felt that they were learning much about their own school.
Response to the SOED material was more mixed.
Almost half had used some training units, but from our observations it was clear that the guidelines for use were rarely followed closely.
The designers of the material had  provided explicit suggestions for the time to be spent on each activity within a unit and had indicated whether activities should be carried out as individual work or group discussion.
However, most boards tended to extract material when it suited them and rarely adhered to the time-scale or suggestions for different kinds of activity.
It was also quite common for a training session to be postponed if a pressing practical issue led to lengthy discussion.
Area-based training
Area-based training sessions using the Scottish Office modules were less popular.
Just over a quarter of the survey respondents reported having attended these.
Three main reasons were given for the apparent lack of enthusiasm: board members found it difficult to spare additional time for this form of training; they were doubtful of the ability of outside trainers to provide training in tune with local needs; attempts by some education authorities to retain part of the training budget in order to supply such area sessions were seen by some members as demonstrating a lack of trust in the board's ability to organise its own training.
Reactions to training
Our evidence suggested that there had been a mixed reaction to the take-up of material designed specifically for boards.
The units had been used by only half the boards surveyed, area sessions had been attended by less than one-third.
This is not to suggest that boards had been idle.
Certainly the boards we studied in more depth had made serious efforts to understand their duties and responsibilities.
However, they had been plunged into a welter of activity in which they tried to respond to urgent and practical matters placed before them and it is, therefore, not surprising that a commonly held view was that ‘the best form of training comes from getting on with the job’.
It may well be that this is important in itself.
However, few of the boards that we observed appeared to have arrived at the stage of reflecting on some of this learning in training sessions, which might, in turn, help them discover ways to become more effective.
Moreover, in the national survey, almost 60% of those who responded did not expect to take part in further training and only 8% identified specific topics they expected to cover in the future.
From the detailed observation of fifteen boards, it was evident that training often followed the pattern of immediate demand rather than being linked to any developmental plan; thus, a board might ask the headteacher or member of staff for further elaboration of a topic which surfaced at a meeting, such as subject choice by S3, or individuals might decide to attend an area session on interviewing skills only once they knew that they were to participate in the selection of a senior member of staff.
There were exceptions to this approach, but, given that the most popular form of training was that conceived by boards themselves, perhaps a clearer message is required as to the general value of training.
It was noticeable that boards who had got furthest with training were those with a clearly articulated plan related to an explicit agreement on their overall purpose.
Parents have an overall majority on all school boards.
Perhaps, it is not surprising, therefore, that it was the set of functions which emphasise consumer accountability and a pivotal role for boards, which often concerned members most.
Yet it is not easy to define any limit to the amount of activity which is possible in this area.
From our interviews and observations it was apparent that many members were experiencing frustration through a lack of sense of direction or achievement in this field (in the survey 25% of respondents felt that their board had achieved little in any field of activity), although they were not clear how this might be improved.
Factors affecting the uptake of training
Negative factors
Undoubtedly, providing training to such a diverse audience is difficult.
Designers of training materials intended for national or area use tried to allow for board members who would differ in experience and working diverse contexts.
But centralised provision of materials reduces the opportunity for ‘contextualisation’— and it is little wonder that many board members perceived the published training material and the area sessions as lacking in relevance.
There is also the question of the appropriateness of the model of training.
The materials which had been developed embodied accepted features of good practice in adult education with an emphasis on group interaction and exchange of ideas.
This may well have been of benefit to individuals, but school board members were very conscious of their role as representatives of parents and the local community.
Indeed, 55% of survey respondents stated that the main purpose of their board should be to improve communication between parents and the school.
They were therefore keen to demonstrate the board's usefulness tot hose they represented and this may have made them reluctant to accept a model of training which did not produce immediate and tangible results.
For them ‘learning on the job’, combining learning with clearly identifiable aims, may have appeared a more effective strategy.
Typically, where boards devoted time to a training activity, this lasted for approximately 45 minutes.
In many cases practical issues, such as school refurbishment or the re-surfacing of a school playground, took an increasing share of the agenda.
Training was therefore seen as time-consuming and a burden for busy volunteers, many with other commitments.
Nor did  everyone see the need for an update on current classroom practice.
The pace of educational change has been swift in recent years.
Although many board members reported being fascinated by recent developments, it was not uncommon to find those who failed to appreciate the amount of change since their own schooldays.
Positive factors
In the case-studies of 15 boards it was clear that half had made significant progress.
For these, training was a regular event and in one case was carried out at a separate meeting every alternate month.
These boards appeared to have certain common characteristics.
Here we identify four key areas:
The leadership of key individuals
Where there was significant progress the headteacher's influence was central.
In such cases they were keen not only to support the members in offering advice but also expressed the hope that training would serve to raise awareness of school issues, in order to inform discussion and help the headteacher in decision-making.
They saw their relationship with the board as a two-way process, taking advice and ideas from a meeting as well as to it.
In this, they did need the enthusiastic support of the chairperson.
If this was not forthcoming, then there was little the headteacher could do to encourage training.
This is not to say that other members did not provide leadership.
Some boards had enthusiastic and confident training coordinators who went beyond being merely information providers and saw their role as facilitating the identification of needs and discussion of plans for a training programme.
However, the role of facilitator can only be successful if others perceive training as important.
On their own, training coordinators were unable to link training with decision-making.
This could only be achieved through the support of the chairperson and headteacher.
Training seen as contributing to personal development
Board members talked about their growing awareness of the complexity of problems associated with their school and emphasised that they found stimulation in the challenge to their accepted values, through exploration of issues.
Perhaps the most striking example of such growing enthusiasm is from one of the boards which devoted 45 minutes in three consecutive meetings to a series of talks and discussion sled by a senior member of staff.
The subjects of these talks were current teaching methodology, assessment and reporting.
The board carried out this training diligently, in spite of increasing involvement with a significant problem concerning redistribution of the catchment area of the school, requiring extra meetings with parents, other boards and the education authority.
They also found time, during this three month period, to visit the school for a day, observe classes in action and attend small seminars led by members of staff.
The following comment is from one member of this board:
During the first year we probably didn't give enough time to training.
I think we were so busy trying to get ourselves organised that the training issue seemed to be something that we would get around to later.
I think this year it is interesting that, despite the fact that we have that major concern of the catchment area, we have stuck to our guns on the curriculum talks.
We have already indicated that we would now like to have a session with teachers and principal teachers.
I guess that is a form of training as well, in that we are being made more aware of teaching issues and problems as they appear to the everyday teacher.
(Parent member).
Group cohesion and sense of purpose
All of the boards actively involved in training practised some form of activity as a whole group, generally within a board meetings.
It is possible that a strong sense of teamwork, which was less apparent in other instances, had been engendered through such within-board activity.
Cohesiveness found expression in open discussion about needs and in drawing up a training plan: the boards had recognised a problem and done something to resolve it.
The following extract from an interview illustrates the sense of togetherness which was apparent in some boards:
I certainly think that nine months down the road we are saying to ourselves, ‘Well what are we about?’
The question is being asked, what is the school board doing?
We are very conscious that perhaps there is an attitude out there which says, ‘Well, they're a bit of a damp squib!’
We are really struggling at this point in time, thinking, ‘What are we doing, what are we about?’
So we're developing our independence because we feel we need to.
We've committed ourselves to it.
(Parent member — Chair)
Shared concerns with the community in which the school is based
In three cases, during our observations, community issues related to the school intruded upon board business.
For example, in one case there was an important issue concerning the redefining of the catchment area for the school, whilst, in another instance, discussions were continuing on the design of a sports area for evening use by the community.
Such occurrences caused some anxiety at the time, but were accepted by members as part of their responsibility.
They demonstrated the school's strong relationship with its environment.
Members appeared to value their role as representatives of the community at large, just as much as their narrower role as parent or staff representative, or as a co-opted member serving a limited group of interests.
The way ahead
In our interviews we found headteachers and board members considered that boards were strongly supportive of their schools.
Despite fears when boards were being established, training has, if anything, strengthened their commitment to schools as their knowledge of the complexities of school life has increased.
Those boards which took the establishment of a training programme seriously have been able to contribute constructively to school decision-making.
Individual school boards
Basing our conclusions on the characteristics of boards that were successful in organising training, the following would appear important for boards attempting to make space for training:
Setting aside adequate time for the discussion of purposes (aim to identify a small number of common purposes as a starter).
Deciding what the board needs to know about its school and community, and then discussing with the headteacher and school staff how best to become informed.
Together, drawing up a training plan which gives adequate opportunity for working as a group, as well as identifying individual training needs.
This task requires the leadership of the chairperson and training coordinator.
Building in regular evaluation of activities and training, as a way of improving and monitoring performance.
Supporting school boards
Board members suggested a number of practical ways in which central and local government can continue to support boards.
Following the research, these suggestions were discussed at a seminar attended by education authority officials, SOED representatives, board members, trainers and headteachers.
This discussion reinforced some of the points made during the research and added further suggestions.
The following points were made by individual board members during the research:
As membership changes, regular induction courses for new board members will be a central and continuing need
Board members often reported difficulty in attending area sessions as well as their other commitments.
The development of self-study materials which cater for a range of expertise is an important contribution central government could make.
That it may have been difficult for members to attend area sessions, should not rule out the possibility of encouraging collaboration among groups of local boards.
Those members who did manage to attend area sessions considered that learning from each other 's experiences and personal contact with regional officials were major benefits.
From the seminar came the following suggestions:
Education authorities were the key to providing training.
They needed to be able to respond to local requests for specific training from individual boards.
They should also inform board members of training opportunities offered by a range of providers.
Education authorities could play an important role in promoting and encouraging local clusters of boards which could provide a focal point and be more locally relevant than wider area-based training.
Certain members should be targeted: induction for new members and training for clerks to the board, given the importance of this position, were identified
Board members needed to feel that training was meeting their specific needs and arose directly from needs.
They should be encouraged to analyse their needs and to develop their own training materials.
Providing training for volunteers
Moving from the specific instance of school boards and training, the experience of a major training project, associated with a whole new body of volunteers, highlights issues which are relevant to the planning of training for similar innovations.
These issues relate to: available time for training; timing of the introduction of training materials; catering for a wide range of experience; and participants' perception of the task.
In relation to school boards, there would appear to be three sets of questions:
When is the time right to introduce training material?
Was it right to present this all at one time to the boards for them to pick and chose, or should practical issues, such as board operations, have been introduced first, before asking them to consider larger educational issues?
Did the training material take into account the need expressed by volunteers to show early evidence of their usefulness to the school and its community?
Was the model of learning, which emphasised an interactive approach, appropriate for many board members whose experience of learning was likely to be one of transmission of knowledge by an ‘expert’?
The main theme that runs through these questions is that there was a possible mismatch between how providers of training and boards perceived needs.
Certainly some of the material which provided advice on how boards could best become operational was beneficial.
However, the desire to provide an extensive training programme as soon as boards came into existence did rule out any early collaboration between provider and receiver.
The development of the material was not a two-way exercise.
As one member stated:
What do you expect the training to do for you?
This is a question that the board has struggled with for two years.
The training in on offer appears to be about increasing management capabilities and if you don't want to go down that road there is a problem, for there is a significant and genuine gap between the expectation of school boards and how their task was perceived by the Scottish Office.
(Parent member)
As headteachers reported, boards operated most effectively when it was possible for members to offer constructive criticism which provided an input into the decision-making process of the school.
Here training was important in order to create a well informed group.
Taking account of moves towards further devolved management to schools and proposed greater consultation between headteachers and boards it is likely that training will be all the more important in the future.
If boards are encouraged to take part in the identification of their needs and the development of materials, as indicated from the seminar conclusions outlined above, then it is to be hoped that their potential to act in a supportive and constructive way will be fully realised.
The study on which this paper is based was commissioned by the Scottish Office Education Department and took place between January 1990 and December 1991.
The full report,The Provision and Take-Up of School Board Information and Training (N Arney, P Munn and C Holroyd) is available from SCRE, price £5.00.
COPYRIGHT
SCRE Spotlights may be photocopied, for use within your own institution.
Copyright 1993 The Scottish Council for Research in Education
The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SCRE.
Printed and published by the Scottish Council for Research in Education, 15 St John Street, Edinburgh, EH8 8JR, April 1993