

Our mission statement…
Into the 1990s with the Employment Service
The ES
The ES was created by the Government to provide an effective and high quality public employment service.
We are well qualified and equipped to do this through our committed and trained people and our nationwide network of local offices.
Our Purpose
Our purpose as a public employment service is to help people into work, thereby filling employers' vacancies, and to pay benefits to those unemployed people entitled to receive them.
Our continuing priority in the 1990s will be to help unemployed people entitled to receive them.
Our continuing priority in the 1900s will be to help unemployed people, and particularly the most disadvantage, to find work, and to ensure that in the meantime we pay them benefits accurately and on time.
However, our role may need to broaden and develop in response to new policies and programmes introduced by Ministers.
The ES has earned a good reputation in responding to new opportunities.
We must be ready to meet fresh challenges.
Our Values
The ES serves people through people.
We must all work together in close cooperation to provide the best possible service for our clients.
We will ensure that the ES is a well managed organisation, where people want to work and where they can realise their potential.
Our Vision
We will become a business-like agency, respected for the quality of our customer service and people.
We will make good use of agency flexibilities in meeting our targets, and deliver programmes and services cost-effectively through a unified local office network.
Our Aims
To achieve this vision for the ES, we have set ourselves the following key aims for our organisation:
to improve the effectiveness and quality of ES programmes and services;
to foster relationships with people and organisations outside the ES who can help our clients;
to develop a strong culture for the ES as an agency with greater emphasis on effective management and on the achievement of positive results from our efforts;
to integrate the ES local office network across the country;
to ensure that all of us in the ES have the capability to deliver the programmes and services required in the 1990s.
By achieving these aims we can build an Employment Service for the 1990s valued by our clients and by us all.
AUTHOR'S AIDE MEMOIRE If your instruction is complex, length or will have a major impact please consult us first!
1.
Target your instruction to the people who need to see it.
2.
Use abbreviations within the text, eg. Head Office (HO).
3.
Good layout of an instruction makes it easier to read.
Look at a recent example.
4.
Break a paragraph down by using: a b c d
5.
15 words or less to a sentence.
6.
Use bold where necessary.
Do not underline.
7.
Use plain  English be :
Simple
Brief
Direct
8.
Cancel/amend relevant instructions.
9.
Remember to use the ‘Guide for Authors’.
COMMUNICATIONS UNIT:
Plain English makes common sense!
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE 
THINKING ALOUD
Send your ideas to:
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
All of us have ideas to improve the quality of our service and the way we do our jobs.
Many of these can be built into the way we do things in our office, but some could have a much wider impact.
Thinking Aloud is an easy way to have your ideas heard and rewarded.
Do you have any good ideas on:
improving the way we do things
providing a better service to clients
making your job (and your colleagues' jobs) easier
saving money or time.
Thinking Aloud is ready to listen to your idea and will:
register and acknowledge your idea
have your idea evaluated
let you know if your idea can be used
arrange payment of any awards.
DO
state the problem or situation your idea is designed to overcome.
write clearly in black ink or type your idea if possible.
send in two copies of your idea with any forms or leaflets you are introducing or changing.
keep a copy of your idea.
fill in your identity details only on the tear off portion of this leaflet,not on the copies of your idea .
let us know if you change your name or location.
read Circ. 160/69 for the full rules of Thinking Aloud.
DON'T
hesitate to let us have your idea
KEY POINTS
Ideas need to show a benefit to the ES, or our clients.
Ideas should highlight a problem and give a solution.
Well researched and neatly presented ideas are more likely to succeed.
Every idea will be acknowledged and receive a reply.
Ideas will remain valid for a year after evaluation.
At your request, ideas can re-evaluated in that year.
THE ES AND YOU
A guide to working in the Employment Service
Our mission statement…
Into the 1990s with the Employment Service
The ES
The ES was created by the Government to provide an effective and high quality public employment service.
We are well qualified and equipped to do this through our committed and trained people and our nationwide network of local offices.
Our purpose
Our purpose as a public employment service is to help people into work, thereby filling employers' vacancies, and to pay benefits to those unemployment people entitled to receive them.
Our continuing priority in the 1990s will be to help unemployed people, and particularly the most disadvantaged, to find work, and to ensure that in the meantime we pay them benefits accurately and on time.
However, our role may need to broaden and develop in response to new policies and programmes introduced by Ministers.
The ES has earned a good reputation in responding to new opportunities.
We must be ready to meet fresh challenges.
Our values
The ES serves people through people.
We must all work together in close cooperation to provide the best possible service for our clients.
We will ensure that the ES is a well managed organisation, where people want to work and where they can realise their potential.
Our vision
We will become a business-like agency, respected for the quality of our customer service and people.
We will make good use of agency flexibilities in meeting our targets, and deliver programmes and services cost-effectively through a unified local office network.
Our aims
To achieve this vision for the ES, we have set ourselves the following key aims for our organisation:
to improve the effectiveness and quality of ES programmes and services;
to foster relationships with people and organisations outside the ES who can help our clients;
to develop a strong culture for the ES as an agency with greater emphasis on effective management and on the achievement of positive results from our efforts;
to integrate the ES local office network across the country;
to ensure that all of us in the ES have the capability to deliver the programmes and services required in the 1990s.
By achieving these aims we can build an Employment Service for the 1990s valued by our clients and by us all.
A WELCOME FROM THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Welcome to the Employment Service.
This booklet has been produced to help you understand what it will be like in our job — working in the Employment Service (ES).
This booklet describes what the ES does, how it's organised and where you will fit in.
It also outlines what guidance and support you can expect to get at work and what we expect from you in return.
One of the first things you'll realise is that you work for an organisation that has to react and respond rapidly to changing circumstances.
Levels of employment and unemployment and the easy or difficulty with which people find jobs can vary a great deal from place to place as well as from year to year, and so our tasks are always changing and developing — something you will notice and shouldn't be surprised by.
There is a great deal of variety in the work of the ES and this booklet should help you see the bigger picture — of how you can help to provide a vital service to the public.
I hope you find it helpful and that you enjoy working with us.
MIKE FOGDEN 
ABOUT THIS BOOKLET
The booklet has been written for permanently appointed people in the ES but people on temporary appointments will find much of it also applies to them.
While it doesn't give the full details, this booklet will provide a quick insight into your terms and conditions which are currently described in the ES Personnel Handbook.
However, do check anything you're not sure of with your line manager.
There are three sections in the booklet.
Part One —The Employment Service — tells you how the ES is structured and what it is in business for.
Part Two —Working in the ES — summarises the key points you will need to know about what you can expect in terms of support and entitlements from your new employer and other useful information; and
Part Three —Conduct — lists in detail what is expected of you in your dealings with the public and your colleagues.
A word about Part Three.
You'll see that it is written in a slightly more formal style so that you can be absolutely clear what we expect of your now that you are working in the ES.
You should read this part of the booklet carefully as it outlines our standards and the importance we attach to your meeting them.
PART 1 THE EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
The dual purpose of the ES is to help people into work, which also fills employers' vacancies, and to pay benefits to those unemployed people entitled to receive them.
The ES aims to meet its targets and deliver its programmes and services cost-effectively through a network of local offices.
ES is responsible for carrying out Government policies.
The head of ES is the Chief Executive, who is responsible to the Secretary of State for Employment for the operation and management of the ES.
The Chief Executive negotiations an Annual Performance Agreement (APA) with the Secretary of State.
If you are interested in finding out how the ES sets its targets and is monitored, ask your line manager to let you see a copy of the Annual Report and Accounts.
Your manager may ask your views when preparing the detailed operation plan for meeting targets in the year ahead.
Your own work objectives will, in turn, help to achieve these targets.
AIMS
We are continually seeking ways of improving our performance and therefore enhancing our reputation of being a business-like organisation, respected for the quality of our service.
This is why, in response to a Government's Citizens' Charter Initiative, we introduced a Jobseeker's Charter in December 1991.
This gives an indication of the range of service people can expect to receive in our offices.
Local offices display their service standard and encourage customers to put forward views about the service at any time or through Customer Satisfaction Surveys.
Our main aim is to help promote a competitive and efficient labour market.
In particular by giving positive help to unemployed people through our job placement service and other programmes and by the payment of benefits and allowances to those who are entitled to them.
To achieve this aim, we have the following main operational objectives:
to provide unemployed people, particularly those who have been unemployed for longer than six months and those in the inner cities, with job opportunities and help in job search skills, or opportunities to become self-employed or to find appropriate training;
to provide particular help to people with a disability to take advantage of work and training opportunities and to help and encourage employers to make such opportunities available;
to pay benefit promptly, accurately and courteously;
to encourage unemployed claimants to seek work actively; and to check that they are entitled to unemployment benefit, national insurance credits or, as an unemployed person, to income support, in accordance with social security legislation;
to discourage benefit fraud by identifying, investigating and, where appropriate, prosecuting those suspected of, or colluding in, obtaining benefit by deception.
VALUE FOR MONEY
Meeting our business objectives, improving services and integrating the local office network are all important to the success of ES; but we must achieve these aims within the resources that are made available to us by government.
So getting value for money, doing our jobs efficiently and effectively is important for all of us, wherever we work, whatever job we do.
STRUCTURE AND SERVICES
We operate through a network of local, area regional and head offices across England, Scotland and Wales.
Our operational budget is over £1,100 million.
In addition, we pay out over £7,000 million in benefit payments on behalf of the Department of Social Security.
The following diagram shows our structure in January 1993.
LOCAL OFFICES
1,300 Jobcentres and Unemployment Benefit Offices.
(We will have a fully integrated network of around 1,100 ES Jobcentres by the mid-1990s)
Local Office Managers run offices in which 80% of our people work in delivering the service (see next page)
AREA OFFICES
59
Area Managers are responsible to the Director for performance, budgetary control and value for money in their area
REGIONAL OFFICES
9 (7 English regions plus Offices for Scotland and for Wales)
Directors are responsible to the Deputy Chief Executive for the delivery of the agreed levels of performance in the regions
HEAD OFFICE
Sheffield/London
The Chief Executive , assisted by the ES Executive Board is responsible to the Secretary of State for Employment for the delivery of ES Services.
Heads of Branch in head office development relevant operational policies 
DELIVERING THE SERVICE
50,000 people work in the ES.
80% of them work in our 1,300 local offices in England, Scotland and Wales.
These local offices are responsible for:
submitting jobseekers for vacancies and providing guidance for unemployed people on how to get work;
displaying and holding details of employers' job vacancies;
taking new claims for benefit from people who have become unemployed;
giving guidance to long-term unemployed people and entry to employment and training programmes;
paying benefits and warding national insurance credits to those people who are entitled to them;
referring to adjudication those cases where a client's entitlement to benefit is in doubt;
providing access to specialist services for people with disabilities;
contacting employers and encouraging them to use the ES to fill their vacancies;
supplying information on local employment and training opportunities;
identifying to the Inspector those claims for benefit which may be fraudulent.
Over 2 million people visit our local offices every week.
During the course of a year we will:
place over 1.5 million people into jobs (around 30,000 each week);
handle some 2 million vacancies;
carry out over 7.7 million advisory interviews (including taking nearly 5 million claims for benefit);
make around 61 million individual benefit payments.
PART 2 WORKING IN THE ES
The ES is an agency within the Employment Department Group.
The people who work for the ES are civil servants.
This section covers some of the entitlements and help you can expect from the ES.
It is not, however, a statement of your terms and conditions of employment.
You can find these in the ES Personnel Handbook at the moment.
We will be replacing the ES Personnel Handbook during 1993–94 with a range of documents covering terms and conditions of employment, personnel and management procedures and guidance and good practice.
LINE MANAGERS
Everyone has a line manager who is your immediate supervisor.
Line managers are responsible for allocating you work, setting and monitoring the general standards of conduct and performance they require from you at work and helping you perform to the best of your ability.
They are also responsible for helping you with your development and for appraising your performance, see APPRAISAL AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING .
You will have your own detailed job description which describes the kind of tasks you will be doing.
You will probably find yourself working as part of a small team within the office and a great deal of emphasis is placed on ensuring that these teams work well.
PAY
At present, people in the ES are covered by national Civil Service pay agreements and details are held in your office.
By April 1994, the ES intends to take responsibility for negotiating pay with the appropriate trade unions for everyone in the ES.
In addition, we are developing proposals for new pay and grading arrangements for EOs, HEOs and SEOs in the ES.
These will support managers in meeting the changing demands of delivering our services and reward people for contributing to the business performance of the Agency.
Your salary is paid on a monthly basis by credit transfer, either to a bank or building society account, or by direct credit to a national giro account.
If you do not already have an account, you will need to open one.
All payments are processed at the ED Group Central Pay Office (CPO) in Runcorn.
Payments are usually made on the last working day of every month.
Each time you are paid, CPO will send you a pay statement which will normally arrive a few days before your pay is put into your account.
Your statement shows details of all payments and any deductions, such as Earnings Related National Insurance Contributions (ERNIC) and Income Tax.
There will inevitably be occasions — hopefully few — when your pay is incorrect or there may be times when you want to question the amount you have received.
If this happens, you should speak to your line manager, who may be able to deal with the problem, or advise what you should do.
HOURS AND WORKING PATTERNS
Hours of work for people who work full time are 41 hours in London and 42 hours elsewhere (including a one hour lunch break each day).
Within your overall conditioned hours you may be able to work a number of different working patterns.
Amongst these are part time hours, job sharing and term-time working.
In most offices we also operate a Flexible Working Hours (FWH) system.
This enables you to gear your working arrangements to match your domestic and personal commitments.
Speak to your line manager in the first instance if you want to find out whether you can change the hours you work.
Your manager will be sympathetic but will need to ensure any change does not hinder the effectiveness of our public service.
LEAVE
You will get at least four weeks annual leave .
This can increase to a maximum of six weeks leave, depending on your length of service and grade.
You will also get ten and a half public and privilege holidays each ear.
People who work part time get annual leave and public and privilege holidays on a pro-rata basis.
You will receive a personal leave record showing your leave entitlement.
You use this form to apply for leave and must submit it in advance to your manager.
Line managers have discretion to give people time off as special leave .
This can be for unexpected circumstances, such as short term domestic crisis.
Depending on the  circumstances, this may be with or without pay.
Your line manager will be sympathetic to all reasonable requests but you should be clear that special leave is granted at management discretion; it is not and entitlement and is not an entitlement and is dependent on the needs of the business.
If you need to take a longer amount of time off, for example for longer term care of young children or relatives, you may not need to resign.
You may be able to take time off without pay or negotiate a Career Break of up to five years.
Again, talk to your line manager.
PROBATION
For an initial period (usually up to 12 months but up to 2 years for some people), your line manager will closely monitor your progress.
This is to decide whether you are suitable for the grade and the post you have been allocated.
Your line manager will ensure that you are fully trained and given the maximum encouragement to help you become effective.
Your probationary period can be reduced to 6 months if you have demonstrated that you fully meet the requirements in terms of performance, conduct, attendance and timekeeping.
In a few cases, despite training, coaching and support, people are unable to meet our standards.
In order to ensure the quality of our service, and to avoid undue pressure on their colleagues, we have no option other than to dismiss these people.
APPRAISAL AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING
Your line manager will agree a job description with you.
Your job description outlines the main duties that you will be carrying out in the course of your work.
Your line manager will also discuss and agree realistic objectives with you.
Objectives enable you to agree what work needs to be done, what standard you are expected to achieve and by when.
Your performance against your job description and progress made towards achieving your objectives will be reviewed on a regular basis.
At your reviews you will discuss the areas in which you are doing well and where you may need to improve.
This may include identifying additional skills you need to acquire.
At the end of each reporting year (the date of which depends on your grade), your manager will complete a formal report on your performance.
This will take account of whether you have achieved the required standards and met your agreed objectives.
Your appraisal will include an overall performance mark, which we use to decide on increases in your pay for the following year.
Line manager normally write appraisal reports in their role as reporting officers.
You will receive a copy of the report and have the opportunity to discuss it in an interview.
You can find more information about appraisal arrangements in the Staff Appraisal Handbook.
Your line manager will have a copy you can read.
Opportunities for training and coaching are provided to help you meet the standard your line manager expects of you.
If you experience difficulty in reaching these standards, your manager will try to help you improve your performance.
However, should you fail to do so, action will be taken which may lead to your dismissal.
TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT
We place a high priority on learning.
We will give you the opportunity to develop your skills and encourage you to take up personal development opportunities throughout your career with the ES.
During your first months with us, you can look forward to training that will help you carry out your role confidently and effectively.
This initial training will often combine off-the-job courses with on-the-job guidance and support.
As well as formal training provision, you will be encouraged to take responsibility for your own development and identify what you need to carry out your work efficiently.
Talk to your line manager about your needs.
PROMOTION
We advertise opportunities for promotion internally.
You may apply for a job in the next grade if you meet the requirements stated in the job advertisement.
Promotion is awarded to the person who demonstrates they are the most suitable for the advertised vacancy and for working in the higher grade.
SICKNESS
If you are ill and cannot go to work, you must let your manager know as soon as possible.
You will be paid while you are on sick leave but obviously there are limits to this.
You'll find details of your responsibilities in Part Three, under Attendance and Timekeeping .
EXPENSES
If you have to go away from the office on official business ES will pay for the cost of travel.
There are also, depending on circumstances, a range of allowances to cover the cost of meals.
If you have to stay away overnight you can arrange for accommodation to be found for you and paid for by ES.
Your office has a copy of the ES Guide to Expenses which explains all the rules and allowances in detail.
If you are in any doubt about your entitlement then you should consult your line manager before you incur any expense.
MOBILITY
The ES is a changing organisation and therefore expects everyone it employs to be flexible.
This flexibility includes job mobility, which may require you to do different jobs in the office, or being asked to take up a job at another office within a reasonable travelling distance.
If you are at EO grade or above, working full time, you may be required to take a job beyond daily travelling distance which would require you moving house.
In most cases, you will be entitled to some financial assistance if you will be out of pocket.
We will always take your personal and domestic circumstances, and those of your colleagues, into account when deciding on transfers.
DISCIPLINE
Like other organisations, the ES has rules and regulations you must observe and instructions to be acted upon.
Part Three of this booklet sets these out.
If you do not adhere to these, there are both informal and formal disciplinary procedures currently set out in the ES Personnel Handbook (soon to be replaced by a statement of terms and conditions) and a range of disciplinary penalties up to and including dismissal.
The procedures give you the right to state your case before any decisions are taken.
GRIEVANCE
We have procedures to give you a right of appeal if you think you have been unfairly treated.
This allows you to question decisions and have your case heard by another senior manager.
WELFARE
If you find yourself in difficulties of a personal nature, you can discuss them in confidence with your manager.
If, however, you are unhappy about doing this, there is an independent Welfare Service in the ES.
They provide a confidential and impartial counselling service.
There is also the Benevolent Fund of the Department of Employment Group (and the Benevolent Fund for Scotland).
The Fund may be able to help you if you have financial problems.
It is financed by voluntary deductions from salaries.
If you would like to join, complete the application form with your appointment letter, or ask your local representative for a form.
If you would like to apply for help, or find out who your local representative is, contact your welfare officer.
MATERNITY AND PATERNITY LEAVE
If you are pregnant you will normally be allowed maternity leave of 48 weeks.
You may also be entitled to departmental maternity pay during some of this period.
Details are in the ES Personnel Handbook.
If you don't satisfy the conditions you may still be entitled to either Statutory Maternity Pay or Maternity Allowance.
Fathers are allowed two days off as paid paternity leave.
This may be taken either at the time of your child's birth or during the weeks following, for example, when the mother and baby leave hospital.
PENSIONS
If you retire at the normal minimum retirement age, which for most civil servants is 60, you will get an annual pension and a lump sum.
If you resign before the minimum retirement age, and have at least two years' service, your pension and lump sum will be preserved until you reach the age of 60.
You receive pension benefits under the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme (PCSPS).
Apart from widows' and widowers' benefits, the scheme is non-contributory.
You should nominate someone to receive benefits in case you die while you are working for us.
Complete the nomination form with your appointment letter or ask your personnel section for a form if you are not sure that you did this when you joined.
If you leave the Civil Service before you are 60 and take another job with pension scheme, you may be able to transfer your pensions rights.
If you have previously contributed to another pension scheme before you joined the ES, you may be able to transfer your pension rights into the PCSPS.
In either case you should ask your personnel section for advice.
GIVING NOTICE
If you want to resign you should give your line manager at least one month's written notice.
Grade 7s and above are expected to give three months.
The amount of notice ES will give if we end your appointment will depend on your length of service.
Full details are given in the ES Personnel Handbook.
COMMUNICATIONS IN ES
For an organisation which exists to serve people, and is itself made up of many thousands of people, effective communication is essential.
Communication is about people, our customers and our colleagues.
If we are to meet our business objectives, we all have a responsibility to communicate well and make sure our communications are open, honest, effective and can be easily understood.
To do this we should:
keep each other informed about developments in the organisation;
encourage and share good ideas and practices, views and concerns;
communicate upwards, as well as downwards and sideways; listen and respond to information from others;
explain to seek to understand the reasoning behind decisions;
avoid using acronyms and abbreviations, particularly when dealing with the public.
In the ES we have a policy of regular two way communication meetings.
This gives everyone the chance to find out what's going on and voice their views.
Ask your line manager what the arrangements are in your office.
Remember it's up to you to:
ask if you need or want more information; and
make sure your views and ideas are heard.
We have various ways of sharing information which your line manager and colleagues will be able to tell you about.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
The ES is firmly committed to equality of opportunity for everyone.
This goes beyond the statutory requirements against discrimination on grounds of sex, marriage and race, to include age, disability and sexual orientation.
Your individual responsibilities are set out in Part Three under Discrimination .
Regions and head office have their own equal opportunities action plan.
These include specific targets for increasing the number of women, people from ethnic minority groups and people with disabilities, in the higher grades.
The plan is designed to achieve equality of opportunity for people from these groups within the ES.
The ES views harassment of colleagues as unacceptable.
If you feel you have been harassed or discriminated against in any way, you can raise the matter locally or use the network of Harassment Advisers who can offer support and guidance.
The service is confidential and you have the right to decide what action, if any, to take.
Local publicity tells you how to contact your Harassment Adviser.
DEALING WITH DIFFICULT CLIENTS
People who have regular contact with the public receive training to help them deal with clients.
This enables them to handle any disputes in a courteous, constructive manner.
There are separate instructions for those rare occasions when assaults occur.
You should report all assaults.
Although these cases do not happen often, if you are assaulted or threatened by a client in the ES takes it very seriously.
If the police don't seek a prosecution, the ES may take action on your behalf.
ES is committed to ensuring that the risks of assaults are minimised through training, understanding our clients, safe office layouts and procedures for dealing with threatened or actual assaults.
TRADE UNIONS
There are a number of trade unions representing people in the ES.
They offer a range of services and help to individuals.
The two biggest are the Civil and Public Servants Association (CPSA) and the National Union of Civil and Public Servants (NUCPS).
Trade union representatives meet with management regularly at national and regional level at meetings known as Whitley Councils.
The purpose of these councils is to discuss matters affecting terms and conditions of employment and to provide the opportunity to influence management's thinking.
Any chances in your terms and conditions of employment that are negotiated with the trade unions are incorporated into the ES Personnel Handbook.
At local level most offices have a TU representative who can give you more information about joining the relevant union and the services they offer.
For example, if you become involved in any form of discipline, inefficiency or grievance case, you may be helped and supported by your TU representative.
At formal interviews in connection with these cases you may, if you wish, be accompanied by either a TU representative or a colleague.
It is for you to decide whether or not you want to join a union.
SOCIAL CLUBS
A number of locations will have a social club for people who work in that particular office or area.
Activities will range from occasional social evenings to organised theatre visits and so on.
There will probably be a representative in your office.
Your colleagues will be able to give you details.
SPORTS AND SOCIAL COUNCILS
The Department of Employment (DE) Group encourages sporting and social activities for people who work within the Group.
Events are organised at national, regional and local level and cater for people at all levels of ability.
Details of these are announced in ES Personnel Notices.
PART 3 CONDUCT
INTRODUCTION
We expect you to observe the general rules of conduct and standards of behaviour as et out below.
These standards are intended to support the business-like approach of the ES.
It is important that you are aware of these standards and meet them.
If you fail to meet the standards, it will lead to action being taken, which in turn could result in disciplinary penalties, including dismissal.
If you do not understand the standards or are in doubt about how the general principles or rules of conduct might apply in specific circumstances, you must ask your manager for clarification.
Your manager may also refer you to the ES Personnel Handbook.
GENERAL OVERRIDING PRINCIPLES
The most important principles of conduct, which apply to everyone working in the ES, are contained in the following four statements:
we expect you to carry out your duties, as determined by management, in the correct manner and in line with current ES policies and procedures.
You should comply with all reasonable management requests and be prepared to perform the full range of duties appropriate to your employment, ie not only your current duties; but a wider range of duties required by the ES (within daily travelling distance of your home for non-mobile employees and anywhere in the organisation if you are in a mobile grade.
Your letter of appointment will tell you if you are a ‘mobile’ employee);
you must deal with people, both within the ES and outside the organisation, impartially, courteously and promptly.
You must always try to provide the highest level of service to our clients and customers, in accordance with the Jobseeker's Charter.
You must not discriminate unfairly on the basis of the ethnic origin, gender, marital status, sexual orientation, religion, age or disability;
you must ensure that, in all financial matters, you follow correct procedures so that money, property and other funds are properly safeguarded and not misappropriated.
You must take care to ensure that all our customers receive any financial benefit to which they are entitled and no financial benefit to which they are not entitled.
You must report, to your manager (in confidence), any suspicion of financial irregularity, whether by your ES colleagues or others, and co-operate fully with any subsequent investigations into the alleged offence;
you must ensure your conduct (both at work and in your own time) and appearance do not discredit you or the ES in any way.
You must not undertake any action which breaches the mutual trust between the ES and the people working for it, such as being the cause of adverse publicity for, or embarrassment to, the Agency.
In addition, if you have responsibility for the management and development of others, you must treat the people who work for you equally and fairly.
You are responsible for maximising performance by supporting and developing your people and for carrying out the full range of managerial duties and checks as prescribed.
You are accountable for the resources you manage and are responsible for making the best possible use of these.
SPECIFIC RULES ON CONDUCT AND BEHAVIOUR
We expect you to keep within the framework of the general principles outlined in pages 23 and 24.
These principles are further supported by specific rules on conduct which are explained below.
The rules, although covering a wide range of issues, do not cover every situation, and you should make reference to the general principles in cases of doubt.
Attendance and Timekeeping
You must attend your place of work regularly and punctually, at the times agreed in your letter of appointment, or as directed by your manager.
If you are given the opportunity to work flexible working hours, you may agree your working times with your manager within the flexible working hours scheme in operation where you work, subject to the operational needs of the organisation.
If you work Flexible Working Hours you must ensure that you record your times of work accurately.
Any abuse of the Flexible Working Hours facility can result in its withdrawal, in addition to any disciplinary action which may be taken.
You must get permission from your manager in advance for all absences, apart from sickness.
If you are absent without prior approval we will consider you to be taking unauthorised absence unless you provide a satisfactory explanation of why it was not possible to obtain approval in advance.
If you go on strike your absence will be treated as unauthorised and you will not be paid by the ES.
We may also consider taking disciplinary action.
If you are absent due to sickness, it is your responsibility to inform your manager, by an agreed time on the first day.
Give the reason for and expected length of your absence, and keep in touch regularly throughout the absence.
If you do not, we may contact you to find out why you are absent.
You must provide your manager with a self — or a medical certificate, depending on your illness for the first 7 days you are off but you must provide medical evidence if you are ill for longer than this.
While on sick leave, you must not work for another employer and should not engage in activities which your illness would normally prevent and which could therefore raise doubts about the nature of your illness.
We actively monitor sickness absence levels and record the amount of time that people are unable to come to work.
You can find the current rules in the ES Personnel Handbook.
If the levels of your sickness absence are high, we will talk with you to find out why this is so.
In some cases we will take action against you which could lead to you being dismissed.
Use of Official Resources
We expect you to use all resources effectively and efficiently and only in the delivery of ES business.
You must bear in mind the need to safeguard public funds and observe security requirements.
The main resource we all use is time.
You must use your time at work effectively to meet ES business needs.
You must not use official equipment for private purposes — this includes the mail service, stationery, computerised equipment (eg use of software packages for playing computer games), telephone facilities, vehicles, photocopiers, facsimile machines and any other resources which you have use of during your work.
However, you may make occasional short, urgent local telephone calls.
In some cases, with your manager's prior permission, you may make long distance calls or calls to directory enquiries but you will have to pay for these.
You should tell your friends and relatives that they should not ‘phone you at work unless it is about something important which cannot wait.
We will consider you to be wasting ES time if you spend long or frequent periods of time talking about personal matters which have no relevance to you work for the ES.
You must report any loss or damage to ES property.
Where this has occurred because of negligence or deliberate action on your part, we may require you to reimburse the cost of repair or replacement to the ES.
We are entitled to recover any such monies from your salary.
We will usually regard theft from the ES as gross misconduct and this could result in summary dismissal and referral to the police for prosecution.
This includes stealing items of equipment, misappropriation of funds, false declaration of hours worked, fraudulent travel and subsistence claims and misuse of official property.
We regard allowing others authorised access to ES computer systems, whether deliberately or through negligence, in the same light.
This means, for example, failure to properly safeguard computer access cards, like TRES and NUBS 2 keys or passwords.
Use of Official Information
You must keep to the requirements of the Official Secrets Act, Data Protection Act and the Disclosure of Information Guide.
These are binding on you while you work for the ES and after you leave the organisation, both at work and in your own time.
For example, information about clients disclosed in the course of your work must remain confidential.
You must only use computerised systems to gain information which is necessary for your job.
We will treat any other access to, or use of, computerised systems as unauthorised.
You must take all reasonable precautions to safeguard official security passes, computer access cards and passwords (for example TRES and NUBS 2 keys) and all official documents.
You must report any losses immediately.
Individuals may be held accountable for any loss to public funds or unauthorised disclosure of information occurring because of failure to take these precautions.
In addition to any disciplinary action, if you have deliberately defrauded the ES or colluded with someone else to defraud the ES, we may require you to repay the amount lost and we are entitled to deduct any such amounts from your salary.
Impartiality, Honesty and Integrity
You must make sure that you deal (and are seen to be dealing) impartially with all aspects of your work, eg you must not wear items which may indicate political, controversial or other affiliations which might bring your impartiality into question.
You must be above suspicion of any impropriety.
You must be above suspicion of any impropriety.
You must never leave yourself open to allegations of bribery or corruption.
You must not gamble on ES premises (other than raffles etc for charitable purposes) and must not borrow from or lend money to colleagues or people with whom you have dealings during your work for the ES.
You may not use  information gained through your work for ES for any private purposes.
In order to preserve confidence in the appraisal and promotion system, the management role and to guard against accusations of favouritism, you will not normally work in the same reporting line as a relative or someone with whom you have a close personal relationship.
Similarly, people who are related or who have a close personal relationship will not be employed where one acts as the other's superior in a disciplinary role or in financial matters.
If you are charged with, or convicted of, an offence you must report this immediately to your manager, whether or not the incident is related to your work for the ES.
You may be subject to disciplinary action if the offence:
could bring into question your reputation (and therefore, indirectly the reputation of the ES); or
has a damaging effect on the ES’ trust and confidence in your ability to carry out the duties for which you are employed.
To protect yourself against possible allegations it is essential that you tell your manager:
if you have been, or become bankrupt or insolvent as you will not be allowed to deal with money;
if you are offered any time of gift or inducement from people with whom you have dealings as a representative of the ES;
if you are a personal acquaintance of anyone with whom you are required to have business dealings during the course of your work, for example, if you  have to deal with benefit claims or tenders for contracts made by friends or relatives.
if you intend to take up outside employment, self employment or consultancy work, either during your time working in the ES or after you have left the Employment Service, with any organisation with whom you have had dealings while working in the ES;
if you are offered payment for any outside activity undertaken as a result of your employment in the ES or for any invention developed during your employment with the ES;
if you are related to, or have a close personal relationship with, a colleague in the ES; or
if you take up outside employment during your career with ES — even if this employment has no connection with your work for the ES.
Failure to report any of these situations could result in disciplinary action.
There must be no suspicion that you are making use of your official position to further your private interests.
There must also be no opportunity for anyone to claim that you have been given, or are giving, preferential treatment which puts you or others at an advantage, for example, over other organisations who may be tendering for the same work or other colleagues working for the organisation.
This also applies when you no longer work for the Employment Service.
Discrimination
You must not discriminate unfairly against colleagues or members of the public.
This includes harassment which will always be treated as a serious breach of the rules and may constitute gross misconduct under the disciplinary procedures.
You must observe ES policies on equal opportunities and give your full commitment to any measures introduced to ensure equality of opportunity.
If you believe that discrimination has occurred against yourself, a colleague or a member of the public, you are responsible for reporting this at once to your manager or personnel section.
If you prefer, you may wish to speak to a Harassment Adviser.
Dealing with Colleagues and the Public
In all dealings with people, we expect you to treat others promptly, courteously and with respect.
In your dealings with the public you must keep to the requirements of the Jobseeker's Charter to ensure that the high standards of service on which ES prides itself are maintained.
In particular, this means that you:
must wear a name badge when dealing with the public.
This is so that members of the public will know who they are talking to.
Your manager will advise you of the options that can appear on your badge.
There are very few relaxations about the wearing of name badges but your line manager will tell you about these if necessary;
must only eat or drink in areas of your office designated by your manager;
must give your name when answering the telephone; and
must comply with ES policy on standards of appearance which requires everyone, regardless of location, to present a clean and tidy appearance and, in particular, to dress in a business-like way (in general , this should be similar to the standards you would expect to see in a bank or building society).
You must ask your manager to let you know what is, and is not, acceptable.
Specifically, men must wear a collar and tie and no-one is allowed to wear denims or trainers at work.
In some situations you may dress casually, according to the nature of your job, with your manager's agreement.
Your manager will also be sympathetic if you need to dress in a certain way for religious, cultural or health reasons.
Unless you are told otherwise, you should meet the standards of appearance when you are on a training course.
You must never be rude, threatening, physically violent or insubordinate.
If you are the subject of aggressive or abusive behaviour, or you feel you are being treated unfairly, you should remain calm and not respond to provocation.
We usually treat physical violence towards others as gross misconduct and this could result in summary dismissal.
Activities outside Work
The requirement for you to maintain a high standard of conduct also extends to your out-of-work activities.
You should let your manager know in advance if you wish to take outside employment in addition to your work for the ES.
You can do this provided it does not:
adversely affect your ability to carry out the duties required by the ES (eg overlap with the time you are required to work for ES or leave you too tired to be able to carry out your ES duties properly); or
represent a conflict of interests with your normal work.
You are responsible for ensuring that the nature of the work does not adversely affect the requirement for you to preserve your reputation for honesty, integrity and impartiality.
If you want to take part in political activities, either at a national or local level, you must first make sure that you have permission and secondly, comply with the Code of Discretion which applies to all Civil Servants.
In most cases, you will be required to request permission from your line manager before engaging in any political activity.
However, there are some people who, because of the nature of their work, have automatic permission.
Further information on the type of political activities which may be restricted, together with the Code of Discretion, is given in the ES Personnel Handbook.
You may not accept invitations to speak on TV or radio programmes, participate in surveys or contribute to publications which might include commenting on the work of the ES or other Government Departments without having first gained permission from your manager.
You may not accept invitations to speak on TV or radio programmes, participate in surveys or contribute to publications which might include commenting on the work of the ES or other Government Departments without having first gained permission from your manager.
Health and Safety
You are responsible for your own safety and that of your colleagues and should follow any health and safety rules which apply to your workplace.
You have a responsibility to familiarise yourself with the fire and bomb instructions and the  procedures for reporting assaults.
You should report any potential danger or hazard to your manager.
Any accident which occurs on official premises must be reported and recorded immediately.
You must not be under the influence of alcohol during the course of your duties.
You may not drink alcohol on ES premises unless authorised by your manager in special circumstances, for example, office parties.
You must comply with any smoking policy in force in the office where you are working.
You must not smoke when dealing with members of the public.
IN CONCLUSION
We hope that you find this booklet informative and helpful in your job.
If you don't understand something, don't be afraid to ask a colleague or your line manager who may refer you to written instructions such as the ES Personnel Handbook.
Also, if you have any comments on the booklet or can think of ways that we might improve it, we'd be pleased to hear from you.
We are based in Personnel Branch in ES Head Officer in Sheffield.
Edited by Chris Askew, PB2,
YOUR NOTES
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
Annual Performance Agreement 1993–94
EMPLOYMENT DEPARTMENT GROUP
SECTION A: INTRODUCTION
The Agreement
This Agreement between the Secretary of State for Employment and the Chief Executive of the Employment Service sets out the aim and objectives of the Employment Service and the targets to be met in year 1 April 1993 to 31 March 1994.
It also specifies the resources the Secretary of State will make available to the Agency and the arrangements for the Chief Executive to report to the Secretary of State of the Agency's performance and use of resources.
The Agency's plans for meeting the requirements of this Agreement will be published in its Operational Plan for 1993–94, which is approved by the Secretary of State.
The Employment Service Framework Document provides for the review and revision of this Agreement if necessary.
Aim, Objectives and Targets
The aim of the Employment Service is to help promote a competitive and efficient labour market, particularly by giving positive help to unemployed people through its job placement service and other programmes and by the payment of benefits and allowances to those who are entitled to them.
The Agency's objectives, together with the targets for 1993–94, are set out in the Performance Requirements table in Section B of this Agreement.
The arrangements for the Chief Executive to report on the Agency's performance are set out in Section C.
Resources
To enable the Chief Executive to meet the performance requirements contained in this Agreement, a gross total of £1,392.8 million will be made available to the Agency, being the sum for which the Secretary of State has gained the approval of Parliament under Vote 2 of the 1993–94 Supply Estimates for the Employment Department Group.
Improving Standards of Service
The Secretary of State has asked the Employment Service to continue to improve the standard of service it offers in accordance with Citizen's Charter principles and the expectations of its clients.
The Employment Service has published the Jobseeker's Charter which sets out the standards of service that the Agency will aim to achieve for each client.
In addition, this Agreement contains indicators which measure the effectiveness of the Agency in delivering some key elements of these service standards.
For 1993–94 the Agreement sets targets for promptness and accuracy of benefit payment and delivery of advisory interviews.
The Chief Executive also makes arrangement for an independent annual national survey of client satisfaction.
SECTION B: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Objective
A.
To provide unemployed people, particularly those who have been unemployed for longer than six months and those in inner cities, with job opportunities and help in job search skills, or opportunities to become self-employed or to find appropriate training.
B.
To provide particular assistance to people with a disability to take advantage of work and training opportunities; and to help and encourage employers to make such opportunities available.
C.
To pay benefit promptly accurately and courteously
D.
to encourage unemployed claimants to seek work actively; and to check that they are entitled to Unemployment Benefit, National insurance credits or, as an unemployed person, to income support, in accordance with social security legislation
E.
To discourage benefit fraud by identifying, investigating and where appropriate prosecuting those suspected of or colluding in obtaining benefit by deception
F.
To provide a high standard of service cost-effectively within the resources available
Target
1.
1.47 million placings of unemployed people into work at a planned unit cost of between £204.90 and £226.50, assuming 2.05 to 2.15 million vacancies are notified
2.
27 per cent of total unemployed placings achieved to be long-term claimants
3.
35 per cent of total unemployed placings achieved to be people in inner cities
4.
65 per cent of starts on Training for Work to be from referrals by the Employment Service
5.
87 per cent of clients due an advisory interview to receive one, assuming 9.35 to 9.45 million interviews are due
6.
30 per cent of unemployed claimants due a 12 month advisory interview to start a Jobplan workshop.
7.
3 per cent of total unemployed placings achieved to be people with disabilities
8.
At a planned unit cost per claimant of between £12.20 and £13.40 for all benefit claims, to:–despatch 87 per cent, rising to 90 per cent in the last quarter, of first payments on the day that benefit entitlement is established–pay correctly by value 96.5 per cent of Unemployment Benefit payment
9.
9 per cent of initial claim enquiries not to be pursued as new claims
10.
63,000 claims to be withdrawn following investigation by Employment Service inspectors
11.
To achieve £21.2 million efficiency savings
Supporting Information
Placings of long-term claimants and inner city long-term claimants
Unit costs of long-term claimant and inner city job placings
Contribution to quarterly report on Action for Cities
Employment Service programmes — throughflow and (as appropriate) placings or people helped:–by programme–by unemployed and long-term claimants
Places available and starts on Community Action
Number of Service Level Agreements with TECs and LECs
Referrals to and starts on Training for Work:–total–by long-term claimants and other unemployed–by priority group
Starts on Learning for Work
Number of new Career Development Loans
Restart contract rate
Number of Advisory interviews (new claims and Restart) and numbers due a 12 month advisory interview
Evaluation of Jobplan workshop outcomes
Unit cost of job placings of people with disabilities
Numbers benefiting from special scheme provision
Numbers of rehabilitation starts
People in sheltered employment by type of sponsor (including Remploy) and by provision
Copies of Remploy's reports on progress in meeting targets
Number of disability symbol users
Unit costs of a new claim, claims not pursued; and expenditure on sector adjudication
Percentage of new claims input to the payment system within six days of claim being made
Speed of despatch of first payment of benefit to clients within 10 days and 15 days of claim
Promptness of despatch of subsequent payments of benefit to claimants
Promptness of despatch and accuracy of training allowances
Number of new claims
Clients taking up more appropriate benefits
Adjudication referrals and disallowances by type
Radio of benefit savings to costs
Investigations and prosecutions
Use cost of a claim withdrawn
Annual client survey report
Progress on efficiency savings and savings identified in Scrutinies
Number of field staff (local office, fraud and adjudication staff) and as a proportion of total staff
SECTION C: MONITORING AND REPORTING PERFORMANCE
Monitoring Standards of Service
This agreement includes a number of targets which measure progress in achieving standards of service to clients, in particular those for promptness and accuracy of benefit payments to unemployed people.
Further standards of service are set out in the Jobseeker's Charter, including the time people may have to wait to be seen and the time taken to answer the telephone.
these standards of service and the results achieved against them will be displayed in all Employment Service local offices.
The Jobseeker's Charter will be revised during 1993–94.
The Secretary of State has asked the Employment Service to develop in 1993–94, for possible use in 1994–5, a target or targets for relevant elements of the Jobseeker's charter that are not presently covered by existing Annual Performance Agreement targets.
Reporting on Expenditure
The Chief Executive shall provide by the end of May 1993 a monthly profile of expenditure by vote subhead, and within the running cost subhead, a breakdown by salary costs and general administrative expenditure.
Within 15 working days of the end of each month the Chief Executive shall provide information on expenditure by vote subhead (including separate details of salary costs and general administrative expenditure), monthly staff usage, an explanation of variances from the profiles, a forecast of financial outturn and the staffing information required by Treasury.
Reporting on Progress
At the end of each financial quarter the Chief executive shall provide information on performance against each target in the quarter within 15 working days and report on progress in achieving the targets and variances from profiled performances and expenditure with 25 working days.
The report shall also cover progress towards achieving each of the planned efficiency savings; the use of financial flexibilities; the labour market situation; and the items of supporting information set out in Section B of this Agreement.
The Chief Executive also shall report on clients' views of the service provided, drawing on an independent annual national survey and results of local office monitoring of customer service.
The Chief Executive will usually be invited to meet a Minister of the Department to discuss the report.
These arrangements will be reviewed during the year with the aim of speeding up the performance reporting process.
The Annual Report
The Chief Executive shall provide the Secretary of State with a full report on the Agency's performance and use of resources in 1993–94 by the end of June 1994.
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE TARGETS 1993–94
Placing unemployed people into jobs
1.47 million unemployed people placed into jobs, of whom:
27 per cent to be long-term claimants
35 per cent to be people in inner cities
3 per cent to be people with disabilities
Providing advice and extra help to unemployed people
65 per cent of starts on training for Work from referrals by the Employment Service
87 per cent of claimants due an advisory interview to then receive one
30 per cent of those invited to an advisory interview after 12 months to start on a Jobplan workshop
Paying benefit promptly and accurately to those entitled to it
87 per cent of first benefit payments to be despatched on the day that entitlement is established rising to 90 per cent by year end
96.5 per cent of Unemployment Benefit payments by value to be correct
9 per cent of initial claim enquiries not to be pursued as claims
63,000 claims withdrawn following fraud investigation
Providing a quality and cost-effective service
achieving efficiency savings of £21.2 million
INVESTOR IN PEOPLE THE NATIONAL STANDARD
— Links to Assessment Indicators
The assessment indicators are, quite simply, what will help the National Training Task Force (NTTF) to decide whether the Employment Service measures up to the national Standard and can be recognised as an Investor in People.
You will see that each of the four principles of the Standard is accompanied by a number of indicators which stem directly from the Standard but do not go beyond it in any way.
The indicators underpin each other and should be viewed as a whole.
They have been designed to be relevant to both small and large organisations in the public and private sectors, and take into account the variations that there will inevitably be in organisations' approaches to developing their people.
The national Standard
An Investor in People makes a public commitment from the top to develop all employees to achieve its business objectives.
Every employer should have a written but flexible plan which sets out business goals and targets, considers how employees will contribute to achieving the plan and specifies how development needs in particular will be assessed and met.
Management should develop and communicate to all employees a vision of where the organisation is going and the contribution employees will make to its success, involving employee representatives as appropriate.
Assessment Indicators
1.1
There is a public commitment from the most senior level within the organisation to develop people.
1.2
Employees at all levels are aware of the broad aims or vision of the organisation.
1.3
There is a written but flexible plan which sets out business goals and targets.
1.4
The plan identifies broad development needs and specifies how they will be assessed and met.
1.5
The employer has considered what employees at all levels will contribute to the success of the organisation and has communicated this effectively to them.
1.6
Where representative structures exist, management communicates with employee representatives a vision of where the organisation is going and the contribution employees (and their representatives) will make to its success.
The national Standard
An Investor in People regularly reviews the training and development needs of all employees
The resources for training and developing employees should be clearly identified in the business plan.
Managers should be responsible for regularly agreeing training and development needs with each employee in the context of business objectives, setting targets and standards linked, where appropriate to the achievement of National Vocational Qualifications (or relevant units) and, in Scotland, Scottish Vocational Qualifications.
Assessment Indicators
2.1
The written plan identifies the resources that will be used to meet training and development needs.
2.2
Training and development needs are regularly reviewed against business objectives.
2.3
A process exists for regularly reviewing the training and development needs of all employees.
2.4
Responsibility for developing people is clearly identified throughout the organisation, starting at the top.
2.5
Managers are competent to carry out their responsibilities for developing people.
2.6
Targets and standards are set for development actions.
2.7
Where appropriate, training targets are linked to achieving external standards, and particularly to National Vocational Qualifications (or Scottish Vocational Qualifications in Scotland) and units.
The national Standard
An Investor in People takes action to train and develop individuals on recruitment and throughout their employment.
Action should focus on the training needs of all new recruits and continually developing and improving the skills of existing employees.
All employees should be encouraged to contribute to identifying and meeting their own job-related development needs.
Assessment Indicators
3.1
All new employees are introduced effectively to the organisation and are given the training and development they need to do their jobs.
3.2
The skills of existing employees are developed in line with business objectives.
3.3
All employees are made aware of the development opportunities open to them.
3.4
All employees are encouraged to help identify and meet their job-related development needs.
3.5
Effective action takes place to achieve the training and development objectives of individuals and the organisation.
3.6
Managers are actively involved in supporting employees to meet their training and development needs.
The national Standard
An Investor in People evaluates the investment in training and development to assess achievement and improve future effectiveness.
the investment, the competence and commitment of employees, and the use made of skills learned should be reviewed at all levels against business goals and targets.
The effectiveness of training and development should be reviewed at the top level and lead to renewed commitment and target setting.
Assessment Indicators
4.1
The organisation evaluates how its development of people is contributing to business goals and targets.
4.2
The organisation evaluates whether its development actions have achieved their objectives.
4.3
The outcomes of training and development are evaluated at individual, team and organisational levels.
4.4
Top management understand the broad costs and benefits of developing people.
4.5
The continuing commitment of top management to development people is communicated to all employees.
Notes
News of the Employment Service
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
ISSUE 42 April 93
Editor's Corner
There's plenty of information in this issue of NOTES.
We have an interview with Roger Lasko, Head of Job Broking Branch, about the new employment measures.
We also have an update from the Market Testing Unit and news an exciting marketing event from Hackney Jobcentre.
Have a look at the Bulletin Boards to find out about two new videos.
NEW EMPLOYMENT MEASURES
In his budget speech on 16 March, the Chancellor of Exchequer announced a package of new employment measures:
Community Action;
Workstart Pilot;
Learning for Work:
business Start Up Scheme; and
TEC Challenge
I asked Roger Lasko, Head of Job Broking Branch, who is masterminding the ES side of operations, about the main elements of the new programmes.
Sue : What are your initial reactions to the new measures, Roger?
Roger : I'm delighted to be involved at this early stage, especially in Community Action.
The new measures are a real step forward for the Employment Service.
Being asked to deliver these services is a tremendous vote of confidence by Ministers in our ability to deliver.
Sue : You just said you're especially pleased to involved in Community Action.
Many people remember and have fond memories of Community Programme, could you explain what the differences are between Community Programme and Community Action?
Roger : My own memories of Community Programmes are particularly fond.
I was responsible for Community Programme for the last 18 months of its life, so I'm delighted to be involved in introducing Community Action.
As to differences between the two, the major difference i in how people will be paid.
On Community Programme people were paid a wage, on Community Action they will be paid benefit plus an allowance.
The benefit plus arrangement has become well established over the last four years and it makes sense to use it for Community Action.
Another difference is that structured jobsearch help will be an integral part of Community Action and will be built in from the start.
Sue : What kind of people is Community Action designed to help.
Roger : It's designed to help people who have been out of work for more than a year.
It will be particularly helpful for people who are getting ready to go on training, or who have already done some training and now need to get into work.
Sue : Where did the idea for Community Action come from?
Roger : It seems from various pilots, run locally under the Pilot Volunteer Programme and paid for by our Programme Development Fund.
All the pilots were different but they all had a common theme, giving people who were out of work something worthwhile to do with their time.
Community Action will give our long term unemployed clients another chance.
We want it to give them back their self respect, help acclimatise them to work and above all to give them something positive and worthwhile to show an employer.
It's vital that as the economy improves we find ways to enable long term unemployed people to compete positively for jobs.
Community Action gives us the opportunity to do that and more, on a fairly large scale.
It must have tangible benefits for the unemployed and the community.
We will be looking to build up a programme which has a reputation for being worthwhile, well run and well managed.
Sue : What kind of organisations will be involved in setting up Community Action projects?
Roger : We will be working largely with voluntary organisations.
This will give us scope to cover a wide range of activity — from environmental work to the statutory care sector, for example hospitals, the probation services and child care.
Sue : How well do you think this will work?
Roger : Well of course I would like to say it will work perfectly, right from the very start.
Realistically we should expect a mixed experience as at the start of all major new programmes.
Not all voluntary organisations have the resource to develop financial management expertise and this can obviously pose problems in administering schemes.
However, many of those organisations have been contracting with TECs and will therefore have developed in this area.
The main benefit from working with voluntary organisations is that they will help us into areas of work in the community which we wouldn't otherwise have an entry to.
They also bring a high level of expertise which will obviously benefit our clients.
Sue : How will people get on to Community Action?
Roger : Their main route will be through our local offices, particularly through Jobplan Workshops.
Sue : When can Jobcentres expect more guidance about Community Action and their part in it?
Roger : We have a team of people in Job Broking Branch and two people on loan from South West who are working out what we need to do next.
So far they have produced a list of 16 blocks of work!
Communicating with the field is top of that list.
We will be sending out more details over the coming weeks and months with a view to starting Community Action in the summer.
Sue : I appreciate it's early days, but what can you tell me about the Workstart Pilots?
Roger : For some time people who study the labour market have been recommending using money paid as benefit, to subsidise the cost of helping unemployed people back into work.
The Chancellor was particularly taken with these suggestions and therefore included them in his budget.
Workstart is an experimental programme to help us assess what forms of wage subsidy work best.
The ES and TEC pilots will bring a wide range of approaches for us to consider.
Sue : Have the pilot areas been chosen?
Roger : Yes, in the ES, East Kent will be running a pilot of people who have been unemployed for more than two years.
South West London and South London will run one for those out of work for more than four years.
In the TEC network, Tyneside TEC will run a pilot for people unemployed for more than two years, and Devon and Cornwall TEC will run one for those out of work for more than four years.
Sue : Will there be differences between the TEC pilots and the ES pilots?
Roger : Yes, but it's too soon to know what the differences will be.
Sue : Has the level of subsidy been agreed yet?
Roger : The suggested levels are £60 per week for the first six months, followed by £30 per week for the last six months, but these haven't been agreed yet.
These levels are more generous than those tried in other similar programmes.
Sue : The programme has obvious benefits for our long term unemployed clients, but what safeguards are there to protect it from being exploited by unscrupulous employers?
Roger : Ministers have declared new rules or constraints in advance but one rule will definitely be that employers must not sack other employees so that they can take on Workstart participants.
We will be monitoring the pilots carefully to see how they are delivered so we can identify and repeat successes elsewhere.
Sue : Can we talk now about Learning for Work?
What is the difference between Learning for Work and Training for Work?
Roger : Learning for Work will give our clients the opportunity to study full time courses, instead of being constrained by benefit rules and having to attend part time courses within the 21 our rule.
The courses will be college based, they will be vocationally relevant but they will also offer academic qualifications.
Sue : Who will decide what is vocationally relevant?
Roger : TECs will be responsible for negotiating provision with technical colleges and other educational providers.
They will therefore make sure courses are relevant to the labour market.
Sue : Some courses last longer than 12 months, will there be any provision to deal with this?
Roger : Our colleagues in TEED are working this out but it's fair to say that people will be encouraged to take courses they can complete in 12 months.
The programme's aim is to help people into work sooner rather than later.
Sue : What role will Jobcentres have?
Roger : They will have three main roles:
providing a gateway to the programme for our clients;
arranging payment of allowances (these will be at the same level as the client's previous rate of benefit); and
developing jobsearch help for the client towards the end of the course.
Sue : Finally, is there any thing you can tell us about the Business Start Up Scheme and the TEC Challenge?
Roger : The Business Start Up Scheme is an expansion of an existing programme.
TEC Challenge will involve TECs in bidding for a share of a £25 million budget.
The winners will be those with the most innovative ideas, especially for getting unemployed people work — so there ought to be plenty of scope fro an input from the ES.
Sue : thank you very much for taking the time to talk to me.
I'm sure everyone will appreciate the extra detail you've given us.
Editor's note: The 21 hour rule says that anyone attending a further education course for more than 21 hours a week is not entitled to Income Support.
NATVACS AND JOBFINDER GO TO NORTHERN IRELAND
Mike Fogden joined Julian Crozier, Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland Training and Employment Agency, in Belfast on Monday 1 March, to launch a NATVACS link with the providence and a teletext Jobfinder service on Ulster TV.
The Jobfinder service is available to the 194,000 households with teletext sets in Northern Ireland, and brings the province's system into line with all the GB ITV regional programmes, providing 30 job vacancy and 20 Gateway pages of information daily.
Like the mainland service, it uses television as an additional, accessible way of providing employment and training information.
The need for better links between the ES and the Northern Ireland Training and Employment Agency, was highlighted by work being done to create an information technology system to link European Community member states.
Called EURES (EURopean Employment Services) the system will eventually allow us to exchange vacancies and vacancy information with other EC member states.
In launching the link, Mike Fogden pointed out that the NATVACS Unit answers 25,000 enquiries each month and the Jobfinder service in Great Britain helps to place 2,000 clients in work yearly.
Julian Crozier welcomed the development and said, ‘With the completion of this link there will be a greater opportunity for Northern Ireland jobseekers to access all UK vacancies and beyond that, the European jobs market.’
HACKNEY — THE NEW CENTRE OF THE FASHION WORLD?
Traditionally, jobs in the clothing industry in Hackney have been difficult to fill, but on the other hand, unemployment is a growing problem.
This report from Frank Wood tell us what Hackney Jobcentre did to tackle the issue.
We needed an effective and interesting way of telling our jobseekers about training and job opportunities in the clothing industry.
Our idea was to organise a Fashion Theme week, in partnership with the local TEC and Hackney Task Force.
We had tremendous support from all our local offices who helped by distributing programmes advertising the week, and the local newspaper ran a four page special feature.
BBC TV and Carlton Television also covered the week's events.
Monday 1 March — Fashion Show
We were keen to start the week with a flourish and decided on a fashion show at the Hackney Empire Theatre, superbly organised by students from the London College of Fashion.
The Mayor of Hackney officially opened the show and over 800 people attended.
Julian Crozier, Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland Training and Employment Agency, Mike Fogden and Siobhan Timoney, District Manager, Training and Employment Agency, Belfast.
Tuesday 2 March — Exhibition and Business Forum
A month long exhibition opened at the Hackney Museum, featuring historical and multi-cultural garments, machinery and technology, with a special focus on local history and people in the industry.
The exhibition attracted 217 people in the first week.
Forty companies and training organisations took part in a Business Forum.
The event also included seven seminars on subjects such as marketing, networking and finance.
Over 500 employers attended.
Wednesday 3 March — Training and Job Opportunities Day
Shoreditch ESJ hosted a training and job opportunities day, where eleven Training Agencies were on hand to offer help and advice to jobseekers.
There was also a display of canvassed vacancies.
Thursday and Friday 4/5 March — Open Doors
The week ended with a number of local companies and colleges opening their doors and giving guided tours of their premises to jobseekers, students and the public.
What have we achieved?
It's obviously too early yet to see any detailed results.
However we have been delighted by the response so far.
Total attendance at the various events was 21,600!
Many of these people, training providers, employers and job seekers have been in touch to tell us how worthwhile the events were.
The week has been a huge marketing success and has certainly helped us promote ES services locally.
We have shown how a good idea and some hard work can provide the ideal opportunity to bring jobseekers and businesses together.
MARKET TESTING
What is Market Testing?
in notes 37 we told you about the Government's policy on market testing.
We explained that market testing involves the ES in having to review blocks of work, to test that services are delivered as cost-effectively as possible.
If the review shows it is feasible for the work to be done outside the ES, the market testing process is taken to another stage.
This stage is a competitive tendering process, in which an in-house team and any external contractors bid to win the contract on grounds of value for money.
The ES Market Testing Programme — an update
So far, two market tests are complete.
The IT Mainframe Services for the ES Accounting System has been retained in house and the ES Travel Service contact has been awarded to Wagons Lits.
Details of the current ES Market Testing Programme are shown in the table below.
Work has not yet started on two other functions in the programme — Invoice Payments and IT Services Management.
The Market Testing Unit
In the ES Market Testing Unit, we are responsible for managing the ES programme.
Individual project boards have been set up for each area of market testing.
These boards include head office and field representatives, who are responsible for recommending to the ES Executive Board the way forward in each case.
In every case there will be an opportunity for the ES to submit and in-house bid.
We need to make sure we put together businesslike, competitive proposals for the in-house delivery of our services.
An in-house bid support unit is being set up in Financial Management Services Branch, to help support and train people in the necessary skills to compete effectively with external contractors.
Keeping you in touch
Each region has a Regional Market Testing Co-ordinator who has more detailed information.
In head office, managers are responsible for keeping their teams up to date with progress on their tests in their particular areas of work.
More generally we will keep everyone up to date with progress on the programme through NOTES.
Market Tests with target completion date of end of September 1993
Note:
1.
Completion means submission to Ministers of the recommended bid.
2.
These exercises are currently at the feasibility study stage.
Head Office functions
IT Applications Maintenance (existing systems)
Internal Audit (timing subject to review)
Estates Services (Security/Messengers/Typing)
Purchasing Functions (Supply/Management/Distribution)
Microcomputer Training
Research and Evaluation Services
IT Applications Development
Management Services
Occupational Psychology Services
Trainer Training
Financial Management & other Management Training
Adjudication and Fraud Training
Field functions
Jobclubs/Jobsearch seminars
Employment Rehabilitation Courses
Psychology Services (supporting Placing, Assessment and Counselling Teams — PACTs)
Field functions currently at feasibility study stage, with target completion date after September 1993
Staff Training
Personnel Services
Purchasing Functions
Estates Services
Management Services
PHONEDAY — 16 APRIL 1995
You may have seen in the press that British Telecom is planning to create more phone numbers to meet growing demand for telecommunications services.
From 16 April 1995 the number 1 will be inserted after the first 0 in UK area codes.
For example, 061, the code for Manchester will become 0161.
There will also be new codes for Leeds, Sheffield, Nottingham, Leicester and Bristol.
A group has been formed in HO to co-ordinate the changes which will be needed to our phone systems and to provide information and guidance.
Look out for a circular in the 146 Series which will be issued shortly.
HARD WORK REWARDED — QUALIFICATIONS IN MANAGEMENT
Eighteen months of hard work were rewarded on 11 February when Andy Davey, Dave Dodson, Les Gillard, Jeff Annison and Ann Beeston, all managers in Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and North Buckinghamshire Area received the award of Higher Level National Vocational Qualification in Management, from the University of Westminster.
The awards were presented by Baroness Cox of Queensbury in Greater London, the Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords.
The initiative was started by Barbara Wiles, then Area Manager, in conjunction with the University of Westminster.
It offered her managers the chance to participate in the |Management Charter Initiative's approach to the accreditation of Prior Learning.
The managers built up portfolios which enabled them to demonstrate competence in ten specific areas from their day to day work.
David Litton, Deputy Regional Director of London & South East, who attended the ceremony, said ‘These awards are not only major achievements for the managers themselves, they also recognise the high standard of competence at which many managers operate in the Employment Service.’
Left to right: Dave Dodson, Ann Beeston, Less Gillard, Jeff Annison and Andy Davey.
ES SAYS GOODBYE TO JOHN COOPER
On 12 March we said goodbye to John Cooper on his retirement.
He was our Director of Field Services.
John joined what was then the Ministry of Labour and National Service in 1956.
In the years that followed, his career took him to many different locations and a wide variety of posts within our Department.
He became a key figure in the early 1970s when the public employment service was modernised and Jobcentres as we know them today were first established.
He was later Head of the Unemployment Benefit Service, which he managed with great skill, and where he made many friends.
When the Employment Service was formed in 1987, he joined the Executive board and has been an influential figure in our development as an Agency.
John intends to keep active in retirement and will be spending more time on ‘serious’ walking.
We wish him a long and happy retirement.
NOTES IS FOR EVERYONE
You may have noticed that recent issues of NOTES have given people with visual impairments the chance to have NOTES on a DOS text file on computer disk, to use with aids such as screen magnifiers, synthetic speech generators or electronic braille.
We are now adding to this service.
Starting with this edition, braille copies of NOTES will be sent out at the same time we do the bulk NOTES despatch.
Other important corporate communications, for example letters from the Chief Executive, special notices or newsflashes and ‘Messages’ will also be sent out in braille.
We have offered to produce, on demand, any other communications which braille readers ask us for.
We have written to everyone in the ES who reads braille to offer this service but if we have missed anyone, our apologies.
Please get in touch.
If there is anyone with a visual impairment who is not a braille reader we would be interested to hear from you to discuss how we might help.
, Editor 
John Cooper
CUSTOMER SERVICE COMPETITION!
Messages 6/93 announced in the 1993 ‘Management Matters’ Customer Service competition.
Like last year, the awards are split into team and individual prizes:
Best team serving the public — a magnum of champagne
Best individual serving the public — a bottle of champagne
Best team serving internal customers — a magnum of champagne
Best individual serving internal customers — a bottle of champagne.
Nominations
Anyone can nominate a team for an award but individuals must be nominated by their manager.
Send your entries to:,.
Please send a copy to:.
The closing date is 19 May 1993 .
BULLETIN BOARD
TWO NEW VIDEOS
Right person, right programme is a twenty minute video which describes our programmes and services and the main TEC programmes.
It is for everyone in local offices but is particularly relevant to Client Advisers.
It's our business 2 is due for release soon.
It continues themes from ‘It's our business’ and shows many of the things you have asked to see, such as people in a variety of local offices, trying out different ways of working to provide a better service for our clients and better value for money.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN — COMMUNICATION?
The Communications Unit in HO has a small supply of the book.
‘What do you mean — communication?’
It looks at how people and organizations communicate, for example breakdowns in communications, methods of communication, listening and reading, non-verbal communication.
If you would like a copy please contact:,.
HELP FOR UNEMPLOYED NURSES
The Nursing Employment Service has developed an initiative with the Royal College of Nursing and the Nursing Standard — a professional journal for nurses — to help unemployed nurses find work.
The Nursing Standard is advertising health care vacancies supplied to them by NATVACS.
A recent article in the Nursing Standard by Kathleen Weekes, Chief Nursing Consultant, and John Barthram, Head of Communications Unit in HO, raised awareness within the Health Service, of the ES services available to them.
Since the initiative started in February, 149 nursing and midwifery vacancies have been advertised through NATVACS.
CLAIMS TOO BIG FOR ENVELOPES
There have been a number of cases recently where claims in transit have burst out of their envelopes.
The solution is also obvious — please check envelopes are not too tightly packed, if in doubt use a bigger envelope!
ES's NEW ADVISORY GROUP
Mike Fogden has appointed an Advisory Group of external people.
They will be an informal ‘sounding board’ on management issues that the Executive Board may raise with them.
The group consists of:
We hope to feature more about the Advisory Group in a future NOTES article.
VISITS BY MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE BOARD
RAY PHILLIPS JOINS THE EXECUTIVE BOARD
Following John Cooper's retirement, Ray Phillips has temporarily joined the Executive Board as Director of Field Services.
Ray, Regional Director North West region, will remain Chairman of the City Action Team for Manchester.
This arrangement will be reviewed in the summer