

HISTORIC Scotland has in its care many superb monuments.
Today, most sit isolated from their environment, yet once each related closely to is surrounding countryside.
The flavour of this can be tasted at some sites, for example Staneydale ‘Temple’ in Shetland, which lies within a landscape of neolithic settlements and field-systems.
The monuments in our care are the best and they have survived for specific reasons — yet they are only the tip the iceberg of our archaeological inheritance.
Scotland is remarkable in that the land management regime over many centuries has resulted in the preservation of archaeological landscapes in our uplands, from the Cheviots to Shetland.
Sometimes, as at Staneydale, such a landscape seems to be of one period; elsewhere several other areas of activity can be detected.
Recent research in north-east Perthshire has vividly demonstrated the complexity of that landscape.
There are very few parts of Scotland today which has not been touched or affected by human activity.
Field and moorland alike have been affected by deliberate management.
Ancient woodlands, seemingly wild, have survived because they had a value for our ancestors.
Thus, archaeologists are concerned with the landscape as a whole.
The preservation and management of the Scottish landscape is the concern of many people including farmers, landowners, foresters and conservationists.
Historic Scotland plays its full part in all discussions affecting the protection, management and interpretation of the landscape which holds the key to our past, and our future.
Chief Inspector of Ancient Monuments 
Sterling work at Stirling Castle
Work started in January on a £20 million programme of improvements at Stirling Castle, designed to restore the historic fabric of the castle and make it even more interesting for visitors.
THE first step is the conversion of the cart shed inside the main gate to create a new shop and ticket office which will open in June this year.
A new restaurant is being built in the Overport Battery Casemates and will open next spring.
It will replace the present tearoom, clearing the way for later development in the Palace.
Also opening next spring is an exciting new introductory display in the Queen Anne Casemates, explaining the castle's rich history and outstanding architecture.
This will be linked to improved information boards throughout the castle.
In addition, the presentation of the castle will be enlivened by imaginative tableaux in the Historic Kitchen and Mint (North Gatehouse).
After extensive conservation and repair work is completed, the Palace will house a rich series of displays showing how its apartments were used by the Stewart monarchs and their households, and a special display will be devoted to the carved wooden Stirling Heads which once decorated the ceiling of the King's Presence Chamber.
In 1994–96 the handsome Chapel Royal will be refurbished and the 16th-century barrel ceiling rebuilt.
The work will include the updating of the heating and ventilation systems to create the optimal environmental conditions for the conversation of Valentine Jenkin's fine painted decoration.
The biggest single part of the Stirling Castle project is the continued restoration of the Great Hall to its medieval magnificence.
The restoration of the interior stonework is expected to be completed by the end of next year.
Work will then start on the rebuilding of the great oak hammer-beam roof, followed by the reconstruction of the wallwalks, parapets and chimneyheads.
The work is due to be completed in the year 2000, after which the Great Hall will provide an unrivalled setting for conferences, concerts, balls and other grand events.
What do you think of Welcome ?
Does it cover the sort of topics which interest you?
Is there anything that you feel is missing?
If you have any comments or suggestions, please let us know — we always appreciate receiving feedback from Friends.
Events Programme ‘93
THE 1993 Historic Scotland Events Programme gets off to a dramatic start on Saturday 1 and Sunday 2 May, with a major battle re-enactment by the Sealed Knot at Linlithgow Palace and Peel.
A weekend of connected activities will bring the town of Linlithgow to life, with sounds ranging from medieval music to cannon and gunfire.
Keep an eye on your local press for details, or phone the Events Unit on  during working hours, Monday to Friday, for further information.
The battle is the first of a series of events to take place at Historic Scotland sites throughout Scotland, including historical playlets, concerts, walks and talks.
A programme will be produced in time for the summer season and Welcome will continue to keep Friends informed.
Holding the Fort
HISTORIC Scotland's modelmaker, George Blair, has recently completed a scale model of Fort George, to be displayed in the Fort's Grand Magazine as an aid to interpretation for visitors.
The model, which has taken over two years of painstaking work to produce, is made of rigid urethane foam, plywood and hardboard.
George worked from detailed plans, drawings and photographs of the Fort, employing a scale of 1:300.
George joined Historic Scotland in 1992 from the Scottish Office's Graphics Group, where he had been involved in the production of models and display materials since 1968.
Glasgow Cathedral — the past revealed
IMPORTANT discoveries have been made about the early history of Glasgow Cathedral during recent archaeological excavations.
Historic Scotland commissioned Glasgow University Archaeological Research Division to carry out investigative work in advance of the installation of an improved heating system at the cathedral.
Their findings have surpassed all expectations, as Principle Inspector of Ancient Monuments Richard Fawcett explains:
‘The architecture of the cathedral is extremely confusing.
In the course of building what we now see, it seems that no sooner did one bishop come on the scene than he abandoned the work of his predecessors and started again.
We know there was a dedication in 1136 by Bishop John, and another in 1197 by Bishop Jocelyn, but almost all evidence for those buildings was lost in a series of further campaigns in the course of the 13th century.
As a result of the recent excavations, however, we know a great deal more about the 12th-century buildings than we did before.
‘We have found what seems to be the lower walling of the west front of the cathedral dedicated to Bishop John.
It also now appears that his cathedral was considerably bigger than anyone thought, since sections of cylindrical columns from it have been re-used in later works.
‘The most extensive evidence found is for the church built by Bishop Jocelyn.
Extensive stretches of the walls of his nave have been traced on each side of the existing nave, although we do not yet know if it had an aisle along each flank.
Equally exciting has been the finding of large numbers of discarded carved and painted stones from Jocelyn's church, which were re-used in the foundations of the elongated crypt built by Bishop Bondington in the mid 13th century.
‘Tradition has it that St Kentigern founded his cathedral at Glasgow in the late 6th century within a burial ground that had earlier been founded by St Ninian but never used.
That story is likely to be a 12th-century fabrication.
But it is also worth noting that evidence has been found of burials and drainage channels that appears to be pre-date any of the recorded cathedral buildings, and it now looks as if the site has a longer ecclesiastical history than was thought.’
We're honoured
TWO Historic Scotland staff received honours in the New Year honours list.
Dr David Walker, Chief Inspector of Historic Buildings, has been appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE).
David joined the Scottish Office in 1961 at Senior Investigator of Historic Buildings.
He has been in charge of professional advice on listed buildings since 1975 and was made Chief Inspector in 1988.
He has published many works on Scottish architecture and has contributed to a variety of publications including the Architectural Review ,Country Life , the Architects' Journal and the Times Literary Supplement .
Alan Armstrong, Senior Professional Technical Officer, has been appointed a Member of the Royal Victorian Order (MVO).
As Area Superintendent at Edinburgh Castle 1980–91, Alan was involved in the care of the Palace of Holyroodhouse and Holyrood Royal Park.
Since August 1991 he has been a key member of the Planning Team preparing for the European Summit Meeting at the Palace on 11–12 December 1992 and organising the subsequent reinstatement works.
David and Alan will be presented with their honours by Her Majesty the Queen at Holyrood in June.
St Margaret's Chapel refurbished
IN recognition of the 900th anniversary of St Margaret's death this year, Historic Scotland has undertaken a sensitive refurbishment of the tiny chapel in Edinburgh Castle which is dedicated to her memory.
St Margaret's Chapel, dating back to the 12th century, is the earliest surviving structure in Edinburgh Castle.
It has had a chequered history, including use as a powder magazine.
In January work started under the supervision of Stenhouse Conservation Centre to remove layers of modern paint from the walls and ceiling of the chapel.
The stone which emerged was much repaired and very rough, and the vaulted ceiling of the apse was found to be coated in a dull brown plaster.
The idea of leaving the walls uncovered was therefore dismissed.
The stonework of the walls and vault was repointed in lime mortar, then washed with water-based colour, thinned to allow the details to show through.
The chapel's striking chancel arch was another matter.
As successive layers of paint came off, the details of the zigzag carving emerged clearly and small areas of red and dark brown pigment from the original painting could be seen.
An ugly cement patch was carefully removed from the crown of the arch, and the stonework was left exposed so that the vigour of the fine carving can be appreciated.
Before the stonework was repointed, new light fittings were installed to give a subdued, indirect light in the nave, with a slightly more intense light in the apse, focusing on the table.
Finally, masons laid a new stone floor, using reclaimed Craigleith stone and employing a simple and traditional pattern in keeping with the building.
The St Margaret's Chapel Guild has commissioned cabinetmaker Piers Kettlewell to make ten bench seats for the chapel.
Made of solid oak with a polished beeswax finish, each seat has a carved limewood roundel depicting a different symbol associated with St Margaret.
He is also making an oak flower stand to hold the flowers placed in the chapel every week by the Guild, and a new case for the facsimile of St Margaret's Gospel Book.
A special service on St Margaret's Day, 16 November, will dedicate the furniture and an alter cloth commissioned by the Guild from Hannah Frew Paterson MBE.
The cloth will be adorned with a richly embroidered symbolic design.
Details of a programme of events including concerts, services of thanksgiving, guided walks and exhibitions during 1993 are to be found in the leaflet Events and Places to Visit: St Margaret 900 .
Write to:, or phone  during working hours, Monday to Friday.
‘Braer’— the aftermath
ONE of the major implications of the Braer tanker accident at the south end of Shetland in January is the effect of the oil spill on the Islands' archaeology.
As soon as the news broke, Historic Scotland inspectors made their way to Shetland to assess the damage to archaeological sites.
They also assisted the local archaeologist in alerting the relevant authorities to the locations of important prehistoric remains at risk of damage by the movement of heavy equipment during the clean-up operation.
Both Jarlshof and Ness of Burgi have been covered in the thin film of oil which was deposited all over the southern part of Shetland.
The oil has begun to evaporate from the stones, helped by the lashing rain and the longest spell of gale force winds for decades.
However, it is not yet known how deeply the oil has penetrated into the stones and soil of the sites and whether long-term damage will be caused.
Research has been commissioned by Historic Scotland.
So far it appears that other monuments in care have not been affected, although Mousa Broch has yet to be visited.
Jarlshof has been closed since January to avoid risk to visitors or their clothing.
However, it is hoped that by bringing in additional path material it will be possible to reopen it by Easter, with access being limited to certain ‘clean’ areas.
Turning back time
Conserving and restoring the work of masons and artists from centuries past is the delicate task of Principal Conservator Rab Snowden and his team at Historic Scotland's Stenhouse Conservation Centre.
Rab co-ordinates the conservation and restoration of easel paintings, structural paintings (such as murals), heraldic decoration and stone ornament.
The Stenhouse Centre in Edinburgh is the foremost agency in Scotland in these fields.
The centre also houses the Scottish Conservation Bureau, run by Carol Brown, which operates an information and advice service to and about conservators working in Scotland.
As well as work on properties in care, the centre undertakes projects on behalf of the National Trust for Scotland, regional and district authorities and private owners.
The volume of work is ever increasing, and the centre recently expanded into a new annexe at South Gyle, Edinburgh, with a studio workshop and storage facilities, where most of the stone conservation work is now handled.
Rab has worked in conservation for over 30 years; some of his conservators for even longer.
With a staff of 13, the centre encompasses the full spectrum of specialist skills.
Practical conservation is highly scientific, requiring an intimate knowledge and understanding of ancient materials and how they will respond to treatment.
Stone conservators, for example, work with chemical solvents and resins and must take the utmost care to avoid any risk of damage.
Scientific analysis of the stone is required to determine, for example, the geological make-up, mortar recipe or contaminating salt content, and careful work may be necessary to pin cracked stones together with non-rusting phosphor bronze dowels.
The Shandwick Stone, a pictish symbol stone found in a field near Tain, had been badly cracked and crudely rejoined with heavy metal bands by a local blacksmith about a century ago.
After extensive work in the Edinburgh studio, it was transported back to Tain and encased in a glass enclosure to protect it from the elements.
Conservation can also involve painstaking detective work.
Written accounts from diaries or reports, and physical evidence such as paint scrapes, can help the restorer to stay true to original colours and designs.
Old photographs can also hold valuable clues.
All of these sources of evidence are currently being used in the interior restoration of Duff House, near Banff.
Sometimes luck plays a hand, for example when a late 18th-century oil-painted wall decoration was discovered by conservators repairing damage caused by a leaking roof at Hopetoun House, near Edinburgh.
‘The paintings are set directly into the ceiling of an octagonal staircase,’ Rab explains.
‘They had been covered up by layers of varnish and paint over the years and no-one knew what lay underneath.’
After months of work, there emerged the family crest and classical scenes set in oval frames above trompe l'oeil bas reliefs.
‘We are becoming increasingly involved in important historic interiors,’ said Rab.
‘Culross Palace in Fife is one of our major ongoing projects.
It was recently returned to the management of its owners, the National Trust for Scotland; however, Historic Scotland is still in charge of conserving the Palace's early 17th-century painted wooden ceilings.
‘Unfortunately, the ceiling we are working on suffered worm attack over the years and was restored in the 1940s using a wax resin, which turned it brown, and cellulose repairs, which shrank, creating further problems.
We now have to clean, repair and preserve the boards.
It is a time-consuming operation but we estimate that it should be complete in the next two years.’
With a steady stream of projects Rab has a simple philosophy: ‘I approach each project differently and never with a set idea.
Each problem dictates its own solution.’
We've got them on the list
We currently have nearly 39,000 listed buildings in Scotland — but what is a ‘listed building’?
A great country house?
One of the many important churches which are often so crucial in forming the townscape we see about us?
A marvellous Georgian terrace or a great public building?
These types of buildings are, of course, represented on the list.
But listed buildings come in all shapes and sizes.
Our biggest is the Category A-listed Forth Rail Bridge — which, as regular readers will know, is my own favourite listed building.
I couldn't say for certain what our smallest listed building is, but I suspect that some old wall-mounted pillar boxes will be strong candidates!
Here are some examples which give an indication of the variety of structures which can be listed.
Across the sea to Rothesay-O!
Rothesay Castle on the Isle of Bute is one of the most remarkable and important medieval castles in Scotland.
Unique for its unusual circular plan, it also boasts an association for over 800 years with the Stewarts, who from 1371 to 1714 were the royal house of Scotland.
From Alan, Steward of the King of Scots, who was holding Bute from King William I the Lion around 1200, is descended by one line Charles, Prince of Wales, the present Duke of Rothesay, and by another John Crighton Stuart, Sixth Marquess of Bute and the present Captain and Keeper of Rothesay Castle.
The present stone castle was begun in the first quarter of the 13th century by Alan's son, Walter, Second Steward.
It comprised a circular curtain-wall of stone enclosing a courtyard within which were placed the domestic apartments and service offices, probably of timber construction.
The circular untowered plan is unique in Scotland, though it is found in Cornwall, France and the Low Countries.
Norse victory
The castle did not prove strong enough to resist attack by a Norse raiding force in 1230.
Despite the stout resistance of the garrison within, ‘the Norwegians hewed the wall with axes’ and ultimately gained entry, spilling much blood.
The Norse withdrew shortly after, but the castle was recaptured during King Haakon of Norway's invasion of the Clyde estuary in 1263.
When Bute returned to Scottish control in 1266, the castle was strengthened by the addition of four round projecting towers and, on the north side, a gatehouse facing the sea.
During the Wars of Independence, which began in 1297, Rothesay was remote enough to survive largely unscathed.
The marriage of Walter, Sixth Steward to Marjorie, daughter of King Robert the Bruce, eventually resulted in the Stewarts obtaining the throne in 1371, through Walter and Marjorie's son Robert.
Both King Robert II (1371–90) and his son Robert III (1390–1406) spent time at Rothesay and carried out minor building works on it.
The next monarch to take a personal interest in the castle was James IV (1488–1513), who in August 1498 appointed his kinsman, the Sheriff of Bute, Ninian Stewart, as Captain and Keeper of Rothesay Castle.
James began construction of the large residential gatehouse or forework, called le dungeon , that was added on to the earlier gatehouse to provide a more fitting apartment for the Keeper — and also for the King, whenever he should visit.
The work was finished under James V in 1540–42.
In 1685 the castle was burnt by the Duke of Argyll and fell into ruin.
In 1816–18 the second Marquess of Bute had the courtyard cleared of vegetation and rubble, and in 1871–79 the third Marquess cleared out the moat and engaged the architect William Burges to carry  out restoration of the masonry.
The forework was reconstructed by the third Marquess in 1900.
The Bute family gave the castle into state care in 1961.
Local favourite
Rothesay Castle has been in the capable hands of custodian Fiona Macrae for the last eight years, assisted throughout the summer months by her father Finlay, who has been the seasonal custodian for over twenty years.
Fiona is a well known figure in the local community, which recently formed a Friends of Rothesay Castle association.
The castle's impressive great hall is a popular venue with local couples for wedding receptions.
Fiona often takes parties of local school-children round the castle.
‘The highlight of their tour is being locked in the dungeon after hearing the tale of the ‘Green Lady and the Bluidy Stairs’,’ she says.
‘Following the Viking attack in 1263, Lady Isobel Stewart took her own life (on the steps of the wallwalk) rather than yield to her captors.
Her ghostly presence now haunts the ruined castle.’
Spring Site Visits
Spring is in the air and it's time for Friends to venture out and take advantage of our special guided tours of Historic Scotland sites.
A late medieval tower-house, a Cluniac abbey founded in the 13th century or an early Georgian mansion — take your pick!
Duff House
DUFF House, near Banff, is widely recognised to be one of William Adams's finest achievements.
It was commissioned in 1735 by William Duff MP, later Earl Fife.
The house is currently closed for extensive conservation works and conversion to a country house gallery.
As well as learning about the house's architecture and chequered history, Friends will be able to see how the interiors are being restored to their original splendour by Historic Scotland conservators on the basis of documentary and physical evidence.
Peter Donaldson, Principal Architect and Rab Snowden, Principal Conservator, will lead tours of the house on Saturday 15 May.
Balvaird Castle
BALVAIRD Castle, near Bridge of Earn, is a fascinating illustration of how a late medieval tower-house could also provide a residence of great comfort and convenience for its occupants.
The tower which forms its nucleus was built in the early part of the 16th century for Margaret Barclay and Andrew Murray, the ancestors of the Earls of Mansfield.
It was extended on several later occasions, so that the main accommodation extended around all side of a small courtyard, while other courtyards were added to house stables, a garden and an orchard.
The most complete surviving part is the tower, and the fittings in the first-floor hall are particularly fine.
Richard Fawcett, Principal Inspector of Ancient Monuments, will lead tours of the castle on Saturday 24 April.
Crossraguel Abbey
CROSSRAGUEL Abbey, near Maybole, was founded as a Cluniac monastery in 1244 by Duncan, Earl of Carrick and much rebuilt during the next three centuries.
The remains, which are very extensive and of high architectural quality, consist of the church, claustral buildings, outer court with an imposing castellated gatehouse, and abbot's house with a strong tower attached.
The choir of the church, with its three-sided apse, is a fine specimen of the latest phase in Scottish Gothic.
The tour also offers a visit to nearby Maybole Church, a late 14th-century collegiate foundation.
Julian Small, Inspector of Ancient Monuments, will lead tours of the abbey and church on Saturday 8 May.
To apply, write to:.
Please state your choice of visit and the number of tickets required and your name, address and telephone number.
For Friends members only.
Christmas Quiz winners
CONGRATULATIONS to the three winners of the 1992 Friends Christmas Quiz, who were:.
They received as their prize a year's free Friends membership and a book chosen from a list of HMSO titles.
The correct answer are listed below:
1.
Dunfermline Palace; Charles I
2.
St Andrews Castle; John Knox
3.
Duff House; country house gallery
4.
Dundrennan Abbey; Mary Queen of Scots
5.
Rothesay Castle; HRH The Prince of Wales
6
Dryburgh Abbey; Sir Walter Scott and Field Marshal Earl Haig
7.
Bearsden Bathhouse; Roman
8.
Castle Campbell; Burn of Care and Burn of Sorrow
9.
Maes Howe Chambered Cairn; Vikings
10.
Claypotts Castle; John Graham of Claverhouse, ‘Bonnie Dundee’
The irresistible lure of history
As the largest provider of visit attractions in Scotland, Historic Scotland plays a major role in the Scottish tourism industry.
Travel Trade Manager Bill Cameron tells Welcome how he goes about promoting Historic Scotland's heritage sites at home and aboard.
‘The main reason tourists come to Scotland is heritage,’ says Bill.
‘Many British and American tourists feel that they have connections with some part of Scottish history and they want to experience it for themselves.’
In fact, according to a recent Scottish Tourist Board survey, 79 percent of all visitors to Scotland come because of the heritage attractions, putting activities such as hillwalking, fishing and golf well down the list.
With over 300 monuments in its care, this is good news for Historic Scotland and the team responsible for marketing its properties.
‘We only charge entry at 64 of our monuments at present.
Many of them are well known, such as Edinburgh Castle and Stirling Castle, but we have to ensure that people are aware that some of the lesser-known sites they visit are in the care of Historic Scotland, and that they realise many more are on offer,’ says Bill.
Historic Scotland works closely with the Scottish Tourist Board, area tourist boards, the National Trust for Scotland and other organisations towards the achievement of a common aim — maximising Scotland's tourism potential.
‘The last two years have been difficult because of the effects of the Gulf War and recession.
However, Historic Scotland's visitor numbers have held up well in the context of the overall market picture,’ explains Bill.
Visitors from the UK account for about 70 per cent of Scotland's tourism market.
‘There has been a big drive in the last year to get closer to the travel industry generally,’ says Bill.
‘We want to make sure that UK handling agents, Scottish hotels and in particular coach operators are aware of who we are and what we have to offer their clients.’
Historic Scotland participates in UK travel trade exhibitions and holiday shows in Glasgow, Manchester, Sheffield and London, as partners on the main Scottish Tourist Board stand.
‘Travel trade decision makers are invited from all over the world to come and see for themselves what Scotland has to offer as a destination,’ he says.
‘We work closely with the organisers of the familiarisation trips to ensure that Historic Scotland sites are featured prominently in their itineraries.’
Promotional tools used by Historic Scotland include the Scottish Explorer Ticket, which allows visitors to see as many properties as they can within either 7 or 14 days.
It is sold at the monuments, tourist information centres and through an increasing number of travel trade operators.
A voucher scheme has been introduced to encourage coach tour operators to include Historic Scotland properties in their itineraries.
Historic Scotland produced about 1.5 million free colour leaflets for distribution in the UK and overseas in 1992–3.
The foreign language editions of A Journey Through Time are available at British Tourist Authority offices throughout the world.
The ‘family’ of regional leaflets is currently being revamped and extended, and new promotional materials are being developed.
Promotion in the UK is supported by a press advertising campaign which seeks to present Historic Scotland properties as interesting places with colourful histories, without trivialising their historic importance.
‘It's a difficult balance to strike’ says Bill, ‘but we feel we have got it right.’
Promoting Historic Scotland abroad has taken Bill to conferences and trade missions in South East Asia, Japan, Germany, Canada and the United States in the last year.
In January he took part in a US Road Show around the Mid West, North East, South East and Texas.
With the beauty and diversity of its landscape and the richness of its heritage, Scotland has a lot to offer the visitor.
However, the world tourism market is fiercely competitive and becoming ever more so with the countries of Eastern Europe now opening up as holiday destinations.
Playing his part in meeting the challenge is the prospect Bill relishes.
The Eternal City
Friends tour of Classical Rome
IN response to a number of requests from Friends, we have organised through DA Study Tours a tour of Classical Rome from 16–22 October 1993.
The tour will be led by Dr David Breeze, Chief Inspector of Ancient Monuments in Scotland.
Dr Breeze is an international authority on Roman archaeology and has published extensively on the subject.
He has led many archaeological tours in Britain and Europe.
Although concentrating on the Classical period, the tour will also cover some of the buildings of Christian Rome.
Our hotel is the elegant four-star Grand Hotel Plaza, which has been a landmark in Rome since 1860, and is ideally situated in the very heart of historic Rome.
All rooms have private facilities and there are lifts, a restaurant, a cocktail bar, a beauty parlour and a sumptuous lounge.
Saturday 16 October
Depart Edinburgh/Glasgow 1500/1515 by British Airways to London for connecting 1745 flight (BA558) to Rome, arriving Rome at 2010 (local time).
Light dinner on flight.
Coach transfer to Grand Hotel Plaza.
Sunday 17 October
Coach tour of the city seeing or visiting the Servian walls, Aurelian walls, gates of the city and Praetorian camp, pyramid of Cestius, temples of the Forum Boarium, theatre of Marcellus, mausoleum of Augustus, Pantheon and Baths of Diocletian.
Monday 18 October
Short walking tour of the Forum, Palatine, arches of Severus, Titus and Constantine, Colosseum, Trajan's Column and Trajan's market.
Tuesday 19 October
Free day in the city to visit museums, the Sistine Chapel or do some shopping.
Wednesday 20 October
Coach tour to the Circus Maximus, baths of Caracalla, tomb of Scipios, Appian Way, tomb of Cecilia Metella, mausoleum of Romulus, circus of Maxentius, church of St John Lateran.
Thursday 21 October
Coach Tour to the Mithraeum of St Clemente, churches of St Sabina and St Maria Maggiore, church and catacombs of St Agnese, church of St Constanza (mausoleum of Constantia).
Friday 22 October
Coach transfer to Rome airport for 1125 flight (BA553) to London, arriving London at 1400, connecting with flights to Edinburgh/Glasgow to arrive 1615/1630.
The price of £669 includes scheduled flights by BA from Edinburgh and Glasgow to Rome, coach transfers, six nights bed and breakfast in twin rooms with private facilities (single room supplement £99), three dinners (on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday) and all excursions led by Dr Breeze as per the itinerary.
Entrance fees are not included, but will be at a reduced rate.
For a supplement of £25, you can fly from Inverness or Aberdeen.
For further details and to book, contact ,.
Note: The price quoted is based on an exchange rate of 2,250 IL = £1 and on a group of 28 passengers, and is subject to possible increase with lower numbers or a lower value of the pound, as per DA Study Tours brochure conditions (available on request).
Bornholm, 13–19 June
THE Friends tour of the Danish island of Bornholm will now depart one week later than advertised in the winter issue of Welcome .
It has not proved viable to run a separate tour for Friends only, so DA Study Tours are offering Friends the opportunity to join the very similar tour featured in their brochure ‘Northern Lights’ for the same price of £639 per person.
This represents a £20 saving on the normal brochure price.
The tour departs Glasgow by SAS flight on Sunday 13 June, returning on Saturday 19 June.
Led by historian and broadcaster Dr Ian Grimble and accompanied by a member of Historic Scotland staff, it is based for six nights in picturesque Svaneke at the 17th-century Siemsens Gaard Hotel overlooking the harbour.
Three leisurely day tours are included to explore the island's rich heritage — round fortified churches, ancient rock carving and monoliths and Scandinavia's largest castle, Hammershus.
The rest of the time can be spent exploring Svaneke's winding streets with museums, half-timbered houses and lush gardens, or taking a boat trip to unspoilt Christianso island and it navel fortresses.
The price of £639 includes scheduled flights, transfer and dinner, bed and breakfast.
Single room supplement: £79.
On the return, you can stay on for a few nights in Copenhagen for just £39 per person per night.
For further details phone   
Historic Venues for Special Occasions
A MEMORABLE occasion deserves a memorable setting.
Whether it is a personal celebration such as a wedding or a family party, or an important corporate event such as the launch of a new product, Historic Scotland has the perfect venue.
There are many historic sites to choose from, stretching from the Borders to Shetland.
Each offers a unique atmosphere, from the grandeur of the Renaissance Palace at Stirling Castle to the intimacy of the Gallery at Aberdour Castle.
Authentic entertainments can be arranged, from a medieval jousting tournament to a recital of early music.
The leaflet Make Your Celebration a Historic Occasion describes some of the venues available.
To obtain a copy, write to  or phone  during working hours, Monday to Friday.
Edinburgh Exhibition celebrates architectural links with Europe
AN EXHIBITION celebrating Edinburgh's long tradition of architectural links with Europe is currently circulating round the city's public libraries.
The exhibition is a joint venture between Historic Scotland and Edinburgh District Council, and was opened last November as part of the European Programme of events taking place throughout the UK presidency of the European Community.
The exhibition describes the architectural development of Edinburgh and how this was influenced by Europe, with illustrations and explanations of the many buildings and areas which make Edinburgh a truly European capital city — particularly Holyrood Palace, Edinburgh Castle, the Old Town, New Town, Royal Mile and the port of Leith.
Also highlighted is the work of both Historic Scotland and the District Council in the conservation of Edinburgh's historic townscape.
The exhibition itinerary is as follows:
Become a Friend
If you have enjoyed reading this magazine but you are not yet a Friend, you can find out more about the benefits of membership by filling in the coupon below.
Send it to .
No stamp is required.
Please send me your full colour leaflet which explains the benefits enjoyed by Friends of Historic Scotland and a membership application form.