

GRAMPIAN EXPORT SURVEY 1990/91
This paper reports the results of the Scottish Council's survey of exports from Grampian during the year 1990/91.
Background
The Scottish Council has been estimating the value of Scottish manufactured exports since the early 1960's and is the only organisation producing regular and comprehensive statistics on this aspect of Scottish economic activity.
The survey is conducted on an annual basis, with results supplied by around 650 companies in Scotland.
This makes it the largest regular business survey in Scotland.
Participating companies are asked to provide information on products exported; on the value of these exports to each market destination; company employment figures; the percentage of turnover dedicated to exports; and their perception of future prospects, including indication of any new overseas markets which are likely to be of interest.
For the second year in succession a regional survey for the Grampian area was undertaken.
The 1990/91 Grampian survey form was devised jointly with Grampian Enterprise, and the survey undertaken by the Scottish Council with financial assistance from Grampian Enterprise.
All companies in Grampian known or believed to be exporting were invited to take part, with the Council's North East office co-ordinating responses.
Participants in the survey were asked to state the value of their exports during the calendar year 1990.
However not all respondents were able to do so and a number of them gave figures for exports during their company's financial year.
The majority of financial years specified ended on 31 March 1991.
To conform with most Governments statistics, and for comparative purposes, the scope of the Council's survey was defined by the Standard Industrial Classification definition of manufacturing.
Whisky companies were not specifically targeted for the survey as comprehensive statistics on Scotch whisky exports are obtainable from the Scotch Whisky Association.
A discussion on the special nature of the whisky industry is included in Section 6 of this report.
The national survey for the equivalent period shows that Scotland's exports for the year rose to a level of £8.574 billion, an increase of 11.9%, in current prices, on last years figure.
At constant prices accounting for price movements, this represents a 7.6% increase, comparing favourably with last years increase of 1.6%.
Scotland's most significant exporting industries are Office machinery and data processing equipment [£2.792 billion or 34% of total exports]and Food and drink manufacturing [£1,991 billion or 23% of total exports], this sector is dominated by whisky exports, which increased by 17% to a new level of £1.712 billion.
Once again Europe dominates the destination of Scottish exports, with the European Community accounting for 58% of total exports and EFTA accounting for 12% of the total.
This gives a total of 70% of Scottish exports destined for Western Europe.
The picture in Grampian region is even more pronounced with exports to the European Community accounting for 65%, and those to EFTA accounting for more than 10% of the total, giving a total for Western Europe of 75%.
Industry by Industry Exports
Table 1 indicates total Grampian manufactured exports subdivided into industry classes, while Fig.1 illustrates the proportion of the total exports attributed to each of the largest exporting sectors.
The value of exports from all sectors included is estimated to be £351.3 million.
This represents an increase of 10.7% on last years figure of £317.3 million.
The Paper and printing industry is the most significant export sector, providing a contribution of more than £105 million or 30% of the overall value.
This represents an increase of 25.8% on last years figure, and means it is now the largest non whisky export sector in Grampian.
One of the reasons for this is the dominance in this sector of large companies.
The national and regional survey figures indicate that the large companies are in a better position than small companies to expand their export activity to compensate for a recession in the home market.
As a result sectors such as Paper and printing, that are dominated by large companies, are more likely to show improved export results.
The second largest exporting sector is Mechanical engineering, representing more than £102 million or 29% of total exports.
This shows an increase of 13% on last years figure.
This is a slightly larger rise than the national figure for Mechanical engineering, which recorded a 12% increase on 1989 levels.
It should be noted that this figure excludes sales to the UK sector of the North Sea which are not classified as exports and reinforces the point made in last year's survey, that the Mechanical engineering sector in Grampian is having considerable success in widening it's export markets.
The third largest export sector is Food and drink, which contributes £78.3 million to exports from the region, or 22% of the total.
This represents a modest 3.5% increase on last years figure, and there is no doubt that the fish processing sector in particular in experiencing difficulties due to the knock-on effects of quota restrictions in the fishing industry.
It should again be emphasised that this figure excludes whisky, which is considered in Section 6 of this report.
The fourth major export sector in Grampian in textiles, with exports totalling £24.2 million, representing a drop in exports of 27.9%.
In addition to companies generally experiencing the recession within the industry, another aspect of this has been an actual reduction in the number of textile companies in the Grampian area, compared to last year.
This is obviously having a detrimental effect on textile exports from the region.
Comparison with Scottish Exports
Table 2 offers a comparison of Grampian exports with the equivalent totals for Scotland as a whole.
The Paper and printing sector, is the most significant, accounting for 41% of all Scottish exports in this sector.
The second most significant sector is Food and drink [excluding whisky], contributing 28% to the national total.
The other significant sector is Mechanical engineering, with Grampian exports amounting to 17% of the national figure.
Fig 2 gives a graphical representation of the top three exporting industries in Grampian, in comparison to the Scottish total.
Small and Large Companies
The figures in Table 1 were derived by estimating separately for small companies [i.e. those with up to 200 employees]and large companies [i.e. 200 plus employees].
This enables the relative contributions of small and large companies to be assessed.
In Grampian small companies accounted for 28.5% of all exports, while large companies were responsible for a 71.5% share.
This compares with Scottish Figures of 15.3% and 84.7% for small and large companies respectively.
The sectors in which large companies made the most significant contribution were Paper and printing [94%]; Mechanical engineering [74%]; Textiles [67%]; and Food and drink [55%].
Small companies predominated in exports from all other sectors.
Destination of Exports from Grampian
Table 3 shows the top 20 destinations for exports from Grampian in 1990/91, while Table 4 shows their distribution by geographic region.
As with the National picture, European Community countries dominate the table of major export markets.
However, this feature is even more evident in Grampian where 65% of exports are destined for the European Community, compared with 58% for Scotland as a whole.
Fig. 3 gives the top ten markets' percentage of total exports.
Excluding whisky, Grampian's principal export market is Germany, which has overtaken France as the regions main export destination.
This conforms to the national situation, where Germany has been Scotland's top market since 1988.
Exports to the EFTA countries are also significant, now accounting for more than 10% of Grampian exports.
This years figure of £36.6 million represents an increase of 22% on last years value of £30 million.
Norway is the major EFTA country receiving Grampian manufactured exports, and the majority of these are from the Mechanical engineering sector.
Exports to North America have dropped dramatically.
From a figure of almost £50 million in 1989, to a level of £26.4 million for 1990.
One of the main reasons for this is due to the current state of the US economy.
The main industry's that export to the US are Food and drink; and Textiles.
The textile industry in particular has been experiencing very difficult trading conditions and is more susceptible than most to recession in the US economy.
Exports to the Middle East currently stand at £16.8 million, this represents an increase of 27% on last years figure of £13.2 million.
This figure accounts for almost 5% of Grampian's total exports, and is significantly higher than the national figure of 2%.
The reason for the relatively high proportion of exports destined for this area is that much of the export activity is oil related.
It is evident that the expertise and contacts Grampian companies have developed through supplying the North Sea oil industry stands them in good stead to take advantage of oil related opportunities in the Middle East.
The major export destination within the Middle East is the United Arab Emirates, with exports of £6.7 million, representing a 20% increase on the 1989 figure.
It appears that the Gulf War has had little effect on exports to this area, although it should be added that much of the conflict post dated the period covered by the survey.
Whisky Exports
Scotland's top markets in 1990 for whisky sales were:
By applying the 27.6% Grampian ration to the above figures, we are able to estimate the extent to which the top market destinations in Table 3 might be altered by the inclusion of whisky.
Including whisky, the top markets are:
While the regional value of whisky exports cannot easily be gauged with accuracy in view of the complex nature of the industry it is interesting nevertheless to attempt an assessment of its impact.
When the estimated value of £472.6 million for whisky is added to the total of £351.3 million for other exports, the cumulative total comes to £823.9 million for Grampian exports — 9.6% of all Scottish exports.
Market Research and Barriers to Exporting
The survey also asked companies a series of questions on what sources of market research they used and also what barriers companies felt had inhibited their export performance.
Companies were initially asked to indicate where they sourced their market research information.
Over fourteen different providers were identified by respondents.
six out of these fourteen were clearly more prominent being listed by 25% or more of the companies.
The main source cited was overseas agents with 51% of firms using their local contact to gain market knowledge.
50% of companies listed the Government services provided by the DTI or Scottish Export Office and 28% cited Grampian Enterprise, an encouragingly high figure considering the recent formation of the Local Enterprise Company.
Other main sources were Chambers of Commerce used by 37%, the Scottish Council by 25% and trade missions utilised by 25%.
Less frequently used sources included the libraries [14%], the local authorities [6%], and consultants [4%].
Perhaps surprisingly the use of banks and trade exhibitions was only mentioned by 1% of respondents.
Companies were also asked whether they accessed information held on online databases.
Only 19% of respondents indicated that they did so.
A further 63% indicated that they did not use such a source.
The main reason for this lack of use appears have been uncertainty regarding the potential of such a source, a small number of companies indicated that cost was a factor deterring them from this type of information.
One of the conclusions that can be drawn from the responses is that despite the increased provision of online information services by a range of organisations including Aberdeen City library, the Scottish Council and others, the level of awareness and potential of such information sources is still low.
Small companies still tend to be inhibited by the cost of using such services and within larger firms the knowledge of their benefits still seems to be limited to a small number of individuals and not widely recognised within the company as a resource.
Fig. 4 illustrates users perception of the information they have received.
The three criteria used to measure the worth of information were; speed of response, quality and cost.
The major conclusion that can be drawn from this analysis is that users are generally satisfied with the information they receive, but there is no doubt that confusion still exists as to the range of information providers available.
Market Research and Barriers to Exporting
Fig. 5 illustrates factors that have inhibited improved export performance amongst respondents.
The most significant barrier appears to be competitive factors, such as, pricing; design and quality.
This was cited by 37% of respondents.
The second barrier is lack of market knowledge, recorded by 28% of respondents and thirdly finance which was highlighted by 25% of respondents.
These latter two barriers are an area where SEAS, the Scottish Export Assistance Scheme, may well have a useful role in lowering such non tariff barriers.
Methodology
All Grampian companies registered as exporters in the Scottish Council's ‘Scottish Production Industries Register’[SPIR]were asked to complete a survey about their exports.
In addition, all companies known to the Scottish Council, but whose status as exporters was not clear, were also contacted.
Using the employment information contained in SPIR and in the responses, it was possible to estimate the overall employment in exporting companies.
This was done industry by industry at SIC Class level and separately for large and small companies.
This information was used to gross up the values declared by respondents to give estimates of exports for all exporting companies in Grampian.
SURVEY OF SCOTTISH MANUFACTURED EXPORTS IN 1990/91
Summary of Survey Results
Scottish exports in 1990 increased significantly to a value of £8.6 billion, representing an increase in real terms of 7.6%.
Scotland's share of UK exports showed a marginal increase to 9.5%, compared with 9.4% in 1989.
Germany and France remain Scotland's dominant export markets but the Netherlands continues to show significant growth.
Overall growth in exports to the European Community continues and this now accounts for 58% of exports.
Whisky and Computers remain Scotland's most important export products.
Encouraging results are reported in the Paper and Printing, chemicals, Electronics and transport Equipment sectors.
Exports from the Clothing industry showed a decline and the Textile industry continued to suffer.
Introduction
This paper reports the results of the Scottish Council's latest survey of Scottish manufactured exports, covering the year 1990/91.
The Scottish Council has been estimating the value of Scottish manufactured exports since the early 1960's and is the only organisation in Scotland producing regular and comprehensive statistics on this aspect of Scottish economic activity.
The survey is now conducted on an annual basis, with results based on information supplied by around 650 companies in Scotland.
The size of the response also makes the survey the biggest regular business in Scotland.
To conform with most Government economic statistics, the scope of the survey is defined by the Standard Industrial Classification definition of manufacturing.
Whisky exports were not included in the survey because comprehensive statistics on Scotch whisky exports are obtainable from the Scotch Whisky Association.
However, it should be noted that, unless otherwise stated, the figures in this report include whisky.
Participants in the survey were asked to state the value of their exports during the calendar year 1990.
However, not all respondents were able to do so and a number of them gave figures for exports during their company's financial year.
The majority of financial years specified ended on 31 March 1991.
For convenience, and to enable comparisons to be made with other Scottish economic statistics and UK export statistics, the estimates presented in this report are shown as calendar year values, although they are in fact a compromise between calendar year and financial year values.
Scottish Export Performance
Table 1 shows the overall performance of Scottish exports in the last three years expressed in both current and constant [1985]prices.
The values recorded for 1990 indicate that manufactured exports rose in value to £8.574 billion, continuing the steady rise in the value of exports since 1987.
This represents a growth of 11.9% on the 1989 figures expressed in current values, but even more importantly reflects a 7.6% growth in real terms after taking account of price movements.
Table 1 also indicates a return to the pattern witnessed in 1987 and 1988 with the performance of Scottish exports bettering that of the UK as a whole.
UK exports rose 6.1% in real terms in 1990 compared to a 7.6% increase in Scottish exports.
This result conforms to the trend established in previous surveys which shows that Scottish exports follow that of the UK but tend to do so in an exaggerated fashion.
Thus, when the UK figure rises the Scottish figure will also rise but at a higher rate and likewise decrease at a faster rate when the UK figure falls.
In real terms the 1989 figures saw the UK outperforming Scotland with a 9.1% increase in exports as opposed to only 1.6% in Scotland.
Thus the return to the previous pattern is particularly welcome and has helped Scotland to marginally improve its share of UK manufactured exports to 9.5% compared to the 1989 figure of 9.4%.
Industry by Industry Exports
Table 2 shows total Scottish manufactured exports subdivided into exports from the 21 SIC Classes.
It can be seen that while the overall picture regarding Scottish exports is good the performance of the different industries is mixed.
Once again the dominance of computers and whisky is very clearly illustrated.
The Office machinery and data processing sector accounted for £2.8 billion or 33% of Scotland's exports.
After a period of rapid growth in exports this sector is entering a more mature phase with 1990 exports rising a modest 8.5% over the 1989 figure.
The recent difficulties faced by this sector do not impact on this year's survey results but may well have an adverse effect on the 1991 figures.
The Food, drink and tobacco manufacturing sector has once more had an excellent year.
Whisky exports have increased 17% from £1.469 billion in 1989 to £1.712 billion in 1990.
Even more encouraging is the performance of Scotland's other food and drink exporters whose exports have increased from £224.7 million last year to £278.9 million this year, a rise of 24%.
This sector as a whole now accounts for 23% of Scottish manufactured exports, with whisky alone representing 20%.
Taken together the Food/drink and Office machinery sectors account for 56% of Scotland's exports.
Despite good performances from both sectors, this share has not increased from last year which reflects some positive performances from other key sectors.
In particular the Chemicals, Paper, Electronics and Transport equipment industries all reported good results.
Industry by Industry Exports
As figure 1 illustrates the Chemicals sector now represents 10% of total exports and has shown a 15% increase from £722.9 million in 1989 to £833.3 million in 1990.
Comparisons with previous surveys show that despite a blip in 1988 this industry has shown steady growth over the last five years and is now firmly established as Scotland's third most important sector in terms of exports.
The Paper, printing and publishing sector recorded a 14% rise in 1990 to £255.5 million, whilst somewhat surprisingly the Electronics sector witnessed a 16% growth in exports.
Although many of the Electronics industry's difficulties post date the period covered by the survey it is still surprising to see a positive performance from this sector.
It may also seem unusual to report on 8% increase in exports of the metal manufacturing sector bearing in mind the rundown of British Steel's activities in Scotland.
However, most of the production capacity was still in place during the 1990/91 period covered by the survey and in any case the majority of production was destined for the home market.
Mechanical engineering continued to perform well with a 12% rise in the value of exports to £599.4 million.
The most encouraging increase of all comes from the Transport equipment sector which has seen exports rise 38% to £223.6 million.
However, this is not unusual for this industry due to the long lead times involved and in fact only represents a recovery to 1988 levels.
The difficulties faced by the Textile and Clothing industries have been widely reported and the 1990 export figures reinforce the picture of decline.
The Textile industry has undergone a 5% fall in exports compared with 1989 and the Footwear and clothing industry has suffered an even larger decline of 13% in the value of its exports.
Recent problems relating to European import quota abuse by Chinese producers of cashmere have undoubtedly added to the industry's problems.
In general, the picture is a positive one with many industries witnessing a growth in exports.
It is obvious, however, that the picture is patchy and that those industries which are dominated by smaller firms, such as the clothing and timber industries, are suffering most in the current recession.
The Destination of Scottish Exports
The results in Table 3 reinforce the continued dominance of Western Europe in Scotland's export markets.
Exports to Germany have risen 18% to £1.2 billion and it has consolidated its position as Scotland's top export market.
France remains the second most important market with the United States again third.
It should be noted that the Netherlands continues to become more important as an outlet for Scottish manufactured goods and now ranks as the fourth largest market having overtaken Italy.
As illustrated in figure 2A these top five markets take a 55% share of total manufactured exports.
A number of other important trends emerge from Table 3.
It can be seen that the ‘developing’ European nations of Spain, Portugal and Greece are continuing to attract an increased volume of Scottish exports whilst the Commonwealth countries continue their recent decline in importance.
Japan now ranks as Scotland's seventh top market which exports in 1990 rising by 14% to £331 million.
This includes an 18% rise in the value of whisky exports up to £177.6 million.
The changes in Eastern Europe were recognised in last year's survey to be of long term importance only.
This year's results tend to reinforce that view with exports to the former Eastern bloc remaining of limited significance at £82 million or less than 1% of the total.
Indeed, the Soviet Union continues to decline sharply in importance.
In 1985 the USSR was Scotland's 16th top export market accounting for £65m worth of exports.
In 1990 the level of manufactured exports destined for the Soviet Union has fallen to such an extent that it no longer features in Scotland's Top 40 markets.
Exports to China have slipped down to the 1987 levels after an artificial high in 1988 caused by the coincidence of a number of major orders.
However, it can be assumed that the political difficulties experienced within China over recent years continue to act as a barrier to any possible growth.
It should be noted that Whisky exports are almost entirely responsible for the appearance of some of the smaller [particularly Latin American and Caribbean]markets in the Top 40 list.
The Destination of Scottish Exports
Figure 2B illustrates the trend over the last five years of Scotland's top five markets.
While the top five destinations have remained unaltered it can be seen that the United States is attracting a steadily declining share of Scottish products.
Germany and France show a gradual rise in their performance, overtaking the United States in 1988 and consolidating that position since.
Italy remains fairly static but the most striking growth shows the rise in importance of the Netherlands.
The Destination of Scottish Exports
The breakdown by geographical region in Table 4 further emphasises the increasing importance of Western Europe to Scotland's exporters.
The EC and EFTA countries account for 70% of Scotland's exports compared with 68% in last year's survey.
Part of the reason for this is illustrated in figure 3 which shows the high proportion of Office machinery and data processing exports destined for Europe.
Whereas last year 90% of exports from this sector went to Europe the 1990 figure is 92%.
The recent announcement of a link up between the EC and EFTA to create a European Economic Area [EEA]by 1993 is likely to have little immediate impact on the proportion of exports destined for these areas, partly because privileged access to each others markets has already been in existence for a number of years between the two trading blocks.
Small and Large Companies
The figures in Table 5 were derived by estimating separately for small companies [i.e. those with up to 200 employees]and large companies [i.e. 200 plus employees].
This enables the relative contributions of small and large companies to be assessed.
It should be noted here that the figures in the table for Food, drink and tobacco industries exclude whisky.
Small companies improved their share of manufactured exports to 15.3% in 1990 compared with 15.
O% in 1989.
Exporting activity in most sectors is dominated by the larger companies and this is particularly true of the Office machinery and data processing sector where the predominance of multinationals leads to large companies representing 98.7% of all exports in this sector.
Most sectors show a rise in exports in both the large and small company categories.
However, it is interesting to note that in four of the sectors where small company exports dominate, exports have actually decreased from the 1989 levels.
The four concerned are the clothing, leather, timber and mineral extraction industries which show an average 23% decline in the value of exports.
The Employment Effects of Exports
Table 6 seeks to estimate the number of jobs generated by export activity in different manufacturing industries.
The table suggests that, in all industries other than whisky, a total of 83,215 jobs were sustained by exports in 1990.
It is probable that about a further 10,000 jobs are generated by whisky exports, giving an estimate of approximately 93,215 jobs generated by all Scottish manufactured exports.
The figures give an idea of the industries that are most geared towards exporting.
It can be seen that the Office machinery and data processing sector is particularly export orientated with an average 79% of turnover being aimed at overseas markets.
Other industries that devote a high percentage of turnover to export include Chemicals, Instrument engineering and the Non-metallic minerals sector.
Although not quite so export orientated, the Electronics sector sustains the greatest number of jobs through its exports followed by the Mechanical engineering industries.
Exporting to Japan
Each year the Export Survey questionnaire is designed to obtain further information on a particular subject.
The subject under scrutiny in the 1990/91 survey was exporting to Japan and in particular the barriers that companies felt they faced in either entering the Japanese market or expanding their level of existing business.
This subject was considered timely to investigate due to the Scottish Council's current level of involvement with Japan.
In addition to organising two trade missions a year to Japan, this also currently includes the services and resultant programme of a Senior Trade Adviser, seconded to the Council by the Japan External Trade Organisation [JETRO].
Companies were asked whether or not they were already selling to the Japanese market.
Of those which responded, 39% indicated they were already doing business in the market with the remaining 61% not involved.
52% of non-exporters to Japan indicated that they were interested in investigating the potential for their firms.
Combined with the number of companies already doing business in Japan, 71% of Scotland's exporters either already trade with Japan or would actively like to do so.
This high figure is borne out earlier in this report by the rise of Japan to the 7th top destination for Scotland's exports.
A final question was asked about the barriers that had prevented companies exporting to Japan or that had inhibited them from improving performance.
The two most common difficulties cited were the complexities of the Japanese distribution system which was mentioned by 27% of respondents and price competitiveness which was listed by 22%.
Language was mentioned by 19% and cultural barriers by 12%.
It is to be hoped that the continued development of training provision in these last two non-tariff areas can have a positive effect on lowering perceived barriers.
A final interesting point to come out of the survey was that considering the importance the Japanese place on the quality and design of products, only 6% of respondents considered these to be a barrier to their performance.
Regional Analysis of Manufactured Exports
For the first time, in last year's survey, an analysis of Scotland's exports by specific geographic region was undertaken.
This exercise proved useful and has been repeated for the 1990/91 survey.
Separate reports have been produced for Grampian and Tayside and are available from SCDI on request.
The following regional data excludes the Highlands and Islands figures because the 1990/91 survey for this region was undertaken using a different methodology which was designed to reflect the unique nature of the area's economy.
The result of this is that a direct comparison with the other regional data is not possible.
A full report on the Highlands and Islands Export Survey is available from SCDI and indicates a value in excess of £100m worth of manufactured exports from the region.
This figure excludes whisky.
On the next page Table 7 an Figure 4 summarises the exporting performance from industry sectors within Grampian and Tayside and provides a comparison with last year's results.
Regional Analysis of Manufactured Exports
It is recognised that whisky sales are a major factor in the value of Scottish exports but their impact on exports from Grampian is particularly significant.
The Council; s regional surveys did not directly include whisky distilleries, for a variety of reasons.
First, export information on the whisky industry is already published by the Scotch Whisky Association.
Second, it is virtually impossible to determine exactly how much Grampian produced whisky is exported because much of it is blended and/or bottled elsewhere.
The importance of the Textiles and Food and drink sectors is common to both areas.
However, compared with the 1989 figures it can be seen that these industries are not without their difficulties.
Taking both sectors together, in 1989 they represented 34% of Grampian exports and 34% of Tayside exports.
This compares with the 1990 figures of 26% in Grampian and 29% in Tayside.
These results are perhaps not surprising considering the well documented difficulties of the textile industry allied to the quota restrictions on the fishing industry.
The knock on effect of the latter throughout the fish processing sector explains the relatively depressed performance in the Food and drink sector.
Other points to note from the Grampian survey include the continued strong performance of the Mechanical engineering sector with a 13% rise in exports over the 1989 level.
Even more impressive results were reported in the Paper and printing industries with a 26% rise in the value of exports to £105 million, making it the top exporting sector in the region.
In Tayside, impressive growth has been reported by the Office machinery and data processing sector with a 34% rise in the value of exports to £131 million.
Mechanical engineering also recorded good results with exports rising 16% to over £32 million.
It should be stressed that the figures given are for manufactures only and do not include exports of primary products or raw materials.
The contribution of the primary sector is likely to be of greater relative importance in these regions than in Scotland as a whole.
This should be borne in mind when assessing the contribution of the regions to Scotland; s exports.
Methodology
All manufacturing companies in Scotland registered as exporters in the Scottish Council's ‘Scottish Production Industries Register’[SPIR]were asked to complete a questionnaire about their exports.
In addition, several hundred companies known to the Scottish Council, but whose status as exporters was not clear, were also contacted.
In all, more than 650 companies returned and completed the questionnaire.
Using the employment information contained in SPIR and in the responses, and from a telephone survey on the exporting status of non-respondents, it was possible to estimate the overall employment in all exporting companies in Scotland.
This was done industry by industry [at SIC Class level]and separately for large and small companies.
The employment figures of respondents who were actually active exporters were then used to derive the survey coverage rates.
These were in turn used to gross up the export values declared by respondents to estimates of exports for all exporters in Scotland.
The grossing-up procedure was carried out at SIC Class level, separately for large and small companies.
The separate estimates for large and small companies were then added together to provide the figures shown in Table 2 of this report.
In Table 1 of the UK export figures were taken from Government statistics published in Business Monitor [MQ10].
Current price exports were converted to constant prices using the Producer Price Index [output price for home sales], as the most suitable price deflator.
FINANCING EXPORTS: A REVIEW OF THE FACILITIES AVAILABLE
INTRODUCTION
The financing of export contracts can be difficult and risky for all involved in international trade but especially for the less experienced.
It is also the area of greatest concern to companies contemplating exporting for the first time of those considering a significant expansion of their overseas activities.
This review attempts to catalogue the mechanisms available to such firms in their efforts to reduce risk, ensure payment and secure adequate finance.
It does not provide a comprehensive explanation of every facility offered but rather gives a brief introduction to the most commonly used methods involved in the financial side of exporting.
By using clear and succinct language, the review aims to remove the mystique which surrounds many of these terms and thus to aid discussion between exporters and their professional advisers and to show that a working familiarity is open to all.
The review is written in two sections — Invoicing the Buyer/Ensuring Payment and Raising the finance.
Further information on any of the items mentioned may be obtained from the contacts and the bibliography given at the end of the review.
PART ONE: INVOICING THE BUYER/ENSURING PAYMENT
When an enquiry has been received which may lead to an export contract, what options are available for securing payment from the overseas buyer?
1
OPEN ACCOUNT TRADING
The simplest course of action for an exporter to follow is to raise an invoice, in the usual manner, on the overseas buyer; this is known as ‘open account’ trading.
It does not ensure that the buyer will acknowledge the debt or indeed settle the invoice when due and therefore demands a great deal of trust between both parties.
2
BILLS OF EXCHANGE
A Bill of Exchange is a legally recognised document for which there are many financing mechanisms and uses.
A definition of a bill of exchange and a specimen are shown at Appendix 1.
The bill of exchange and the similar promissory note are documents recording the debt of the buyer and the time by which payment is due.
At the time of invoicing, by drawing a bill on his overseas buyer which is payable say ‘90 days from sight’ an exporter will have an acknowledgement of the debt by obtaining his buyer's acceptance of the bill.
This acknowledgement of the debt [normally by signing on the face of the bill]gives the exporter more peace of mind as opposed to selling on open account terms, although there is still no guarantee of payment.
Additional guarantees of payment can be obtained when the bill of exchange or promissory note is used in conjunction with a letter of credit or supporting bank guarantee.
In these latter cases, the guaranteed payment against the countersigned bill of exchange is made by reference to a measurable and external act such as, for example , completion and authentication of shipping documents.
3
DOCUMENTARY COLLECTIONS
As an alternative means of adding security, the bill[s] of exchange may be sent with shipping documents — the buyer only obtains title to the goods once the bill[s] have been accepted for payment at a future date [or, if the bill is payable ‘at sight’, when payment has been made].
As for the comments on the guaranteeing role of banks and letters of credit in paragraph 2 above, this documentary collection system relies on further support in order to avoid recourse to the courts [perhaps in a foreign law in a foreign country]to rectify default on a documented payment obligations.
4
IRREVOCABLE LETTERS OF CREDIT/DOCUMENTARY CREDITS The buyer's bank opens a ‘credit’ in favour of the exporter allowing the exporter to draw against [receive payment from]the credit by submitting bills and/or shipping documents between pre-arranged dates.
Provided that all conditions of the credit are met, payment [which is guaranteed by the buyer's bank]will be made to the exporter.
Payment will be made in the manner specified in the letter of credit.
For additional security the exporter can request a Confirmed Irrevocable Letter of Credit where another bank, say, in the UK will ‘confirm’ the credit and thereby assume the payment risk.
This method of securing payment — especially when coupled with credit insurance [see paragraph 7 below]— provides the safest and most widely used system for international payments for major trading transactions.
5
FORWARD FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS
A transaction may be more attractive to a foreign buyer if the invoice is expressed in the currency of the buyer's country.
Where an exporter sells abroad in a foreign currency, a ‘forward contract’ between the exporter and his bank will fix the rate at which the foreign currency will be converted when it is received in the UK.
This enables the exporter to price the contract to reflect the amount of Sterling he expects to receive.
Forward contracts are relatively easy to arrange, although the exporter is committed to supplying the currency agreed to the bank even if the export deal is cancelled or payment is not received within the forward contract period.
To avoid commitments to currency trading risks against deals that are not concluded — when for example the buyer wants a local currency price but seeks a three month validity to the offer — the exporter may offer to fix in local currency at the Forward Rate of Exchange ruling at the date that the contract becomes effective and irrevocable.
Currency exchange contracts should only be entered into when receipt of the foreign currency is highly certain.
6
CURRENCY OPTIONS
These confer the right — but not the obligation — to buy or sell the foreign currency required at a pre-determined rate.
This flexibility allows the exporter to let the option lapse if the order falls through or if exchange rate movements allow him to deal more advantageously on the spot market.
However, this is not a commonly used facility and is not recommended to the inexperienced.
Many banks will only handle large amounts for each deal.
Like all options on any commodity market, currency options involve payment of an irrevocable fee in advance.
7
CREDIT INSURANCE
Credit insurers such as ECGD [the Government's Export Credits Guarantee Department]and Trade Indemnity PLC offer a means of insuring against the risks of non-payment.
The level of premium charged will depend on the payment terms, the buyer involved and the payment risks associated with the buyer's country.
There are two basic categories of risk which can be covered.
These are:—
i
Buyer Risks which include insolvency of the buyer; failure to pay within six months of the due date; and refusal to accept goods which comply with the contract.
ii
Country or Political Risks which include difficulties and delays in transferring money from the buyer's country; action of the buyer's government which prevents performance of the contract; political or economic events which prevent or delay payment; and failure or refusal to fulfil any terms of the contract by a public sector buyer.
Cover may also be arranged to protect against losses during the manufacturing period and is available for certain types of services as well as manufactured goods.
The level of cover is usually 90% for buyer risk and 90 — 95% for political risk.
8
COUNTERTRADE
Countertrade [compensation trade or barter]in its simplest form is a payment method which is useful where currency restrictions in a buyer's country prevent the remittance of ‘hard currency’ abroad.
The main types of transactions are:—
i
In Counterpurchase , the buyer agrees to purchase on normal commercial terms, including making foreign exchange available.
In return, the supplier agrees to, or may assign his obligations to, buy goods or technology of equivalent value, from the purchaser or the purchaser's country or state.
ii
Buy Back is normally used in capital projects where the exporter is supplying part or all of a project and is paid by agreeing to take back part of the output from the manufacturing plant either for his own use or for onward sale.
iii
Offset is similar to Counterpurchase.
It is mainly related to defence projects and most commonly commits the supplier to place a proportion of the sub-contracts with companies in the buyer's country.
Offset is usually a government to government agreement.
iv
Switch Trading is where a third party or country becomes involved in a countertrade deal.
Trade credits or deficits accrued between countries A & B are used by country C or C & D [complex switches are possible]to effect a multi-national balancing of payments.
This is not a system for the novice exporter!
Banks, and in particular the merchant banks, will look at ways to arrange such transactions by finding an outlet for the goods offered by the exporter's buyer.
There are many risks associated with countertrade deals and they may require considerable flexibility on the part of the exporter.
PART TWO: RAISING THE FINANCE
In international trade, short term finance is considered to cover a period of up to 6 months from the date of invoice or shipment and can therefore be considerably longer than the 30, 60 or 90 days credit extended to buyers in the home market.
Whereas in the home market sales and production are likely to be financed from existing working capital, the extended period of credit which is possible in the export trade may necessitate additional forms of finance.
1
BANK OVERDRAFT
This is perhaps the simplest and most flexible means of raising finance.
However, it is always repayable on demand and due to the fluctuating interest rate, costs may be difficult to assess over longer periods.
If the contract is to be invoiced in foreign currency, it may be beneficial for the exporter to arrange a currency overdraft.
The existence of a Letter of Credit which effectively guarantees payment [see 1.4 above]will assist the bank when considering a request for finance.
2
DISCOUNTING
An exporter may obtain payment on an accepted bill of exchange before its due date by presenting the bill to his bank.
Provided that the bank is satisfied with the payment risks involved in the transaction, the bank will advance an amount derived from the face value of the bill less an agreed discount.
In most cases should the buyer refuse to pay, the bank has recourse against the exporter for losses incurred.
3
FORFAITING
This is another form of discounting which has traditionally [although not exclusively]been used mainly for large contracts with payment terms greater than 180 days.
Forfaiting involves a contract between the exporter and the forfaiter [probably a subsidiary of a major bank]to purchase accepted bills at an agreed discount at future dates, in normal circumstances without recourse to the exporter.
The forfaiter will then undertake collection of the proceeds of the bill at maturity.
Because the bills are the forfaiter's only security, the bills will require to be endorsed or otherwise guaranteed by an acceptable bank, unless the buyer is of undoubted financial standing.
The main advantage of forfaiting is that it offers 100% finance.
4
ECGD — LONG TERM CREDIT
ECGD does not lend money to companies but does offer a number of schemes to banks to allow them to finance exports at interest rates which are often significantly below prevailing market rates.
The main types of ECGD backed credits are:—
i
ECGD General Purpose Line of Credit — a line of credit is made available to a particular country through a UK bank.
An exporter would approach the UK bank concerned for details and then apply to have their contracts financed through the line of credit.
The credit terms are already agreed.
ii
ECGD Supplier Credit — the Bank lends to the exporter to finance the manufacture and shipment of goods to cover the credit period until payment is received.
The credit period is at least 2 years.
iii
ECGD Buyer Credit — this is not very useful for one-off small orders.
A loan of up to 85% of the contract value is offered to the buyer who repays the loan over several years having paid the exporter in full.
All of the above are guaranteed by ECGD.
ECGD's schemes are often suited to larger contracts and may take time to put in place.
However, they can be a useful ‘selling tool’ when dealing in particular with poorer countries who are granted cheaper borrowing rates than, say, countries in Western Europe.
5
SHORT TERM EXPORT FINANCE SCHEMES
Operating in conjunction with the bank's or the exporter's ECGD Insurance Policy [which insures against the normal risks of non-payment], these schemes offer a limited recourse debt purchase/goods purchase facility where the terms of payment are not greater than 180 days.
The exporter presents the required export documents to his bank and receives immediate payment from the bank of up to 100% of invoice value.
The bank then undertakes to collect payment from the buyer once the debt falls due for payment.
If the debt is unpaid at maturity the bank will in most cases only seek recourse to the exporter if non-payment is due to a contractual dispute.
Interest is normally payable at a rate which is linked to the bank's base lending rate.
6
FACTORING
Several specialist companies [often subsidiaries of clearing banks]offer a factoring service whereby the exporter is offered finance against book debts/receivables.
The factoring company will undertake the collection of the debt in due course.
Factoring is useful in that it relieves a company of the administrative burden of collecting book debt although it can be expensive.
7
LEASING
This can be an attractive, cost-effective method for an overseas buyer to finance the acquisition of goods, usually larger items of capital equipment.
A leasing company or finance house will purchase the goods from the exporter and the buyer will then obtain the goods under a lease agreement from the leasing company which can be in the buyer's own country or in the UK.
Specialist Countertrade dealers operate as part of the City of London financial services range.
APPENDIX 1
BILL OF EXCHANGE
Definition
‘An unconditional order in writing, addressed by one person* to another, signed by the person giving it, requiring the person to whom it is addressed to pay on demand or at a fixed or determinable future time a sum certain in money to, or to the order of, a specified person, or to order’.
The Bills of Exchange Act, 1982.
* i.e. legal entity 
The following is a specimen layout for a typical bill of exchange although there are many different styles of exchange which can satisfy the definition given above.
NOTES
1
At Sight or at 90 days from sight etc.
2
Normally this sole bill of exchange although it can be this first or second bill of exchange if two bills are raised for the same debt.
3
Where the words first or second are entered at [2]above, insert [second being unpaid ]or [first being unpaid ]respectively.
This first and second method of raising bills of exchange is used where the exporter wishes to raise two bills of exchange for the same debt — this has uses if payment is refused on the first bill or indeed if one bill is lost in the post.
4
Name or drawer of bill, ie. the exporter, followed by the amount in words specifying clearly the currency of the bill.
eg. Pounds Sterling .
The amount in figures may also be added.
N.B. The buyer's acceptance is added normally to the face of the bill, eg. Accepted followed by the signature of the buyer [drawee].