

‘THE DISMISSAL WAS UNFAIR’
On 1st July, 1991, Mr. Frank Holden, Manager of Bank of Ireland, Potato Market Branch, in Carlow was dismissed without notice.
THE LONG ROAD BACK
Over the months that followed, the Association supported Mr. Holden in his quest for re-instatement to his former position in the Bank and the vindication of his reputation.
Lengthy representations, submissions and discussions followed but by the end of 1991 the agreed negotiation procedures had been exhausted without success.
THE TRIBUNAL
Mr. Holden's case was then referred to the Employment Appeals Tribunal, an independent body established under the Unfair Dismissals Act.
At the outset the Bank insisted that the case be heard in private in order to protect client confidentiality.
In order to maintain that client confidentiality this article will not deal with any of the core issues in the case, but I will highlight a number of the relevant points which are a matter of public record arising from the publication of the Tribunal decision.
It is fair to say that this case probably resulted in one of the most important landmark decisions in the history of relations between the Association and the Banks.
Over the months of March and April, 1992, four full days were utilised in taking evidence and submissions on behalf of the claimant (Mr. Holden) and the respondent (Bank of Ireland).
THE DECISION
The Employment Appeals Tribunal gave meticulous consideration to all the evidence and submissions before it.
It took four months to reach its decision which issued on 11th September 1992.
The unanimous decision of the Tribunal was that the dismissal was unfair.
The Tribunal is composed of an Independent Chairman, an Employer Nominee and a Worker Nominee.
The Employer Nominee, while supporting the decision that the dismissal was unfair, recommended that Mr. Holden be re-engaged on suitable functions within the Bank with effect from 28th April, 1992.
THE MAJORITY DECISION
The majority decision of the Tribunal was that Mr. Holden should be reinstated fully in his former position in Potato Market Branch, in Carlow, as Manager, effective from the 1st July, 1991.
This was especially important for a number of reasons and these can be best explained by quoting the rationale given in the majority decision of the Tribunal.
In coming to its decision the Tribunal bore in mind the following and I quote:
‘
1
In the normal course employment in the main clearing Banks is a lifetime career.
2
It is widely believed among the general public that dismissal of a Bank Official is rare and is usually associated with some act of dishonesty.
3
By dismissing him the Respondent left a cloud over his honesty which can be removed only by full vindication in respect of that.
4
It is essential for his reputation that he again walk as Manager into the Branch which he managed as if he had never been dismissed.
5
We are unhappy about the way in which the Respondent presented its case in a number of respects.’
Those words of the Tribunal summarise the philosophy of Frank Holden and the Association in their pursuit of justice in this case.
THE BANK REACTION
How often have we heard the Association lashed by the Banks for our alleged failure to accept Independent Third Party decisions?
On this occasion the Bank of Ireland refused to accept this Independent Third Party decision and has now appealed the case to the Circuit Court.
A date has now been set for a Circuit Court Hearing in June of 1993,almost two years since the date of his dismissal .
GOLIATH
This Appeal by the Bank, in itself, is unjust.
Frank Holden has earned no income from the Bank for the best part of two years.
He has undertaken huge legal costs.
The Bank has limitless resources and is utilising those resources to crush a man who has won justice from the Employment Appeals Tribunal.
APPEAL
The Association, today, launches an appeal on behalf of Frank Holden.
Unless he gets the financial support of his colleagues, the Bank may succeed in breaking this man.
His success will be of immense importance to each and every Bank Official in the future.
Can I appeal, in the strongest possible terms, to each and every member to make any contribution, large or small, to the FRANK HOLDEN DEFENCE FUND.
Please use the form contained elsewhere in this ‘Newsheet’ and return it straight away to ‘93’.
Remember Frank Holden's defence is in the interest of every member of IBOA.
CIARAN RYAN GENERAL SECRETARY.
IN THIS ISSUE
‘THE DISMISSAL WAS UNFAIR’ The story of Frank Holden, unfairly dismissed by Bank of Ireland 1
COMMENT On Job Losses and on Frank Holden 3
COMPETITIONS Crossword Puzzle 4 Children's Word Puzzle 4
IBOA PENSIONERS' COMMITTEE Nominees for 1993/95 Committee 4
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE Notes on current industrial relations issues 5
AUTOCOVER I.B.O.A. Car Insurance Scheme 6/7
UNEMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITY BENEFITS AND PART-TIME WORKERS 7
FRANCIS WOODLEY PEARD An obituary 7
CUSTOMER CARE Peter Edwards makes practical suggestions on customer care in banking 8
IBOA WHO's WHO Profiles of six Executive Committee Members 9
IBOA SPORTS AND SOCIAL forthcoming Dublin Party 10 Draw Results 10 Limerick Bowling 10 Bowling Final 11 Irish Bankers' Club 11
BIENNIAL DISTRICT MEETINGS List of dates and venues 12
COMMENT
JOB LOSSES
Newspaper reports on 12th March that the Bank of Ireland is to shed 600 of its staff over the coming years could not come at a worse time for the economy.
It is interesting that the Bank of Ireland spokesman who gave that figure should have been specific, as members will be aware that many figures have been rumoured over the past couple of months.
While it is incumbent upon Bank Management to ensure that they operate profitably to secure profits for expansion, payment to staff and also payment to shareholders, it is also incumbent upon them to display an allegiance to the economy in which they make their profits.
The best manner of displaying that allegiance, nowadays, is to retain jobs and, indeed, create jobs as they would be well capable of at this present time.
The profitability of Irish banks is good, no-one can deny that fact.
One has just to look at recent results from a number of the Banks to get an idea of the vast profits being made.
One can certainly understand a company in dire financial straits seeking cost cutting, but it is very hard to explain why the Banks should be embarking on this trend now.
One of the reasons being put forward is that they are jumping on a bandwagon which unfortunately is worldwide.
The argument for the Banks employing new staff is indeed great.
They are great upholders of the Programme for Economic and Social Progress, part of which puts an onus on employers to create jobs.
They also accept Labour Court Recommendation 13601, part of which dealt with the recruitment of staff to cover for Extended Opening Hours.
The Banks indicated to the Labour Court, at that stage, that the numbers required for this task would be approximately 700 but despite the fact that full Extended Opening Hours are now in place, the figure actually employed by the Banks falls very far short of that number.
The IBOA will, of course, be tackling this particular problem in discussions with the Banks over the coming months.
A spokesman for the Banking Industry has denied that there are about to be any job losses and it is hoped that that statement is correct.
It would also be preferable that the Bank of Ireland would discuss the situation with IBOA as the representative of the majority of their staff.
INJUSTICE
Our front page article, this month, graphically describes the length to which a Bank will go to impose its ‘justice’ on individuals.
Mr. Holden is lucky on two counts.
Firstly, he is a strong willed, capable and determined person — all qualities which have been well tested over the past year and a half.
Secondly, he is a member of the Irish Bank Officials' Association and at the Special Delegate Conference, in the Mansion House, Dublin on 13th March, a Resolution was passed calling on all members to support Frank Holden in his quest for justice.
That support will undoubtedly be forthcoming for while it is Frank Holden today, who knows, into the future, who will be put into a similar predicament if the Bank is allowed to get away with its present unreasonable stance.
We wish Mr. Holden well in the coming months and assure him and his family of the continued support of IBOA.
STAFF CHANGES SUPPLEMENT
The Staff Changes Supplement accompanying this issue of the Newsheet is distributed on the basis of one per branch representative who holds it available for inspection by all members.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE
BANK OF IRELAND — BRITAIN
Voluntary Redundancy/Early Retirement
It has come to the attention of the IBOA that there may be pressure put on members to accept a Voluntary Redundancy or Early Retirement Package in the near future.
Such packages have never been the subject of discussion with IBOA and members are advised of the dangers of individual negotiations on these very important issues.
Any member who is approached should immediately contact ‘93’ to discuss the matter.
POOL CASHES — NATIONAL IRISH BANK
Recent memoranda from Regional Managers requesting the recording of errors which occur in Pool Cashes are completely at variance with agreements in respect of Pool Cashes.
On contacting Head of Personnel, the matter has been clarified and the instructions from Regional Managers are to be ignored.
LONG TERM TEMPORARY STAFF AIB NORTHERN IRELAND
The Bank has agreed to meet with the IBOA to discuss the plight of officials in the above category.
The Bank states that there is no attempt to undermine existing agreement and that its proposals can be viewed as a reasonable basis to provide permanent employment for all members in the long term temporary staff category.
When discussions have been finalised, members involved will be contacted.
NORTHERN BANK INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The Bank has informed the IBOA that a separate Information Technology Group for Ireland will be set up, based in Belfast.
It will cover both National Irish Bank and Northern Bank.
The Bank confirms that there will be no rationalisation required nor redundancies demanded.
Structures are to be advised to the IBOA prior to implementation and members are requested to contact their local Executive Committee member if there are any further issues of concern.
SALARIES AIB BRITAIN
Following failure to make any progress at conciliation on the above issue, the matter was referred to Third Party Mediation.
This Mediation meeting will take place on 24th March 1993.
Members will be conscious of the fact that results for the Bank in Britain were substantially better than those predicted earlier and, of course, this will have a bearing on the outcome of discussions.
BANK OF IRELAND ASSISTANT MANAGERS AND OFFICERS
Following consultation with Assistant Managers and Officer members in Bank of Ireland throughout the country in respect of the rumoured implementation of Performance Related Pay, it was agreed that the Bank be contacted for the purpose of elaborating on the views as expressed by the members at those meetings.
The meetings emphatically rejected implementation of such a scheme on an individual one-to-one basis but agreed that a way forward should be collectively examined.
The Bank has been written to on the 5th February 1993 seeking a meeting for this purpose.
AIB/FIRST TRUST BANK
Following the issuing of the Tribunal Recommendations on the outstanding merger issues, a meeting was sought with the Bank to clarify its understanding of a number of the recommendations.
This meeting has now been arranged for 11th March at which a number of matters that have also been brought up at the various members' meetings will be queried.
Members will be advised of the outcome of this meeting.
BANK OF IRELAND NORTHERN IRELAND
A domestic meeting between the IBOA and the Bank of Ireland in Northern Ireland took place on 1st March last.
A number of items were discussed and these included Plan for Improved Competitiveness, Security, Temporary Staff, Branch Structures, Lifetime and Bank Assistant Pensions.
In relation to the PIC situation, it was felt that this is now an appropriate time to review the overall outcome of the introduction of this package.
The Bank is to give all the necessary details in relation to PIC Northern Ireland.
The Bank gave details of District Centres which will have an effect on the Branch structure in Northern Ireland and these will be discussed by the Bank of Ireland Executive Committee in due course.
The important issue of Security was discussed and it was agreed that an early meeting with the Bank should be held to discuss all aspects in relation to this sensitive issue.
Members in Bank of Ireland should be advised that these discussions are also taking place in the other Banks.
The Bank stated that it will have proposals to put to the IBOA in relation to pension arrangements for Bank Assistants in the near future.
The IBOA is very conscious of the fact that this issue has been outstanding for a considerable length of time and it is hoped that the proposals will pave the way for a speedy resolution to the problem.
Many members, from all Banks, feel that the Banks' temporary staff numbers are not within the agreed limits.
The Bank of Ireland has confirmed that it is adhering to the agreements and has promised to provide the numbers employed to IBOA.
NORTHERN IRELAND SALARIES
A meeting took place on 3rd March between the Banks and IBOA.
Our claim is for 7% salary increase for the 12 months from 1st March but the Banks pointed out that inflation was running at only 1.7%.
As no progress could be made at that meeting, it was agreed that the matter should be brought to the next stage of procedures which is Joint Industrial Council.
The Banks have also agreed to give the IBOA information on staff and payroll costs at an early date.
BANK OF IRELAND DOMESTIC MEETING 22nd FEB. 1993
At a meeting with the Bank of Ireland on the above date, a number of issues were discussed which included Job Sharing.
The Bank is considering the view of the IBOA to their proposals on Job Sharing and will revert back at an early date.
Other issues discussed included Extended Opening Hours, Health and Safety, Cash Pilot Schemes and Job Security.
In relation to appraisals, it must again be pointed out to members that the completion of numeric targets is purely on a voluntary basis.
AUTOCOVER
IBOA Car Insurance Scheme
Autocover, our Motor Insurance Scheme has been in operation now for over eleven years.
For each of these eleven years our members have enjoyed the good value offered by Autocover in price and cover.
The immediate success of Autocover when it started in 1982 clearly demonstrated just how competitive the premiums were at that time.
The scheme was carefully structured and effectively managed from the outset and this together with the outstanding support of our members has ensured the continued success of Autocover over the years.
The continued competitiveness of Autocover is clearly demonstrated by the fact that 1,021 members arranged new Autocover policies during 1992.
Our members therefore continue to appreciate the good value of the scheme.
No rate increases on the Scheme were announced during 1992 and we are reasonably confident that no rate increase will take place during 1993 for members in the Republic of Ireland though a rate increase is likely for members in Northern Ireland and the UK.
FURTHER IMPROVEMENTS TO AUTOCOVER
Disabled Drivers
When Autocover was originally negotiated the objective was to establish a scheme to cover the widest spectrum of the membership possible but we had to accept that all Insurance Companies would insist on excluding certain categories.
One of the excluded categories related to members who suffered from diseases or disabilities.
We are now pleased to announce that this exclusion has been removed and all members who suffer from disabilities or diseases can now apply for insurance under the scheme.
It will be necessary for such members to produce a medical report from their own Doctor confirming their fitness to drive a car.
If there are any conditions imposed in the medical report or the licence such as the adaptation of the car then evidence that such conditions have been complied with will also be required.
Each individual case will be treated on its merits and special terms and premiums may be imposed in certain cases.
However, we are hopeful that in the vast majority of cases such members can be included in the Scheme at the normal rates.
We are particularly pleased to introduce this change as our members who are unfortunate enough to already suffer from such disabilities can well do without having further obstacles put in their way in seeking to arrange Motor Insurance.
We are also pleased to announce the introduction of the undernoted services free of charge to our Autocover policyholders:—
Free Safety Check
This free Safety check will be offered to any Autocover policyholder at the car Safety Centres of Church & General, an associated company of the scheme insurer, the Insurance Corporation of Ireland
This Safety Check will encompass
suspension and steering
brakes system
electrical equipment
head lights
tyres
The Car Safety Centres are managed by independent Motor Engineers and Assessors and the service is offered to members with the sole intention of identifying possible defects which may exist in cars, unknown to members, and thus preventing possible accidents and safeguarding members and their families from injury.
We emphasise that the service is managed by Motor Engineers and Assessors independent of the Insurance Company and no reports of these Safety Checks will be referred to your Insurance Company, so please do not refrain from availing of the service because of unfounded fears in this regard.
Free Registration Etching
Your registration number will be etched permanently on your car windows at the Car Safety Centres.
This has proven to be a strong deterrent against theft.
It is proposed that members will be issued with an inspection voucher with their renewal notices as and from the 1st May next.
When you receive the inspection voucher simply telephone the most convenient centre arrange an appointment at any time between 9.00a.m. –6.00p.m.
Monday to Friday.
Then complete the inspection voucher and bring this along with you to the Safety Centre.
OTHER ADVANTAGES OF AUTOCOVER
In addition to these improvements and the continuing competitive rates of Autocover it is timely to remind members of the other benefits of our own Motor Insurance Scheme which are summarised below:—
Replacement with a new car without making any deduction for depreciation if your car is written off or stolen within twelve months of purchase as new.
Personal Accident cover for £10,000 for each Policyholder and their spouse.
Legal Fees cover up to £1,500.
Medical Expenses cover up to £100.
A much smaller increase in premium where you loose your no claims bonus following an accident than with most other insurers.
Your full no claims bonus reinstated quicker under Auto-cover than with most other Insurance Companies.
Full Open Driving cover for drivers over 25 and under 70 years of age with a full licence for 12 months.
Members can avail of the competitive terms of Autocover from the time they become qualified to drive.
Members need have no worry about the continuity of Motor Insurance after they retire as Autocover insures members without any upper age limit.
Once again we recommend all our members to seek quotations in advance of their car policies falling due for renewal as otherwise you may be missing out on a very good bargain.
In particular it seems that members in the UK are not taking advantage of the scheme to the same extent as members in Northern Ireland or the Republic of Ireland.
We encourage all our members and particularly those in the UK not to let your renewal date go by without finding out how much you can save by availing of Autocover.
Simply ask your Branch Representative for the rating sheet appropriate to your age and circumstances or contact the Autocover Staff At Frank Glennon Limited who will be only too pleased to assist you.
In case you forget and you would like the Autocover staff at Frank Glennon Limited to give you a free quotation before your next renewal date please complete and return the coupon below.
Unemployment and Disability Benefits and Part-Time Workers
In April 1991, certain part-time workers started to pay full PRSI for the first time.
People who earn £25 a week or more must pay Class A PRSI.
The rules governing payment of UB and DB were changed in April 1991 to reflect the eligibility of part time workers but the Regulations to bring those new rules into effect were not made until the end of December 1992.
In order to qualify for UB, a person must
1
be unemployed
2
be aged under 66
3
be capable of working and available for work
4
have enough PRSI contributions
5
have sustained ‘a substantial loss of employment in any period of 6 consecutive days’
The first 4 of these have been in existence for a long time.
The fifth is the one that affects part time workers.
It was provided for in Section 28 of the Social Welfare Act 1992.
The Regulations (SI No. 448 of 1992) define what is meant by a ‘substantial loss of employment’.
If your normal working week prior to unemployment consisted of less than 4 days, then you must lose at least 1 day's employment in order to qualify for UB.
If your normal working week consisted of 4 or more days, then you must lose 2 days work in any period of 6 consecutive days in order to get UB.
In either case, your reckonable earnings must be reduced by the loss of employment.
If people lose employment for a day, they would normally lose a day's pay.
This provision is to cover the situation where a person works the same number of hours within, say 4 days, instead of 5.
In effect, there is no real loss of employment.
Of course, you only get UB for the days you are unemployed.
There is also a rule for UB that you may not qualify for UB unless you are unemployed for at least 3 days of the social welfare week.
so, if you normally work a five day week and lose a day's work you will not get UB for that day because you are not unemployed for 3 days of the social welfare week.
If you lose 2 days work you will qualify because there are 6 days in the social welfare week and you are now unemployed for 3 of them.
If you normally work 4 days a week and lose 1 day, you meet the requirements of the 3 out of 6 rule but you do not meet the requirements of ‘substantial loss of employment’.
‘Relate’, February 1993.
DEFENCE FUND
The Defence Fund was set up to assist members during the period of a strike or a lock-out.
Since the strike last year a large number of members have sought payment of the amount standing to their credit in the Fund.
the Executive Committee has now decided that no further claims on the Fund in respect of the 1992 Dispute will be entertained after 30th April 1993.
Members will, of course, continue to receive payment on retirement or resignation from the Bank.
FRANCIS WOODLEY PEARD
Frank Peard, the IBOA's oldest pensioner member, died on Sunday, 7th March 1993, in his 107th year.
Born on 1st February 1887, he commenced his banking career on 27th May 1909 when he entered the Bank of Ireland in Waterford on a salary of £60 per annum.
By October 1915 his salary had doubled to £120 per annum when he was appointed Cashier in Banagher.
Subsequent postings included Mountmellick, Listowel and Mountrath.
He joined the IBOA on 4th February 1935.
He was appointed Agent in Mountrath on 29th September 1938 on a salary of £490.
He was Agent in Castlebar, 1941–1946 and he served as Agent in Navan from 26th June 1946, when he was appointed on a salary of £640 per annum, until his retirement on his 65th birthday, 1st February 1952.
Frank was a stimulating conversationalist with up-to-date views on current topics.
He had a very clear recall of what are euphemistically called the ‘good old days’ in banking.
He was the recipient of a presentation from the Association on the occasion of the IBOA's 70th Anniversary in 1988.
Frank lived with his daughter, Mrs. Ivy Kelly.
We extend sympathy to his family.
All Banks are now going out of their way to be as professional as possible and as customer friendly as that professionalism will allow.
But, Peter Edwards asks, are we approaching a customer relationship from a strait-jacket that is seen to be contrived and without spontaneity?
CUSTOMER CARE
A few days ago an elderly gentleman came into a Dublin suburban office with a bouquet of flowers and presented it to a female staff member.
She could not believe it, not because she was not used to getting flowers from men [she and her charm could make men act on impulse], but she felt she had done nothing out of the ordinary to merit it.
It was one of those occasions that had everybody looking, both staff and the queue and it set a mood for the day — and, indeed, the week.
Customers who were not known to smile for years actually could not help making the odd comment to the cashiers.
Their faces lit up like a wintry sun at the event and everybody seemed suddenly happy.
Indeed the reaction was so good that it should be taken on board on a broader scale.
Every office in the country should be scheduled to receive flowers from charming old gentlemen at least once a week, and especially at busy times when carping is usually at fever pitch.
Look, at the favourable publicity it would generate!
If reputations are built by word of mouth [and they are]can you imagine the scene — BEWLEY'S — 11.30a.m.
Susan: ‘Well, Vera, I was down in the Bank this morning paying my ESB and you know what happened — an old gentleman came in with flowers for a member of the staff — it was lovely to see’.
Vera: ‘It's the other way around it should be going on; that's what I say’.
Susan: ‘Ah, no, Vera, it was a human touch, it made everybody smile.
The girl blushed like they used to in my day’.
Vera: ‘Gee, they must have done something right, so’.
Would it be far-fetched then to see Susan, if she were at home ringing up the Gay Byrne Radio Show to tell him what she saw?
No it would not.
If the event were duplicated over the whole country on a week on week basis you could multiply Susan and Vera's conversation many times over.
Look at the spin off there would be.
It could be worth many, many thousands of pounds in conventional advertising and at the same time gain that vital reputation of doing everything right.
(we do just don't have the reputation for it).
There is a notion abroad that if there is a response that is more or less uniformly nice it will suddenly transform the image of the industry for the better.
The idea seems to be that there is a training course that trains everybody in a certain response line.
So that an angry customer in Donegal will get exactly the same wording to calm him down as he would in Cork or Wexford.
That may be professionally cute but it will not have people talking up the industry in Bewley's.
It is, at best, a damage limitation exercise and, at worse, an angry customer encourages others when there is a public relations vacuum.
Staff in the Banking industry do not need to be programmed into how to handle a customer.
That goes without saying; for instance, that charming staff member in Dublin was only doing what she always did so well.
It was the customer himself who recognised professionalism when he saw it and responded accordingly.
Many, many, of course, recognise this and do not show their gratitude with gifts, much and all as the staff might greatly be surprised by it.
However, if it went on, on a grand scale, it might be regarded as benefit in kind and be taxed.
There is another question which arises from all this training; are the Banks ceasing to look upon staff as being capable of individual reaction to whatever difficulty they encounter?
There is a danger of making staff a bland set of people, unsure of their standing in anything without reference to a manual.
If that happens will there be a spark left to impress members of the public?
Would they then bring us flowers anymore?
The staff member who received the flowers on this occasion did what she did through pure interest and gut instinct.
It's something she would naturally do but it was not the job alone that spurred the gentleman to buy her flowers.
It was the way she communicated with him.
That was also natural, untainted by an ideology — just with a smile.
It could have turned the other way; in case you might think this was a simple transaction — it was not.
It was actually a problem.
Has everybody got it?
Training implies that they do not, yet nobody seems to be able to point to any deterioration in customer care.
So what is the ultimate goal?
It cannot be better public relations, so it must be a kind of code of conduct to steer you away from base instincts.
For Public Relations there must be two elements in the package, creativity and originality.
Flower vans should be mobilised countrywide and staff given the bouquets just when the queues are at their thickest.
They should preferably be presented by elderly gentlemen with a certain amount of grace and the recipient must blush; that is important.
Then watch all the eyes in the queue turn towards the exchange.
There is magnetism in romantic gestures that make you forget you've been standing in the same place for half the day, that there is not a child in the house washed and you never got flowers from your's truly.
The uplift of the scenario puts people in good form and, as already stated, softens the carping climate.
Most important of all it will become a conversation piece.
Our Susan and Vera saga in Bewley's is not that far-fetched and it replaces negative comment in many cases.
In other words the sorts of remarks they would be passing if they had not this to talk about.
Most important of all it's brilliant for staff morale.
There is no doubt the staff member who got those flowers in a Dublin suburban branch protested and blushed and her heart beat with embarrassment.
But her feet hit the stairs soundly as she went to put them in water.
She was so chuffed that the blush and the smile carried through lunchtime and well into the evening.
The teasing lasted into the following week.
They looked lovely on the mantelpiece in the flat but a new bouquet would not go astray at this stage.
IBOA WHO'S WHO
Executive Committee Members
DUBLIN LADIES' COMMITTEE
Glenna McKenna
Glenna has, since 1988, been one of the Dublin Ladies Committee's representatives on the Executive Committee.
She works at the National Irish Bank Cash Centre at 27 College Green.
She joined the Northern Bank at its Belfast Head Office and later worked in O'Connell Street and Bray.
Living in Bray, but originally from Kells, Glenna, who is single, is interested in drama, opera and the arts and is treasurer of the United Arts club.
BELFAST DISTRICT COMMITTEE N.I.
SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE
Tony Arnold
Tony has been one of the representatives of the Belfast District Committee on the Executive since 1981.
He has been an Honorary Officer since holding the position of Honorary Treasurer for a year in 1984/85 and since then he has been Northern Ireland Special Representative.
He has been a branch representative for many years since being elected to that role in Queen's Square.
He joined the Northern Bank at Queen's Square in 1965 and postings since then have included Drumshanbo, Waring Street, Antrim Road, Albertbridge Road and his present location, Donegall Square West.
Tony is married to Anna and they have five children.
He is interested in gardening, filming and all sports, especially equestrian events in which his daughter participates.
He lists as achievements playing rugby for Carrickfergus and Sligo 1st XV.
SLIGO AREA SECRETARY WOMEN'S SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE
Eileen O'Connor
Sligo Area Secretary since 1988, Eileen has been an Honorary Officer of the IBOA as Women's Special Representative since 1989.
She was first elected branch representative in 1978 and her first involvement at Area Council level was in 1981.
Presently working in Bank of Ireland, Grattan Street, Sligo, Eileen joined at Ballaghaderreen in January 1974 and was transferred in 1977 to Sligo.
A native of Mullingar, Eileen is married and has one son, Robert.
She enjoys reading, cooking, arts and crafts, quizzes and good conversation.
On the sporting front, Eileen enjoys swimming and the occasional round of golf.
DERRY AREA LADIES' REPRESENTATIVE
Elma Hetherington
Since 1987 Elma has been Derry Area Ladies' Representative.
She was first elected branch representative in 1981 in Shipquay Street.
An officer, she has worked since 1987 in Northern Bank, Strabane, the town where she joined the former Belfast Banking Co.
Ltd. on 1st April 1968.
Other postings have included Shipquay Street and Shipquay Place, Londonderry.
Originally from Magheramason, Strabane, Elma is married with three children.
Interests include reading, gardening and flower arranging.
While she enjoys all outdoor sporting activities, she finds little time due to work and IBOA interests.
She has always taken an interest in youth organisations and finds time to be treasurer of the West Bank Scouts movement.
GALWAY AREA LADIES' REPRESENTATIVE
Marian Egan
Galway Area Ladies' representative since 1989, Marian has been a branch representative in most locations she has worked since 1975.
Working in Bank of Ireland, Glenamaddy since August 1992, Marian joined at Clifden in January 1974 and subsequent postings have included Stephen Street, Sligo 1976–77, Boyle 1977–79, Ballaghaderreen 1979–82 and Castlerea 1982–92.
Marian, who is married to Denny has three daughters.
She is a native of Ballinasloe and has many interests including reading, music and television.
She is interested in most sports, especially hurling and soccer and she has won several trophies for darts.
CORK DISTRICT SECRETARY HONORARY SECRETARY
Brendan Stevenson
IBOA Honorary Secretary since 1987, Brendan was Finance Officer for a few months previously in that year.
He has been a member of the Executive Committee as Cork District Secretary since 1983.
He is one of the IBOA's representatives on the AIB Pension Fund.
He was first elected a branch representative 20 years ago.
He joined the Munster & Leinster Bank at Rush on 1st January 1970 and later worked in Skerries 1972/74, Youghal 1974/82, 66 South Mall 1982/87 and since then at his present location, St. Patrick's Bridge.
Married to Joan, they have 4 children.
He enjoys all sorts of music and television.
He plays golf and does a little sailing.
He is trainer of Ballincollig R.F.C. U-18 team.
IBOA SPORTS AND SOCIAL
A Hurley and then A Brush with A Good Band and you Have A Night To Remember…
Yes Dublin Sports and Social Committee has really done it this time!
On Friday 2nd April at Lansdowne Football Club, Lansdowne Road, they take the wraps off the music of the night — and take over the entire Club in the process!.
Just listen to this for an Oscar winning ceremony.
At 8.00p.m. upstairs we have the inimitable and hugely talented [and he's one of our own — why wouldn't he be]John Hurley.
At 10.00p.m. downstairs we have the immaculate, cultivated and uncrowned king of Skid Row [the man whose cap is as famous as he is]the indomitable Brush Shiels.
At 12 o'clock we have hot food cooked over the stove to the sound of Brush's vocals, the two sizzling in harmony until it is finally cooked from both sides.
Then it will be garnished and served — it will truly be a Pavarotti of a taste.
Does the night stop there — not at all.
Now it is time to writhe and gyrate to the sounds on the turntable and get lost with the D.J.
back in time; until the early hours — the Disco in other words.
Hits from the 60s, 70s and 80s will pour out one after the other to uncontrollable delight.
And all of this to be washed down with a late bar.
Is this an April joke I hear you ask?
Not at all— ring ‘93’ now there may well be cancellations!
And what of the price?
Is it £1,000 or a £100 or even £50 — No way!
All of this costs just a fiver.
Needless to say a ticket is essential.
LIMERICK AREA BOWLING QUALIFIERS
AIB Bank Ennis and Limerick Strike well (again!!)
In a keenly contested Limerick Area 10-pin bowling qualifying competition, AIB Bank Bindon St., Ennis and AIB Bank 63 O'Connell St., Limerick emerged as the best Strikers of the evening.
Over 100 members turned up to compete for the honour of representing Limerick Area in the National Finals in Belfast.
We had a mixed bag on the night, Professionals, Semi-Professionals, Amateurs and members out simply for a good nights fun.
After the first round 8 teams went through to the final comprising 5 AIB Bank teams from Bank Place Ennis, Nenagh, Bindon St., Ennis, 63 O'Connell St., Limerick and Charlesville, B/I 94 O'Connell St., Limerick and Ulster Bank O'Connell St. Limerick.
The rest of us adjourned to a nearby hostelry for some refreshments!
Despite some very good scores and striking on the night AIB Bank, Bindon Street, Ennis came out on top followed by their colleagues, AIB Bank, 63 O'Connell St., Limerick in second place.
The highest individual score was won by Dan Fanning, B/I Roxboro.
Members were surprised when General Secretary Ciaran Ryan dropped in to view the talent on show.
Ciaran said a few words and presented the prizes to the winning teams.
My thanks to all of the Area Council Members who all worked to make the event the success that it was, and to Ciaran Ryan, who took time out from a series of meetings to make the presentations.
Donough Lempriere (centre) a former Honorary Secretary of the IBOA, pictured receiving a presentation from Andy Heffernan, President, on the occasion of his retirement as Manager of Bank of Ireland, Banagher, with Brian Deasy, left, Portlaoise Area Secretary.
The picture was taken at a function held in the Bridge House, Tullamore, on Friday 12th February 1993.
SUPER TEAM WIN FIRST EVER BOWLING TOURNAMENT
It was the turn of ‘The Workers' Party’ from Dublin to capture the headlines in Belfast on 27th February last in the first ever IBOA National 10-Pin Bowling Tournament.
Martin Caulfield led from the front in a steady day's play that ended in triumph.
Liam Conway, Claire Breslin, Adrian Rouiller and Margaret McConkey, all of AIB Dublin, made a formidable line up behind Martin, finally ending up with a total of 889 in the crucial last game.
In second place came another Dublin team, ‘The Random Strikers’ from AIB, ably and professionally motivated by Theresa Rooney.
The rest of that team was Michael Concanon, Jim Browne, Adam O'Keeffe and Margaret Brennan.
They played gallantly, leading right up to the final game, and going down on 836.
These two teams had a remarkable Tournament, cool under pressure and eventually breaking about even right for the winners.
A number of teams deserve a special mention for their tenacity in teaching the last stages.
‘The Renegades’ from Dundalk certainly held on to the very end.
Full marks to Anne McArdle, Anne Connolly, Linda Sweetman, Fergal Collier and Declan Dempsey who flew the flag mightily.
Also ‘Belfast All Stars’ one of the ‘home’teams, played some great bowling.
Their team included David Fairley, Alison Douglas, Carolyn Lavery, Keith Adams and Janice Morrison.
It was a great occasion for the first tournament in this sport.
Belfast was a great setting with a huge welcome from the Belfast and District Committee.
It is definitely an occasion that will run and run and the teams are looking forward to next year already.
Among those who featured round the top ten were ‘NIB All Sorts’ led by Joe McGovern.
‘The Magpies’ led by John Burke, ‘The Strikers’with David Bolger.
From Derry we had Shipquay Place led by James Doherty, ‘Tralee Tigers’ with Tracey Marshall and ‘Lovely Leitrim’with Larry O'Donovan.
At the packed dinner afterwards the President, Mr. Andy Heffernan presented the prizes.