

EXTENDED OPENING HOURS — The Unfinished Business
As part of the settlement to last year's National dispute, the phasing in of Extended Opening Hours was agreed as follows:— 10.00am–4.00p.m. with effect from 1st May 1992; 10.00a.m. –4.00p.m. from 1st January, 1993.
All members will have vivid recollections of the Banks' huge publicity campaign, between January and May last year, attempting to sell Extended Opening Hours to both the Public and our members and the guarantees which accompanied this publicity.
We all remember well Bank statements alluding to improved customer service; the creation of hundreds of jobs; the smooth operation of Extended Hours and the commitment to staff input.
DEVELOPMENTS SINCE MAY 1992
Following the return to work, the Banks set about introducing Lunch-time Opening.
IBOA was provided with a list of Branches, in each Bank, which would open.
Interestingly enough there was no consultation with IBOA on the location of these Branches.
There was no agreement on the operational aspects.
The Banks simply introduced Lunch-time Opening in Branches and imposed arrangements on Staff without their input.
In many cases, Senior Management, in Branches, put in place the operational arrangements for Lunch-time Opening, but happened to be at sumptuous ‘development’ lunches, when these arrangements were being implemented.
Quite extraordinarily, even in the first phase of Lunch-time Openings, some Branches were expected to open without any additional staff.
At the outset of Lunch-time Opening, it is fair to say that customer reaction was quite slow but has increased quite significantly in the intervening months.
By January, all Banks extended to 4.00p.m. in a range of Branches.
It is interesting to note that some Branches were expected to open from 10.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m. without even having arrangements in place for Lunch-time Opening.
The membership's response to these developments has been quite predictable.
They have worked extremely hard to maintain the service to the customer but more and more problems are now emerging.
Where now are the Bank's commitments and guarantees?
ADDITIONAL STAFF
One of the most significant selling points which the Banks used during last year's dispute was the fact that Extended Opening Hours would give rise to significant numbers of additional jobs in Banking.
For many months now IBOA has been seeking details, from the Banks, of these additional staff and it is fair to say that the numbers actually employed are insignificant.
IBOA is now pursuing this issue, not only on a Bank by Bank basis, but also at industry level.
Members are reminded that the Banks sold Extended Opening Hours to the Labour Court on the basis of significant additional jobs, to such an extent that the Court, in its Recommendation 13601 states as follows:
‘The Court notes the undertaking by the Banks that Extended Opening Hours would result in significant extra employment of Permanent Part-Time Staff…’.
The Bank's actions to date, portray little regard for the unemployment crisis in this Country and, quite ironically, at the time of writing, one of these Banks is seeking to reduce the number of staff in the Branch network through a voluntary package and not replace these staff.
Where now are the Bank's commitments to the unemployed in this economy?
OPERATIONAL ASPECTS
With the greater realisation by the customers of the new Opening Hours, customer service is undoubtedly suffering:
In some Branches it is not possible to provide the customer with a full banking service for parts of the day, as staff are under pressure and cannot cope.
With inadequate staffing and the staggering of Lunches, Customers are becoming more and more irritated and taking frustrations out on Branch staff.
It is clear that the quality of service to the Customer has also disimproved because of inadequate staffing.
Cashier services are under more and more pressure and, although sometimes they are given assistance, it is only at the expense of other work.
There is more and more evidence that members are expected to work more overtime; with strong attempts by some Management not to pay members for overtime worked.
There would appear to be the need for a significant increase in the staffing of Branches and adequate training needs to be provided for new staff.
There is no doubt that these issues need to be addressed and the question should be posed; where now are the Banks' plans which were going to ensure a smooth change without any adverse implications for members?
STAFFING LEVELS AND KEY POSTS
One of the most conspicuous aspects of Branch Banking to-day is the major problem which exists around Staffing Levels, Relief Staff and Key Posts.
It is clear that the Banks are preoccupied with keeping staffing to a minimum; have no regard for retaining Key Posts and have totally disregarded Relief Staff.
With reduction in costs as a key objective for Banks, they hope that staff loyalty to customers will allow them to widely market their new hours without properly managing these issues.
It is a sad reflection on Bank Management that our members have taken on additional responsibilities without recognition or recompense by the Banks.
BANKS' RESPONSE
Since the introduction of Extended Opening Hours, IBOA has been high-lighting members' concerns.
The Banks have totally rejected IBOA members' concerns and have advised the Association that Extended Opening Hours are working without any difficulties.
It is clear that the lessons of ‘92 have not been learned and again Managers would appear to be telling Senior Management what they want to hear, rather than reflecting the real situation.
IBOA ACTION
The Association has raised the issue of Extended Opening Hours in all Banks and also at Industry level.
We are concerned about developments and would request each Branch Representative to submit an up-to-date report to ‘93’ as we progress these issues.
We are committed to addressing all problems and ensuring that Bank commitments are met.
Members however also have an important role to play in this process, by being pro-active and resolute.
Informed and accurate information should be forwarded to ‘93’ to ensure that in each location the Banks' guarantees are implemented in full.
FINAL INSULT
To add insult to injury members should be aware that the Banks are now attempting to re-write the settlement proposals of the dispute last year by claiming a right to earlier opening.
IBOA has totally rejected this arrogant attempt by the Banks to undermine the settlement proposals and members in all Banks should clearly give a message to their Management, that this development is totally unacceptable.
CONCLUSION
The issue of Extended Opening is not over, as the banks appear to be indicating, but it has just commenced.
Our objective is to ensure that members can operate these new hours in a satisfactory way and not be expected to do so under enormous pressure.
Additional staffing; proper procedures; quality service and adequate assistance to members must be achieved before Extended Hours will be resolved.
Larry Broderick, Assistant General Secretary..
Belfast Bankers' Club, 31 Malone Road, which had a grand opening on 17th April 1993.
More information on page 12
COMMENT
MOTIVATION!
Members in AIB Bank, in Britain, have received perhaps the greatest blow yet delivered to them, when the Mediator dealing with their outstanding salary claim came forward with his Recommendation.
Banks in Britain have suffered in recent times from the recession just like any other business.
IBOA members in Britain fully realise this situation and have taken it on board in recent years by accepting pay settlements which were far less than increases in the Retail Price Index.
In effect, the purchasing power of members in Britain has fallen dramatically in the past number of years.
That situation can only be tolerated for a while and following the Bank's offer of 3% last June a series of consultation meetings with members overwhelmingly rejected the offer.
The reason for the rejection was that the trend of actual losses had to be stopped.
The Bank, as we know, came up with another offer later in the year which must go down as historic as it entailed a zero increase for a nineteen month period.
Now the Mediator has gone one stop further than that by recommending what, in reality, could be described as pay cuts for staff.
In his Recommendation he also completely ignores the role of the Irish Bank Officials' Association as representative of Staff.
Results of surveys taken in recent years in AIB have indicated that staff morale is low — as it is in all banks — and this can certainly be said for those in Britain where members have had to endure in the past five years a two year period of unreal thinking, the additional pressures brought on by the recession, the pressures brought on by short staffing and on top of all that the lack of recognition in monetary terms for their efforts in ‘keeping the ship afloat’.
Indeed, the area serviced by the vast majority of our members remains highly profitable.
The Bank has consistently ignored that particular argument and in contrast argues that staff have an excellent remuneration package with annual increases in the form of increments and Profit Share Scheme.
The Profit Share Scheme was reduced in 1992 but many members have expressed great annoyance that another scheme within the Bank netted two former members of the staff in Britain almost £218,000 between them.
So much for 3.75% Profit Share figures and so much for staff motivation.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE CHANGES
This is the time of year when new members are welcomed onto the Executive Committee and farewell is bid to those who are leaving.
The turnover of Executive Committee members this year will be particularly high, not least because of the reduction in the size of the Executive Committee by 10 persons.
To those leaving we say thank you for your efforts during an especially difficult past two years and to those coming on board for the first time we wish you every success in the future.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE
Earlier Opening Hours
Members are aware that the Banks are endeavouring to implement earlier opening hours in some locations.
The IBOA fundamentally disagrees with this course of action as the clarification document which resulted from the Labour Court Recommendation 13601 clearly indicates times for opening from 10.00a.m. to 4.00p.m. uninterrupted with one late opening day.
At a meeting with the Banks on 26th March this case was forcibly put to them.
As there was no meeting of minds to the interpretation of the Labour Court Recommendation it was agreed that both the Banks and IBOA should revert to the parties who sought the clarification of the Labour Court Recommendation i.e. Kevin Duffy of Irish Congress of Trade Unions and Turlough O'Sullivan of I.B.E.C. (formerly FIE).
This meeting is to take place at an early date.
Bank of Ireland Cost Reduction Proposals
A meeting was held with the Bank of Ireland on 8th April at which IBOA emphasised the necessity to have full agreement before any cost reduction proposals are put in place.
The IBOA pointed out that as important as the discussions on the actual cost reduction proposals were, other areas would have to be the subject of discussion also.
These included Replacement of Staff, Promotions, Ranked Positions, Branch Staffing, Transferability and of course a Job Security Agreement.
There were a number of other areas that it was felt by the IBOA should be discussed and that included Future Branch Structures, Centralisation and Contracting of Work.
The Bank has agreed to consider all the matter raised by the IBOA and a further meeting is to be held in the immediate future.
Members should not indicate any willingness to accept the proposals until such time as all negotiations on them have concluded.
Republic of Ireland Salaries
The Banks' staff Relations Committee has advised that the Banks will implement the 3rd Phase of the P.E.S.P. Agreement with effect from 1st May, 1993.
Therefore all of our members' salaries will increase by 3.75% from that date.
Northern Ireland Salaries
Direct talks with the Banks in Northern Ireland failed to bring a settlement to the IBOA claim of a 7% increase from 1st March, 1993, for a 12 month period.
It is now proposed that the Joint Industrial Council should meet under the chairmanship of Mr. Peter Smith Q.C.
in an effort to reach settlement.
That meeting has been arranged for Tuesday 27th April 1993.
Members will be informed of the outcome.
INCREASE IN AUTOCOVER PREMIUMS
I.B.O.A. Car Insurance Scheme
We have all enjoyed the good value in price and cover offered by Autocover, our own Car Insurance Scheme, for the past eleven years.
Following a recent review of the scheme we have some good news and some bad news.
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND
The good news is for members in the Republic of Ireland where no premium increases are proposed during 1993.
This means that members in the Republic of Ireland who are over twenty five years of age and have more than a three year no claim bonus have had no increase in premium for over three years and for all other policyholder there has been no increase for over two years.
Consequently the rates on Autocover are now more competitive than ever.
NORTHERN IRELAND AND GREAT BRITAIN
The bad news is for members in Northern Ireland and Great Britain where, because of the continuing climate of increasing claims being encountered by all insurance companies, it has unfortunately been necessary to increase the rates by an average of 23% for all new business and policies falling due for renewal on and after the 1st May next.
In applying this average increase of 23% the insurers have structured it so that the increase will mainly apply to those categories of policyholders which have the greatest incidence of claims.
The price increase will apply as follows:—
All Policyholders with Comprehensive cover 7.5%
All Policyholders with Third Party Fire and Theft cover 50%
All Policyholders under 25 years of age 25%
All Policyholders who are first time insureds 25%
Because of deteriorating claims all insurers have been forced to increase significantly their premium levels in Northern Ireland and Great Britain over the past number of years.
Although we are unable to ascertain the price increases for the various insurance companies in Northern Ireland and Great Britain as we can in the Republic of Ireland, nevertheless our research does indicate that even after allowing for these rate increases the cumulative increase for Autocover in Northern Ireland and Great Britain since the commencement of the scheme is significantly less than the average increase charged by most other insurance companies during the same period.
Autocover premiums were very competitive to begin with and the cumulative price increases make the premium charged for Autocover more competitive than ever in both Northern Ireland and Great Britain in many instances because of the larger price increase charged by other insurance companies.
New rating guides will be sent to Branch Representatives with the May issue of the ‘Newsheet’.
It is important that all the old rating guides are destroyed on receipt of the new guides.
In conjunction with this premium increase we are also introducing exclusively to members in Great Britain and Northern Ireland with effect from 1st May next reduced rates for wives where their spouses have for their benefit separate cars where they are the main drivers provided that the wives are:—
over 25 years of age
hold full driving licences
drive second family cars not exceeding 1600 cubic capacity
the second car does not belong to a higher rating group than the spouses car
Any existing members who believe they qualify for this new rating category from the 1st May next should contact the Autocover staff at Frank Glennon Limited who will arrange for their premiums to be adjusted from their next renewal date.
Once again we recommend all our members to seek quotations in advance of their car or home policies falling due for renewal as otherwise you may be missing out on a very good bargain.
Simply ask your branch representative for rating guides or contact the Autocover or Homecover staff at Frank Glennon Limited who will be only too pleased to assist you.
In case you forget and would like the staff at Frank Glennon Limited to give you a free quotation before your next renewal date please complete and return the coupon below.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN THE WORK PLACE
by Eileen O'Connor
Since we included a short article on this topic in the ‘Newsheet’ last year, the lid has been blown off several skeletons in the National closet.
During the last twelve months subjects that would have been considered taboo, in this Country, have received widespread media attention.
Behaviour that historically, we would have pretended, did not happen in our good, God-fearing country, has suddenly become the latest front page filler this year.
As though a chain reaction was started, we've had stories — of rape and incest victims, wife and child beatings and, most recently, allegations of sexual harassment, at the highest level in the work place.
VIPERS
Nobody wants to admit, that the society we live in actually has these vipers in its bosom.
But over the last twelve months the trickle of disclosures, has grown into a river of revelations.
The only good that may result from this modern-day flood may be the removal of the barrier that has prevented people from discussing the humiliation and tortures that they endure.
This is 1993.
No one should be subject to physical or mental abuse, by another human being.
Sexual harassment is generally a problem that affects women.
There are several different forms it can take.
The most common of these examples are verbal, physical and visual.
The harassment occurs as a result of the effect various suggestions, jokes, touching or showing of pictures has on the recipient.
BORDER LINE
In most work environments there is a local border line for what is considered to be acceptable behaviour.
Within this structure, there will be friendly flirting or joking.
This, when approved by all involved, is not harassment.
The problem arises, when an individual feels uncomfortable or threatened by the activities.
Everyone has their own threshold for harassment.
Some people may find rude jokes funny but others may be deeply offended.
In recent years, as more and more companies adopt American business methods, there has been an increasing use of body language.
More physical contact than in the past, is now seen as important, in persuading individuals to follow certain paths.
This was originally used as a sales technique — you shook hands or put your arm around a relation or friend — the idea was to develop this — the salesperson put his/her arm around the buyer and thereby instilled a sense of security into the individual.
You could trust such a friendly person — couldn't you?
Unfortunately there are some individuals who see this touching and several variations on it, as their right.
No notice is taken of the effect it is having on the recipient.
Generally this type of behaviour is carried out by a person in authority and the victim — because that is what the recipient has become — is reluctant or afraid to complain.
BE ASSERTIVE
The situation I have described here is very mild compared to some happenings in the work place.
Some people are faced with demands for sexual favours or degraded or insulted.
Some suffer the humiliation of having pornographic photographs on the walls and some are subjected to indecent exposure and even assault or rape.
Sexual harassment results from unwanted, ongoing, imposed attention of a sexual nature.
If you are offended by an incident at work, complain to the individual concerned.
Several harassers, not stopped at the outset, will claim that the victim ‘wanted it’ or didn't seem to mind.
If after objecting you find yourself ignored, and the abuse continues, report the individual to a superior.
Always be assertive .
Sometimes the harassment may be unintentional.
A request for a date from the harasser that gets the reply —‘Sorry, I'm busy Friday night’— may certainly be followed up by other requests.
If however, you mean —‘drop dead I've no intention of ever going out with you’— get the intention across — preferably without offence.
If the offender happens to be your superior, and you feel cut off from help and belief, don't despair.
Contact your local Union Representative.
The Bank must be made aware of the abuse that is taking place.
Not only is sexual harassment unbearable for the victim, it is also unlawful.
All incidents should be brought to the attention of your employer.
A person who harasses does not usually stop at one victim.
Evidence shows that where one victim comes forward, and an investigation starts, a trail showing unpopularity with other individuals emerges.
Generally a trend of sick leave or requests for transfers by other women who have worked for this person will emerge.
When further investigation develops then some of these individuals will admit that their reasons for transfer or leaving were as a result of harassment.
Everyone has a right to be treated with respect.
No one should be afraid of reporting any incident that occurs.
Any consequence that results from a report should not affect the victim.
All reports must be treated seriously, and confidentially and must be investigated by the employer.
Unemployment is high in Ireland today.
No person should be forced out of their job because of an intolerable environment.
PROSECUTION
Help yourself, your colleagues, your employer.
If you are in a situation that demands action — act now if you are the victim — report the problem.
If you are an onlooker speak to the victim/employer.
Employers who are aware of a problem and who don't act are liable to be prosecuted.
Finally if you are the harasser —STOP .
LIQUID MARKETING
Many new ideas have come from the Marketing Departments of all Banks in recent years.
But there is no doubt that some of these ideas are causing great disquiet among Branch Management and Staff.
One reason is a lack of feed-back by Managers that would put some perspective on these Schemes.
The idea of an evening get-together for clients over a couple of drinks in the Branch is obviously a non-Banker concept.
Peter Edwards tells us of one particular event recently.
It happened in a rural Branch not a million miles from the Western seaboard of Ireland.
An evening had been set aside for a get-together of the Branch's top 50 clients to promote Special Savings Accounts.
There would be a few drinks, some canapes and a few staff who were free and willing to do it on overtime.
This was not the Manager's idea, nor anybody else's around him.
It blossomed forth at a Managers' meeting when ‘somebody from Marketing’ gave an in-depth talk on selling skills and creating opportunities to sell, using Branch data.
In other words it's about buttonholing a large crowd, together, instead of chasing them individually.
If you are sitting behind a desk with a degree from Trinity and not an ounce of ‘a Banker’ to boast about it probably has all the hallmarks of a great idea.
And, as is usual for Managers' meetings, there was no one there to shout ‘stop’.
They took the briefs and carried the tablets of stone back to their Branches, where this particular Manager gave out hell at the futility of it all.
But he set a date, put an Assistant Manager in charge and after a small conflab set the number at 50.
Surprisingly the 50, or 47 to be exact, were chosen with scientific precision.
Firstly, the usual Churchmen, Doctor, Accountant, Solicitor and other people of local prominence.
Then people with nest eggs in the Branch and most important those with a bit in other institutions.
The Assistant Manager took tremendous pride in who he invited; he had it down to a fine art.
After the approval for the names at a Branch Management meeting he dispatched the letters of invitation.
This was about a week before the event.
Within a few days people phoned or called to confirm their attendance.
And so the stage was set.
A junior with a big interest in meeting people [according to his Appraisal]was given the task of setting out packs of account opening cards, Special Savings forms and passbooks and a couple of credit card application forms for good measure.
He was also given a most coveted job, that of barman, for the night.
In fairness to everyone it is impossible to legislate for the vagaries of human nature and the best laid plans can go astray with a single word in the wrong place.
Not alone can it bring down careers but it has started Revolutions.
One could be tempted to say that this evening was no exception but that would be a little harsh.
It was more a tidal wave in a punch bowl.
In piecing it together afterwards the thing began to go wrong when somebody asked the Butcher was he going to the ‘do’ in the Bank.
Taken a bit aback he said he was, of course!
Being adept at the set conversation piece he managed to extract the relevant data without ever putting his knife in it.
He was livid at being left out.
This sort of an evening would carry a social element, the absence from which would speak volumes locally.
Stories vary widely, some say he took off his apron and laid down his knife before he went to the Bank to tackle the Manager.
Others say he came in with both, and when he left the office there seemed even more blood on his apron.
The Staff thought the Manager was done for.
That he emerged at his door shaking is not in doubt.
That the Assistant Manager emerged later in the day at the same door similarly disoriented is not in doubt either.
The upshot of the matter was that although the Butcher had an account for 30 odd years they did not think him worthy of an invite.
Well he was coming anyway.
That he was not in the category ordained by the Marketing Department for the evening was neither here nor there.
With the speed of lightening word spread throughout the town about the ‘do’ in the Bank on such a night.
The conversation prefix ‘Are you going…’ changed to the definite ‘there is…’and that quite naturally solicited a definite answer.
It became the conversation cornerstone for the couple of days leading up to it.
Some said ‘we might as well get something out of them for nothing’ and others said, ‘ah I know the Manager and he's a decent skin’.
Some even thought it was his going away do!
The fateful evening came and the bottles were arranged in the Public Office on the counter, the beer stacked on the floor, the spirits higher, behind the Junior.
Glasses were in pyramids two feet high at each side; he was all set.
The canapes were under tin-foil to be produced later, the Assistant Manager paced the floor decorating the Office with leaflets, as if by some quirk of fate this evening might well be the making of his career.
By 6 o'clock they began to arrive, an awkward trickle at first.
Drinking whisky in the place where they transacted their cold financial realities during the day was out of kilter somehow.
However, they sipped away.
Quite quickly the place began to fill up.
The Manager, with the ache he had in his hand from welcoming people, realised that much more than the invited number had arrived.
The chat got louder and he, of course, mingled.
He was sucked into every knot of people, and his back was slapped many times.
Very soon the place was so packed that knots of people integrated into a sway and the perimeter of the appointed area burst.
People had no option but to sit on desks or wherever they could find behind the counter.
Then the Doctor began to sing; he was a great man at a party and he warmed up the crowd no end.
They began to look for more drink and the Junior showed his initiative by going up to the off-licence with the Porter and bringing back armfuls of the stuff.
The finishing time of 8 o'clock came and went, and they were only beginning.
By 10 o'clock there were signs of drunkenness and the Manager had a quiet word with the Junior to put away the bottles or they'd be there all night.
The Butcher drank so much [well he said he would show them]that he got sick.
He had no time to run, but, being the discreet man he was, he opened the drawer of the Officer's desk where he was sitting.
He then closed it and felt as right as rain.
He could have drunk all night after that.
Nobody had ever seen the Manager look so pale and tetchy as the morning after.
Sitting at his desk in front of his team he simply read the statistics — cost of drink and food £923.57.
Special Savings Accounts opened — nil.
IBOA WHO'S WHO
Executive Committee Members
WATERFORD AREA SECRETARY
Nora G. Arnold
Nora has been a member of the Executive Committee, as Waterford Area Secretary, since April 1989.
She was first elected branch representative in 1987 and has been Clonmel District Secretary since 1988.
Working in AIB Bank, 65 O'Connell Street, Clonmel since October 1986, Nora previously worked in Fethard, Tipperary Town and 5 O'Connell St., Clonmel.
She joined at Tallow in 1974.
Nora who is married, hails from Bartlemy, Fermoy, Co.
Cork.
She enjoys horse-racing and gardening.
Her brother, Dermot, works in Bank of Ireland, Business and Agri Centre, Dungarvan.
LIMERICK AREA SECRETARY
John Fagan
John has represented Limerick Area on the Executive Committee since 1991.
Ennis District Secretary since 1988, John has been branch representative in several locations.
Working in Ulster Bank, Ennis, John joined the Bank at O'Connell Street, Dublin in 1979 and, since then, worked in Lucan before being transferred to Ennis.
A native of Mullingar, John is married with two daughters, Eimear and Orlaith.
Hobbies include music and reading and his main sporting interests are soccer and rugby.
ARMAGH AREA SECRETARY
Herbie Fleming
Since July 1985 Herbie has been Armagh Area Secretary.
Dungannon District Secretary since 1989.
Herbie was Craigavon district Secretary 1979–87 and he has been a branch representative since 1978.
He works in Northern Bank, Dungannon, having joined at Newtownstewart in April 1969.
He later worked in Lurgan, 1973–87, before transferring to Dungannon.
A native of Dungannon, Herbie, who is married with two daughters and one son is interested in gardening and agriculture.
AIB BANK, DUBLIN
Brendan Carroll
Brendan was first elected to the Executive Committee as a representative of AIB Bank, Dublin in 1989.
He was also elected IBOA Sports Secretary in that year, a position which he has held since then.
He has worked in Rathfarnham since 1990.
Prior to then postings have included Tallaght, where he joined the Bank, 1972–76, Dame Street, 1976–79, Kilcock 1979–82 and Crumlin Road 1982–90.
Originally from Ballylongford, Co.
Kerry, Brendan is married to Kathy and they have three children.
Originally interested in gaelic football, this sporting interest later expanded to include all sports, especially such diverse activities as greyhound racing and horse facing.
CORK AREA LADIES' REPRESENTATIVE
Marian Ryan
Marian has been the Cork Area Ladies' Representative on the Executive Committee for the past two years.
She was a branch representative in Bruff, 1983–84.
Since 1989, Marian has worked in 32 South Mall, Cork.
She joined at Charleville in October 1980 and other postings have included Bruff 1982–84, O'Connell Street, Limerick and Mitchelstown.
Marian, who comes from Fermoy, is married.
Hobbies include music and reading.
She is interested in soccer and admits to being a Liverpool fan.
MANAGERS' PANEL
Pat O'C Hegarty
President of the IBOA 1989–91, Vice-President 1987–89 and, since 1991, a managers' panel member of the Executive Committee, as he had been 1985–87.
He has been a member of the Pensioners' Committee, the Council of the Institute of Bankers and a Trustee of Bank of Ireland Pension Fund.
Presently manager of Bank of Ireland, Inchicore, Pat's banking career commenced on 6th December 1952.
Pat hails from Tralee.
Married to Paula they have 5 children.
Some of his many outside interests include reading, theatre and debating.
He is also interested in rugby, tennis, and jogging and has run three Dublin City Marathons.
A NIGHT TO REMEMBER…
Hurley and Brush Sweep Dublin off its feet
Lansdowne Road has seen some famous victories this year and the Dublin Sports & social Committee was not to be outdone as Lansdowne Football Club was the venue for its latest undertaking.
Friday 2nd April saw 650 or so lucky members gather, from all parts of the metropolis and beyond, to rekindle memories of times past.
Early arrivals heard one of our own, the superb John Hurley, get the ball rolling in the upstairs bar.
After what seemed like all too short a time John gave way to the legendary Brush Shiels, who delivered his unique show to a packed downstairs hall.
As exhausted members gathered their breath after Brush's super show the old maxim that an army marches on its stomach had not been forgotten and a superb hot supper was served, washed down with a lively cocktail of pints, shorts and anecdotes of events of old.
Then to the third instalment of this particular ‘Triple Crown’ and soon the hall pulsated to the sounds of a super disco.
Dancing space was at a premium as hit after hit poured out to the appreciative crowd.
As the night progressed many old friendships were rekindled and new ones formed with ‘cross fertilisation’ seeming to be the order of the day for many a member!
Truly a night to remember — indeed a night some can't remember!
Our thanks to all who attended and to the Sports and Social Committee for their hard work to make the night yet another success.
Watch this space for up and coming events!
Dundalk Indoor Soccer
Winners of the Dundalk Area Indoor Soccer competition held in the Muirhevnamor Sports Centre, Dundalk on 16th March 1993 were the Navan team, front, l. to r.:— Eamonn Kelly and Cathal Ryan.
Back Ciaran Tuite, Derek Carty and Keelan O'Donnell.
Presentation to Margaret Browne
Pictured at a presentation to Margaret Browne, who resigned recently from AIB Bank, held at the Irish Bankers' Club on Tuesday, 16th March 1993, l. to r.:— Ciaran Ryan, General Secretary, Margaret Browne, Dan Linehan and Andy Heffernan, President
Enjoying a ‘Night to Remember’ at Lansdowne F.C.
on Friday, 2nd April, l. to r.:— Ann-Marie McDermott, Therese Purcell, Rena Dunne and Deirdre Carroll.
Cork Social
Tucking in at the Cork District Social function held in Clancy's Bar on Wednesday, 7th April 1993.
Waterford Area Golf
A group of prize-winners at the Waterford Area Golf Outing held in Kilkenny Golf Club on Saturday, 3rd April 1993.
Farewell to Dennis
A group of IBOA office staff pictured at a farewell function for Dennis Corrigan who is leaving after 15 years manning the door of ‘93’.
Dennis is second left in the picture.
The function was held in the Bankers' Club on Thursday 8th April 1993.
Galway Pensioners' Dinner
The Bank Pensioners' and Widows' Association Western Region Annual Dinner was held in the Banba Hotel, Salthill on 26th March.
The function was most enjoyable and we were richly entertained into the early hours by local musicians and some of our own most talented members.
Mr. Frank Shaw, left, receiving IBOA cheque £900 on behalf of Pensioners' and Widows' Association, Western Region from Mr. Pat O'C Hegarty at the Annual Dinner which was held in the Banba Hotel, Salthill on 26th March.
Mr. Noel Purcell is on right.
Pat O'C Hegarty, Executive Committee nominee on the Pensioners' Committee was a very welcome guest and presented us with the Association's usual contribution of £900 for which we are most thankful.
AIB Bank also were very generous in contributing to our Funds and we are indeed very grateful to them.
These contributions will enable us to subsidise our Annual Outing which members look forward to eagerly from year to year.
Usually in May we hire a coach and about 50 of us set off on a 3-day, 2-night hotel stay.
Last year we went to the West cork Hotel in Skibbereen, the previous year the Imperial Hotel, Cork and previous to that the Gleneagles in Killarney.
We have one day coach tours to scenic areas in those regions.
I must again stress how very grateful we are to the IBOA and AIB for their kindness in continuing to help put a little additional pleasure into the lives of our members.
Frank Shaw.
Some of the attendance at the Galway Pensioners' Annual Dinner.