

HIDDEN FEELINGS
Nothing can describe my feelings
Of the times when you're around,
Unborn fantasies, told in fables
Like faces hidden in the crowds,
Something in my heart grows fonder
Long before a word is said,
And as I lay my eyes in wonder
I see the good things you possess,
Like  Grafetti tells of unborn talent
Hidden under cloaks of crime.
How I wish that you could love me
What a comfort that would be,
That one day you'll have the confidence
To show me the love I cannot see.
A WEEK IN RUGGIERO RICCI'S MASTERCLASS
This summer I went to Dartington International Summer School in Devon.
My violin teacher had recommended it for chamber music, and when I found out that on one of the weeks the famous violinist, Ruggiero Ricci, would be there, I was certain that I would go.
After a seven hour train journey, I finally arrived at Dartington College of Arts.
There was a huge choice of things to do.
I had to make decisions as to whether I should join the choir or arrange to play quartets.
But one thing was certain — whether I was chosen to play in it or not, I was definitely going to Ricci's masterclass.
On the Sunday, the second day, I had to audition to Ricci himself, to play in his masterclass.
There were many other students auditioning, aged between sixteen and twenty-five, who came from Holland, France, Germany, Belgium and Britain.
I did not like the prospect of playing in front of all these people who were all older than me and would see my violin playing from a critical view, but I had come this far, and it would be stupid not to go through with the audition.
After a few people had played, my turn arrived.
Ricci sat slouched in his chair, holding his Stradivarius, and nodded to me to start.
I was the most nervous I have ever been.
Here I was, auditioning to a world famous violinist.
Throughout the piece — I auditioned with ‘Scherzo — Tarantella’ by Wieniawski — my knees were clicking in and out of their joints.
I felt as if I could not go on.
By some miracle, I finally reached the end, and, still trembling, told Ricci my name, age and who I studied with.
I could then sit and relax and listen to the other violinists.
The list of the eight lucky people came out later that evening.
Having spent the whole day listening to the contenders, I did not want to look at the list — I felt certain that my name would not appear.
I bumped into a Dutch girl who excitedly told me that both she and myself had been chosen!
I could not believe it, and had to see the list for myself.
Ricci would give masterclasses for the next five  mornings, each one lasting from 9 am to 1 pm.
Like the other seven pupils, I would be given two one hour lessons, and then ½ hour on the fifth day.
Just how lucky we were was further highlighted when we learnt that Ricci's normal teaching rates are £250 for 1 hour.
I spent much of Monday in the  practice rooms.
9 am on Tuesday was to be my first lesson.
I woke up at 6.30 am and practised from 7.15 onwards.
The time finally arrived for my lesson.
Ricci, an American from the Bronx in New York, made his entrance, and the audience suddenly fell silent.
This time I began to play and my nerves had disappeared.
When I had finished, Ricci  complimented my teacher,.
had in fact performed Bach's ‘Double Violin Concerto’ with him in a concert in America several years before.
Ricci helped me a great deal with the fingerings and interpretation, and also gave me tips on how to improve my technique.
The hour seemed to fly past.
I still had another two masterclasses to play in, and so I had to practise the other two pieces which I would play.
Being chosen to play in Ruggiero Ricci's masterclass greatly boosted my confidence, and an intensive week of lessons with him improved my standard of playing immensely.
Ricci gave a spectacular concert one evening, and it is hard to believe that he is now 75 years old!
His playing, and teaching, did however consolidate what several people had already told me — that even at this age, Ruggiero Ricci as still one of the top ten violinists in the world.
Looking Back
Turning my head to gaze at life,
I turn also to the untouchable.
Those years of my life; wasted and empty,
like old packaging…unused.
Refraining from thought of any future ahead,
I am numb.
A blank mind and face to continue my journey
seem the only sane method of travel.
To think is to destroy: to think is to create.
Stop!
What irony is this?
When such phenomena as that become apparent,
hilarity deviously entwines with my thoughts.
She is a feeling and so no longer numb am I;
no longer sane like the clarity of the future.
My train of thought is jostled by the clank;
the clank of the drawer in the effable human brain.
The amalgamation of futile information
becomes a furore of passion until…
the pace slows down and my sense arbitrates the dispute.
It stops, and I look forward with the anticipation of a discoverer.
The Dragon of the Left Corridor
‘b-u-t-t-o-n.
Button!’
I pronounced the word proudly and looked at  for instructions on what to do next.
‘Right then Samantha!
That's your tenth book finished.
If you go and take this to , the headmistress, and she'll give you a new one.
You know where her office is by now, don't you?’
I nodded a little uncertainly.
The office was somewhere along one of the little corridors leading off the hall.
If I had a look, I'd be sure to find it.
Besides, I'd be too shy to ask the way from  who had such an obvious contempt for children who still didn't know their way around the school.
I walked through the big, wide classroom door, and into the hall which always reminded me of the giant's room in ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’.
One of the ‘sixes’ classes were doing ‘Music and Movement’.
I really needed to go to the toilet, but that meant walking past them onto the other side of the hall.
Pure humiliation!
Just walking down the hall was enough to make even the bravest shy violet hide her petals under her leaves.
As I walked down one side of the hall, keeping close to the sides, and scurrying past the classroom doors, I felt my face grow hot.
I quickened my step to reach the quieter part of the hall, where it always seemed darker.
There were two little corridors at that end of the hall.
‘One of them's  's corridor,’ I whispered to myself, and looked carefully at them both.
They looked both the same to me.
‘Eeney, meeney, miney, mo!’
It was the left corridor I chose, and I tiptoed reluctantly down it, holding my breath, for fear of disturbing the dragon which lurked within.
I put my hand on the place where your heart was meant to be.
We had talked about the heart earlier in the morning, because someone had brought ‘Topsy and Tim Go to Hospital’ in for storytime.
Mine was hitting my chest in a frenzy!
As I stood there clutching my ‘Janet and John’, I could hear the typewriter clanking and rattling in the distance.
It reminded me of the ghost in the horror film I had heard some of the older children talking about.
Perhaps it was a ghost!
Perhaps it was coming to get me!
Turning quickly, I tapped on  door.
Facing  the dragon of the left corridor was better than facing a typewriting ghost!
‘Come in!’ voice came through the solid oak door.
It was the right room.
Inwardly quaking, I rolled back the stone from the dragon's den, and stood on the threshold.
‘Hello!’ she smiled at me.
I looked at her, a little uncertain.
Perhaps she wasn't really a dragon…but then again, dragons were often in disguise, weren't they?
I had been there nine times previously, but I supposed it was the same as your time as a baby — you could not remember a thing about it.
I stood there at the entrance to her lair, hesitating, unsure of what to do next.
‘Well, come on in then!’ had reseated herself in the chair, and motioned me to take my place next to her at the desk.
Slowly I walked towards it.
This could be the very desk where she cut up all the little boys and ate them, after cooking them with slugs and snails and puppy dogs' tails.
I shuddered at the thought of all the bones she must have buried under the carpet.
‘Which book is it, dear?’
I stared at her, transfixed, as she stepped over to the scaly green cupboard where she kept all of her books.
Unable to say anything, I held out the book in my shaking hand, holding it only with the tips of my fingers.
She frowned at me; I could see her great, black eyebrows draw together, and the smoke coming from her nostrils.
What had I done wrong?
I'd been so quiet so that she wouldn't breathe fire on me.
sat back in her chair and brought out the list of words which you were supposed to know after each book.
‘Number Ten.’
I saw her long throat vibrate as she muttered the words.
‘Right then!
What is this word?’
She pointed to the word button.
I knew that word…but only that morning  had warned us to be quiet whenever  was around.
If I did say something, perhaps she would gobble me up like the fox did to poor Chicken-Licken.
I gulped, and fixed my eyes on the blood-red pen on the desk.
Was that filled with the blood of her victims?
‘Come on dear!
What is this  word?
I pursed my lips together to prevent the word escaping.
‘Pronounce the letters with me! b-u-t-t-o-n.
What is that word?
Come on!’
I felt a watery feeling in my eyes as that familiar sensation of heat searing through my body engulfed me,
‘Samantha!
Will you answer me?
B-U-T-T-O-N!’
I sneaked a look at  face, although I could scarcely see through the veiled curtain which had so mysteriously  woven its way around my eyes.
Her eyes were very bright.
Maybe she was anticipating her next meal.
I shivered in terror as I saw her face which was becoming more and more dragon-like with every minute.
I whimpered like a wounded puppy dog.
‘I'M NO GOING TO EAT YOU!’ roared.
The sound of a slammed door and the pitter patter sound of a girl running for her life, were the only sounds which could be heard that frosty, November morning.
The Holiday
Monday morning, 4.30 am.
I awoke to the sound of running water in the bathroom.
My brother was up and getting washed.
I  stretched out a weary arm to turn on my radio, an old song from sometime during the 80's finally forced me to get out of bed.
Today my brother and I were catching the 7.00 am  aeroplane from Newcastle to Corfu.
We were going to visit my aunt and uncle who have lived there for the past five years.
We hadn't seen them for more than eight years, as they had lived in Florida before moving to Corfu.
You could guarantee that the welcoming line would be ‘Oh!
Haven't you two grown’ Well, you know you do tend to grow slightly between the ages of 8 and 16, or 14 and 22 as in my  brother's case.
My mum and dad drove us to the airport in the torrential rain and wind.
They waited in the airport for two hours before finally deciding they would go home.
Of course there was the usual, ‘Don't you get into trouble.
Now Michael, look after your sister, but have a good time, ooh I'm going to miss you.’
from my mum, and the usual slap on the back for Michael from dad, ‘See you, son.’
The plane journey was fairly peaceful and comfortable.
We arrived at Corfu airport later in the afternoon.
My aunt and uncle were waiting for us to come through.
All I heard was ‘There they are!
Michael, Helen!
I can't believe how much you've grown!’
Fine.
We were driven back to our home for 2 weeks by my uncle.
During the journey we were informed that tomorrow, we were going to go and see the Queen who was coming to the small town to visit the hospital.
Great.
I couldn't wait for tomorrow.
What a fun time we were going to have.
I really couldn't be bothered.
We entered the house and immediately had tea.
Cakes, sandwiches, and a porcelain tea pot and cups were waiting on the table.
A Visit from the Queen.
I remember that morning vividly as I was so nervous and hadn't been able to sleep much the night before.
By about 4.30 am I had given up on trying to sleep so I got up to have a shower.
I was going to get up at 5.30 anyway so it didn't make all that much difference.
By 6.00 am everybody had assembled to get their orders for the day.
There was a buzz of excitement all around the room, but at the same time everyone had the same nervous look about their face.
Once we had got our jobs for the morning we set about then eagerly as everything had to be perfect right down to the last detail.
It couldn't have been a worse morning for the Queen of England to visit us.
For once she would probably have been better off staying at home as far as the weather was concerned.
Instead of the brilliant sunshine we had had all the week before it had started raining throughout the night and was still falling steadily.
There was not a break in the clouds anywhere.
Hardly the weather you would expect on a  summer's Monday morning in Corfu.
There was a slight air of confusion as people rushed around trying to do three things at the same time.
I, however was lost in a daydream wondering what the Queen would be like.
What would she be wearing?
What would she think of our country?
 And most of all, could I complete my duties for the day without causing a major disturbance?
All these thoughts and many more were racing  through my head  as I polished the silver teapot which she would be drinking out of.
The teapot stood tall above the rest of the set on the tray shining magnificently.
I had  been polishing it for what seemed hours and you could now see your face in it perfectly.
Again my mind wandered from my polishing and back onto the job I would be doing in a few hours.
I felt very honoured to be chosen to serve tea to the Queen and had practised my  curtseys all week.
Only time would tell now whether it would go without mishap I just had to be patient.
A Wet Monday Morning
It was Monday morning and I was in bed.
I woke up and grinned, remembering that it was the half term holiday and I did not have to go to school.
I could hear the rain tapping on my window and I felt very glad that I was in my dry, warm bed.
There was a knock on my door and my mother came into my room to tell me that she was going to work.
I smiled smugly at her because she had to go into the rain and I did not.
I looked at my clock to find that it was nine thirty so I dragged myself out of bed and put on my dressing gown.
I pulled a corner of the curtain away from the window so that I could see out.
My mother was climbing into her car and the rain was coming down fast.
I shivered and moved away from the window.
I went along the landing to the kitchen.
It was fun living in a flat because once you were inside there were no stairs and everything was in about two feet's distance.
I cringed as I opened the fridge door, I hated opening the fridge door.
My mother insisted on having a picture of the Queen stuck on the fridge door with magnets holding it on.
Usually my mother was just like a sister to me but she has a strange fascination with the Queen.
I took the milk out of the fridge and poured some into my tea.
I picked up my mug and padded barefoot into the lounge.
In our lounge we had two large bean bags and an old sofa with a blanket on it.
I flopped down onto a bean bag and took a sip of my tea.
The remote control for the television was next to me so I pressed the ‘on’ button.
After about two minutes of watching I realised that it was a travel programme and they were in Corfu so I changed the channel.
I love daytime television so when I saw Richard and Judy staring  at me from the other channel I was quite pleased.
By the time my mother came home from work for lunch the flat was a mess.
I had tried out Indonesian cooking with the chef, makeup, hairdressing and  all sorts of things and it was good fun.
My mother nearly died when she saw the mess but little did she know that I was going to do it all again the next day.
The Apple Tree
I awoke to the scent of fresh apples
all around me,
Dare I open my eyes?
take a look, what do I see?
Apples, more apples surrounding my bedside.
Should I touch one?
So big and so red,
they'll be juicy
I know now.
There is one very close
just in reach of my claws.
That is it; I'm on to it now.
I feel good, I can eat it.
But I don't take a bite
 merely a peck,
This will satisfy my hunger?
I think not.
Peck again.
But now I awake,
in the darkness of my room
I'm not a bird.
I have been re-transformed
to myself and this
civilised gloom.
Mr Simons
I pushed back the rusty old gate and staggered into the garden.
The grass sprouted up between the paving slabs and the lawn was nearly overspilling with bushes and flowers now growing wild.
The big, heavy blue door loomed before me and as I knocked I heard Mr Simons shuffling along the partially carpeted hall to greet me.
As the door opened the thin sunlight raced into the dusty hall and sprinted up the stairs, never really reaching the top.
The man smiled a wry but gentle smile and beckoned me in.
The front room was dark but the gentle, peaceful fire caringly kept the room at a healthy temperature.
Mr Simons slumped down in his worn seat and looked up at me expectantly.
I handed him the plate of hot meat and vegetables.
The photographs which encircled me were happy with many smiling, young faces on them.
Every possible flat space had a silver frame containing one of these photos.
They made me feel sad.
As the clock ticked monotonously on the wall Mr Simons slowly and methodically cut up and ate his food, he never said a word.
I'm sure that if he had said something he never have betrayed the pain he had been guarding for a long time.
As he finished he smiled and handed me the empty plate.
I walked out of that big, blue door and once more let the light stream in, for today would be its only chance, for this week anyway.
Monday Morning
It was Monday morning; the rain rattled on my window pane while the wind seemed to shake my room, almost forcing me out of bed to face the world.
Then I remembered; today I would walk with my head in the clouds, it seemed.
In a few hours I would be flown into a different culture, a different climate, with different people.
I needed a break and a ticket to Corfu was the medicine I'd had in mind for a considerable time.
The weather was miserable but my thoughts had warmed my heart.
‘Get a move on Fiona.
We're going to be late.
Jesus Christ, you'd think you were the bloody Queen!’ a voice resounded from the kitchen.
‘OK, OK — look, just get the kettle on and make a cup of tea!’
I replied, endeavouring to conceal my excitement.
I grabbed my dressing gown and propelled myself downstairs to the kitchen.
Janet had my breakfast laid out on the table and sat there grinning an insane grin at me.
I ignored her, trying to look as if the prospect of Corfu did not excite me.
I reached for the teapot; it was warm and brightened my day even more.
Today would be great!
The Apple
I woke up suddenly feeling something cold and smooth pressing into my side.
My hand groped for the light in terror as I wondered what this object could be.
I envisaged a deadly  tarantula creeping slowly into my bed, spreading its legs over me, about to bite!
Then I realised that this was unlikely and to my relief I found an apple; slightly bruised by its encounter with me in my bed.
I took it out of the bed and stared at it, then I put it on the table beside my bed and put out the lights.
When my eyes had grown accustomed to the darkness I saw its silhouette and I reached out to touch it, it was rough and had nodules growing from it.
Even so, it felt good, like real nature and how real apples should feel like, not bright green and synthetic but dirty green and coarse.
I imagined how the apple had come to be in my bed.
I remembered I had brought it up to eat as supper and had fallen asleep.
There it lay lifeless, but so full of life.
I grabbed it with my hand and  sunk my teeth deep into it.
It tasted sweet .
I took a big bite ,put it back on the table and left it to rot throughout the night.
The apple
Somehow an apple appeared on the bookcase.
It was directly in the centre and my eyes focused  intensely on it.
Its colour was of brilliant red on the left hand side, but dispersing as it went to the right ending up a pale green colour.
Its stalk was adorned with two leaves in complete  symmetry .
The apple looked false.
I approached it eagerly and touched it.
Its skin was smooth and shiny with no blemishes.
Still disbelieving its reality, I searched for a kitchen knife.
I pierced the skin.
The knife  sunk through smoothly.
I drew it downwards with a clean cut.
Two halves rested gently on the bookcase I examined the inside of  one half.
In the centre was a large round circle enclosing the pips.
It was the core.
There were ten brown, droplet pips arranged neatly around the central point — not one of them had been harmed or  dislodged by the cut of the knife.
I took the other half, inspecting it in a similar manner.
It was identical  to the first.
How strange, I thought.
Not only did I not know how the apple had come to be on the bookcase, or in the house for that matter; but how could it be perfect in every way.
With great doubt in these facts I felt I could not eat it; either because it was an illusion or it perhaps was dangerous or poisonous in some way.
I immediately washed my hands and the knife suspecting poison, but one thing still puzzled me: how the apple came to be there.
I Buried Him
Amidst the wails of terror, the last breaths of despair and defeat,
Through the raging savage cries of our enemies
I heard a sound; a murmur,
My ears frantically sought out the cause,
Followed then by my weary eyes; no longer the bright, alert,
Innocent eyes of the boy I should still be,
And then I saw it:
His body slumped on the tarnished, alien turf,
Slowly writhing, his hand limp but stretching out further and further,
His eyes searching for me, imploring me.
Soon my feet were trampling the earth,
My pace slowing, breath heaving, pulse racing,
I tasted the salt on my lips and felt the sting of the cold, bitter air
His body was draped over my back,
My body was giving up, but I kept on.
Then, almost lost in my breathing, he managed to make out the words;
‘I think I've been hit.’
I kept on, not knowing where I was going, stumbling in the darkness,
But clinging on to him,
Clinging on to my best friend, my buddy,
With whom only months ago I had been like every other new recruit;
Determined, eager, brave and lusting for the real thing,
No more playing at it, like young boys with their toy soldiers
Made of lead, which would never break,
But unaware of the atrocities soon to be witnessed:
The ground littered with corpses,
The smell of burning flesh,
The nightmares which would haunt forever.
As I ran, my feet pounding, I felt a cold dampness near my skin,
And soon my back was soaked through;
It was not his water bottle which had leaked and now lay empty, though,
But the bright, youthful life which had drained from my friend;
I buried him.
‘Hamlet’ is extraordinarily rich in varied incident; yet none of this is irrelevant to the main purpose of the play.’
Discuss.
The number and variations of incidents in ‘Hamlet’ are primarily all connected with the incident of Hamlet's hatred and eventual murder of his uncle, who has taken the throne after killing his (Hamlet's) father Even though at times these may seem irrelevant to this theme, all tie in with Hamlet himself.
The main purpose of the play is not only to show the murder of Claudius, but also, and more significantly, to show the character of Hamlet and the problems he has in accepting what he has to do.
It should thus be said that any incident which involves, either directly or indirectly, Hamlet himself, is connected with ‘the main purpose of the play’.
For instance, Hamlet's relationship and subsequent behaviour towards Ophelia may not appear at first closely connected with Hamlet's plan of murder.
His cruel treatment of her in Act III, Scene I is not directed at her personally, but at the ruthlessness of Claudius' power over her and treatment of her.
Hamlet treats her so badly because he is angry at her lack of willpower against Claudius, the man he hates.
Before speaking to her he has pondered the question of committing suicide to absolve himself from the responsibility of avenging his father; and Ophelia's behaviour only emphasises the apparent pointlessness of trying to oppose Claudius, who could easily destroy him.
It is only when he is on the ship bound for England away from mental setbacks such as this at court, that give Hamlet the courage to return to kill Claudius.
Laertes, who spends most of the play away from the court studying in France, is also a character who appears to have a sub-plot of his own.
However, his furious return in Act IV, demanding vengeance for the murder of his father Polonius, begins to tie in with Hamlet himself.
On his journey home Laertes has raised an army shouting ‘We choose Laertes as king!’, and does not  hesitate in his desire to take revenge on not only Hamlet, the murderer, but also on Claudius, who has kept the death of Polonius secret.
If Claudius had not spoken so cleverly to him.
Laertes would surely have killed him.
This may seem irrelevant to Hamlet taking revenge; but this scene (Act IV, Scene V) shows the contrast between Hamlet, who thinks deeply about actions and their consequences; and Laertes, the man of action, who does not think at all about the consequences of what he does, being driven by his heart rather than his head.
The comedy in ‘Hamlet’ comes mainly from the scenes involving Hamlet's mockery of the foolish Polonius; and the gravediggers in Act V, Scene I. These scenes do indeed provide comic relief for the audience; but they also show the way in which Hamlet vents his feelings (Polonius) and the fragility of life (Gravediggers).
If one looks beyond the surface comedy the sadness of Hamlet is revealed.
He mocks Polonius, but still thinks of him as a ‘tedious old fool’, showing that his feelings have not been resolved.
The gravediggers discuss the unfairness of society and the way in which lives are treated; and even though this may have been funny, it also made serious social comment.
Hamlet often thinks of death, and this debate fits with his thoughts on mortality.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern may also appear somewhat irrelevant characters; but to Hamlet they are representatives of Claudius' manipulative spy network; heightening his belief that Claudius is so powerful he is impossible to beat.
However he also reveals his own cunning (very much like Claudius') when on the ship to England by changing the letters of instruction and having them killed: a punishment for those who tried to deceive him and a warning to Claudius.
It is Claudius and Gertrude who are the main victims of Hamlet's anger, and everything they do makes Hamlet hate them even more.
This is particularly true of Gertrude who only wants her son to be happy, but her  cheerfulness and pleadings with Hamlet only make the situation worse.
The ‘main purpose of the play’ is Hamlet as a character and his development from frustration to final, but brief, victory.
Therefore, any action in this play which involves Hamlet or his ideas involves the main purpose; and without Hamlet himself there would exist no situation.
Hamlet is at the same time the catalyst and the theme of the entire play.
A holiday to remember
I was glad when Sunday morning arrived, I woke up and saw two  suitcases bulging on my bedroom floor.
Today, I was going to Corfu — I had never really wanted to go there, but one day I saw an  advertisement in the newspaper.
‘Two weeks of bliss, a girls only holiday in Corfu’.
The idea appealed to me at once, a plane full of women who, as soon as they arrived in Corfu would pounce on the natives of the island.
There would not be a single British male with his  Hawaiian shirt and sickly white body in sight.
When I arrived at the airport to check in, I was surprised by the amount of security, I decided they must be looking for drug  traffickers .
The employee behind the check in desk gave me a huge smile and welcomed me to the airport, gave me my seat reservation card and wished me a good journey.
I said thank you and secretly  wished her teeth would fall out so she would not be as beautiful.
We  boarded the plane and all found our seats.
I sat next to the  aisle , but the seat next to me was empty.
Everyone had  boarded and all the seats were full except for D1, next to me.
Then I heard gasps all the way up the plane.
I lifted my head out of my magazine and heard a rather posh voice say ‘Excuse me’.
Shortly after take off the  stewardesses brought round some afternoon tea, I shared a pot of tea and a plate of sandwiches and cakes with my new neighbour.
‘Would you like your tea or your milk poured first ?’
‘Milk please your majesty.’
THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF CHEMISTRY SUMMER SCHOOL, JULY 1993
My preconceived ideas about this course, which was held at Manchester University, were completely erased by the end of the first evening.
The advertisement had described the course as an opportunity to gain a taste of university life including lectures, practicals and social life.
I think a more apt summing up would be ‘chaos’.
The lectures were more than a little disappointing in that most of them were concerned with the economics of companies such as Unilever.
There was one fascinating lecture on chirality and organic synthesis including the design of Salbutamol, a drug used to treat asthma.
Apart from this a minimal amount of chemistry was mentioned — not that most of the participants would have noticed since they were lethargic to the point of  unconsciousness .
Those who were still in complete control did not manage to survive the food.
By the second night I had to be scraped from the floor and dragged two miles to the only shop in the vicinity to buy something which could pass as edible.
Although having accustomed ourselves to ‘polyfilla based nutrition’ nothing could have prepared us for the fish which was served at one of the so-called meals.
It was not helped by the fact that it was involuntarily wriggling on the plate.
Later on when one boy inadvertently mentioned that ‘amines smell of fish’ everyone in hearing distance grabbed the nearest available paper bag.
Fortunately we had just about recovered in time for the practical session.
Working in groups of three we tackled about ten titrations each in three hours with a break for lunch.
The practical was conducted in a satisfactory way.
there being no personal disasters on my part (for once).
One other member of my group (the same one who was responsible for the incident with the fish) decided to mix various chemicals together in a conical flask.
Being a sensible young man he calculated energy changes for each reaction and used Standard Electrode Potentials,(beloved of all A-level chemists) claiming that this would ensure that all reactions he carried out were safe.
Fortunately his calculations were accurate and the chemistry department at Manchester is still just about intact.
In the evenings the poorly organized social activities were shunned in favour of a practical study of the aliphatic alcohols and their reactions in the digestive tract.
Those who were not participating in this type of research had to make do with walking in the oh so prolific Manchester rain, holding pillow-fighting competitions or otherwise bear the dreadful timetabled events.
In fact Needham hall where we were housed, deteriorated so rapidly that it was almost necessary to bring in the riot squad.
Unsurprisingly the significance of the last lecture of the course was not in general, mentally processed.
There is a crisis in the field of chemistry.
There are insufficient quality applicants for chemistry-related degrees.
Only one application is made per place and institutions can not fine the calibre of student they would like.
Britain needs chemists as much as it needs doctors and as a result there will be high employment prospects for chemistry graduates in the future.
Despite the failings of the course I did have an excellent time and was not put off continuing with chemistry.
I would not particularly recommend this course but more girls should seriously consider this subject.
To See The Blaydon Races
Although this radio programme was broadcast nationally, I found it very interesting as I happened to know the area in question.
Scotswood Road and the Armstrong Vickers factory used to be one of the busiest places in Newcastle,(it even earned a mention in one of the best known Geordie songs — hence the programme's title) with the factory employing most of the residents.
However as the number of jobs in Vickers decreased the area underwent serious urban decay.
The programme carefully and informatively investigated life in the Scotswood Road, and used interviews with residents extensively to illustrate their points of  view , along with a good use of background noises.
This worked well for two reasons in my opinion:
Firstly, first hand experience seems to be the only way of finding the real problems in the area.
Very many people heard about the riots in the area last year, and heard the authorities' explanations for them, but this programme attempted to find the root causes of the problems.
Secondly, by using  interviews from local people the programme dispelled the ‘Grim North’ image many people have of the Tyneside area.
A wide range of people were  interviewed , everyone from mothers to children, the local police and the recently formed  tenants' association.
Nearly everyone had a very positive outlook and the plans for action to revive the area were discussed.
The programme also neatly illustrated the heart of the problem by the references people made to the high crime rate which was unemployment.
The programme showed really well how serious the crime levels were becoming, when a man explained that houses were completely stripped of anything of any value by adults and children alike, to sell as scrap.
Houses had to be boarded up and rendered both impenetrable and  inaccessible as soon as the inhabitants moved out, so that squatters and wreckers could not move in.
I felt that there could have been slightly more involvement with the police at this point, as it would have been quite interesting to hear their  views on this problem.
However I did find the coverage of the police chasing a joyrider (or a ‘deathrider’ as some people chose to call them) very informative.
Joyriders are a real hazard in and around Scotswood Road, and there seems to be very little that people can do about them, other than give warnings and make arrests.
the police and the parents were trying to work together to try to solve the problem, but the parents accused the police of ignoring any help given to them.
The problems of Scotswood continue, and although various people are trying to tackle them, it is obviously going to take a lot of time, money and effort to solve them.
The coverage of the new business park was encouraging, however, as it showed that Scotswood had not been forgotten, and there was hope for a better future.
LEAH
Why does God punish me so?
Did I ever do anything so wrong as a child that I should deserve to suffer for evermore?
Rachel had it all.
Where I had nothing, she had everything.
Beauty, strength, love — she had them all, and yet she still hates me.
As soon as Jacob arrived here, I knew that he would fall in love with her, just like all the others.
I could not prevent my father from tricking him into marrying me instead of Rachel.
At first I was totally humiliated, and then I suppose in my heart, I truly believed that in that one week that he was mine, I could teach him to love me and to forget that Rachel even existed.
Of course, that did not work.
At first I was bitterly jealous of Rachel and only wanted Jacob to love me more than her to win something from her for the first time in my miserable life, but by the end of that blissful week, I found that I, unfortunately, had also fallen victim to his charms.
After that I had to share Jacob with Rachel.
At that point, I hated her with a strength I never knew I had possessed up until then.
Before that, Rachel had simply been my younger sister; prettier, brighter and sweeter than me, but that had never really bothered me until that moment, when I realised that Jacob obviously loved her far more than he would ever love me.
Then I began to loathe her passionately.
Every little thing concerning Jacob turned into a private battle between Rachel and I. When I gave birth to Reuben, I believed that my husband must love me for giving him a son.
Still there was no change in his attitude towards me.
He was kind and respectful as always, but he loved me no more, and Rachel no less.
I tried again…and again.
Three sons I had given him, and still he did not love me as I was so desperate to be loved.
The fourth I named Judah ‘in praise of the Lord’.
The irony of it all!
At this time, it was great triumph for me to find that Rachel could bear her beloved Jacob no children.
For the first time in her life, she learned what it was like to be jealous of me.
For the first time, I had something which she did not have.
My joy did not last for long.
I did not appreciate my new position of power, and very soon began to pity Rachel.
She then gave Jacob her maidservant, Bilhah, as a wife, saying that through her, she would build a family.
Once again I was crushed.
Was I not good enough, that Jacob had to take an extra wife, a mere servant at that?
Bilhah, since then, has given Jacob two sons for Rachel, and again Rachel feels she has the better of me.
as if this were not enough, I now realise that I can no longer give Jacob children.
What have I done to deserve this?
Should I too give Jacob my maidservant, Zilpah, or should I give in to Rachel?
I can only laugh at Rachel now.
Where once I felt hatred, now I only feel compassion.
Her only aim in life is to produce more children than me, and to keep Jacob from growing to love me.
I would not want his tainted love!
Am I growing cynical in my old age?
Well, let him have Zilpah.
If she wants to continue our private battle, then who am I to stop her?
Who cares, anyway?
Autobiographical memory
I remember very clearly a summer holiday years ago when I was learning to ride a bike.
At that time we had a fairly large irregular backyard where my father would chop wood each morning in anticipation of the cold winter to come.
I was feel very proud of myself because I had just progressed from a tiny red tricycle to riding a huge yellow proper bicycle, with stabilizers.
I had a good sense of balance and had got the hang of riding this two-wheeled bike quite well.
Now, every morning when my father commenced his sawing of wood, I would commence my day's bike ride.
I would drag my pride and joy from a tangle of other bikes in a dark, small out house and set it to start in exactly the same place each morning.
I would then climb on and ride round and round the yard, trying to keep the exactly the same course for each circuit for the whole of the morning.
As I cycled faster and faster each morning as my legs grew stronger, I would imagine myself to be beating a world record for the number of times anyone could ride round our yard in one morning.
I would sing to myself, perfectly content to be alone in my own dream world, imagining myself on television receiving an award for beating a world record and I would see my name and picture in the ‘ Guinness Book of Records’ on the high bookshelf in my brother's room where I could not reach it, and yet, through all those mornings of endless riding round the yard, I never once counted just how many times I had ridden around to see if I had beaten the previous morning's record, so sure was my conviction of success!
THE WAR
War is usually defined as conflict — or fighting between nations, however, this is not always so.
Sometimes, the war is in someone's head.
A conflict between what they know is right, and what they want to do.
Jenny Wilson was an ordinary woman, leading an ordinary life, had an ordinary job in an ordinary town.
Basically, she wasn't going anywhere, career-wise or any other way.
She'd never really been interested in boys, or going out much.
She didn't have many friends and not much of a social life.
There used to be a man in the office…but it didn't work out.
Jenny had always lived with her parents, and even at the age of twenty-five, she was still tied to the apron strings.
She'd lived there partly because she couldn't be bothered to move, partly because it was cheap, but mainly because her mother wouldn't let her go.
Jenny's twenty-sixth birthday was rolling round and she was becoming bored — very bored.
She wasn't the spontaneous kind of person who would just up and leave.
She needed to think, and plan.
Planning is just what she had been doing.
She wanted to travel — she had enough money put away.
After quenching her desire to see and experience new things, she was going to ask her boss for a transfer and move to the nearest city, where the office had its headquarters.
She knew her parents would be upset.
Well, it was her mother really.
Her dad wanted her to spread her wings a little— not too much mind.
He thought that experience was invaluable.
‘Life is based on experience,’ he would say.
‘No experience, no life!’
Her mother on the other hand was undeniably different.
In her mind, a girl should stay with her parents until proposed to, and then go and keep house for her husband, bear him children, and look after them.
On face value, Jenny would nod, and agree with her mother, knowing better than to argue, but underneath her cool exterior, she was boiling.
She had followed her mother's commandments and her idea of what was right and wrong for long enough.
She was going to live her life her own way.
She was…she was….
Her own wants and needs always seemed to become smothered under her mother's.
Jenny was fed up.
She wanted out.
Two weeks after her twenty-sixth birthday, Jenny's father had a heart attack.
Whilst lying on his death bed, he whispered to his daughter, ‘Look after your mother for me’.
Who was Jenny to deny a man his last dying wish?
The war began.
It started slowly.
Perhaps too slowly for comfort.
Like two regiments facing each other over a stretch of muddy field.
Waiting for the command….
Waiting….
The command never came — it was as if the sergeants had said, ‘Right lads, when you're ready.’
The soldiers meandered.
Not wanting to attack, not wanting to be attacked.
They remained undecided.
A stalemate.
A decision had to be made…soon.
Jenny was torn.
A promise made, a dream shattered
Like two regiments…her mind was undecided.
Facing each other…two opposing ideas.
Over a stretch of muddy field…she had to bridge the gap — decide.
Waiting for the command…what should she do?
Waiting…her promise.
Waiting…her dreams.
Waiting…unformed ideas…
‘Up and at ‘em, dear!’
How her mother could be cheerful at seven in the morning, Jenny would never know.
It was just another one of those irritating things about her mother, Margaret, that she hadn't noticed until her dad had died.
Jenny groaned.
After pulling on her clothes, she headed downstairs for the  perfunctory glass of orange-juice which served as breakfast.
Margaret was at it already — her occupation — fussing .
‘You can't just have that for breakfast, dear.’
‘Mom, I —’
‘How about some cereal?’
‘No, I —’
‘Bacon and eggs?’
‘I'm going —’
‘Sit your self down and have a nice cup of tea, dear.’
‘No, mom.’
Jenny sat.
They faced each other.
One smiling, holding a tea-pot.
One lugubrious.
Jenny stood.
 Decisively .
‘I'm going to work.’
She walked into the hallway, picking up her jacket and handbag, amidst much apology:
‘I was only trying to help…
There's no need to take it like that…
I only want what's best for you…
The best way to start the day is with a big filling breakfast…’
It went on and on…
The door slammed.
Jenny walked along the street in the direction of the town.
The cool air on her face was calming her temper.
One half of her mind was telling her to calm down.
‘It's only because she loves you.
You promised your dad you would stick by her — however irritating.’
The other was like music to her ears:
‘Get out.
She doesn't need you.
She needs a pet.
Something to mollycoddle.
Dad wouldn't have wanted a promise to ruin your life.’
Over a stretch of muddy field…
Get out.
Leave.
Travel.
Waiting for the command…
She's doing what she thinks is right.
Waiting…
Experience.
Live
Waiting…
A decision had to be made.
She pushed her inner chaos to the back of her mind and tried to concentrate on the coming day.
In a word — Boring.
These days, working was like an echo.
The same thing day in and day out.
Another reason to leave.
There seemed to be more and more everyday.
About three weeks later, Jenny had resigned herself to the fact that she would stay.
Her dreams were pushed aside.
Her mother needed her.
She'd promised her dad.
She was in a routine.
Work, mother, sleep, mother, work, mother…
It was endless Work was a chore.
Mother was a hassle.
An inner fight.
Outer detachment.
Sleep — well, sleep was escape.
Then ‘it’ happened.
It was a man.
Except he wasn't ‘a man’.
He was The Man.
The Man Jenny had waited for.
She'd found the Man of her dreams, except she was still awake.
He'd walked into the ordinary office on an ordinary day.
he was not ordinary, and Jenny could not help but notice him.
Four days later he asked her out to dinner, and she walked home without her feet touching the pavement.
Not even her mother could ruin her happiness.
Her life was a whirl of parties, outings to the theatre, dinner-dates, picnics and quiet evening walks.
She finally knew what it was to live.
She was learning something new every day, and David was enjoying being the teacher just as much as Jenny loved being the pupil.
She no longer felt ordinary.
She was special.
She was loved.
The indecision in Jenny's mind had been pushed away.
She didn't need to think about it.
Life was perfect…
Too perfect.
The best and worst day of Jenny's life arrived two months later.
David proposed and Jenny accepted.
That was the best part.
The worst part was the arguments with her mother that were inevitable:
‘You've only known him for a few months!’
‘Mother, I love him.’
‘He'll leave you, you mark my words.’
‘He loves me.’
‘What about me, eh?’
‘You always wanted me to get married.’
‘What would your father say?
She'd hit home.
Bullseye.
Jenny froze.
‘I'm marrying David and that's all there is to it.’
She got up.
Left the room.
Ran.
‘What would your father say?’
The words echoed around her.
The war raged.
What should she do?
Her promise…her dreams…
As long as her mother was here, she would be trapped…
The war persisted.
Two weeks later.
A couple sit on the front row of the crematorium.
The mourners sit behind.
Tears fall.
The vicar drones on.
Words are lost.
The girl watches as the coffin is moved away.
Her face is dry.
The curtains close on the disappearing coffin.
No tears.
The separating the living from the dead.
No tears.
His arm encircles her.
Protective.
He looks away.
She turns back.
One last look.
A slow smile spreads over her lips.
The war has ended.
Victory.
HAGAR
It is the best day of my life.
I am with my son in Egypt.
It is his wedding day.
I believe that my God has found this beautiful wife for Ishmael as a recompense for our years of hardship.
My son is happy.
He is not an outsider anymore.
No longer is everybody against him — he has found his place.
At times, I think back to my life in Canaan with Sarah and Abraham.
I remember the first time Sarah and I met.
I was uneasy — she was a lover of  Pharaoh — sophisticated, mature and beautiful — I was Hagar, a servant — young, foolish and juvenile.
How would she treat me?
What would she want from me?
Where would she take me?
For the first years with Sarah my life was a happy one.
We were friends, accomplices, sisters, mother and daughter.
Anything Sarah thought, I was told.
Anything she wanted, I provided.
Our friendship had brought us closer than I had ever been with anyone before.
I would never have believed then, that jealousy would tear us apart.
What was mine was hers.
This would always be true, but would she always want it?
Would she be willing to share?
We had been living in Canaan for ten years when Abraham started inviting me to his tent.
This was the first time I had kept anything from Sarah.
I could not tell her — I could not hurt her in this way.
If I had ever not gone to Abraham when summoned, he promised me he would tell Sarah everything, or at least his version of everything.
This would have no doubt involved stories of my forcing myself on him — something Sarah would have condemned.
Either way, I could not win.
I did not want to lose Sarah's friendship.
It was the only thing I cared about.
After a few weeks of our secret meetings, I thought that Sarah had discovered the fact that we were both, in our different ways, being unfaithful to her.
She asked me how I felt towards Abraham, told me of his feelings for me, and offered sisterly advice on how to win him.
I know now that she was unaware of our meetings.
She wanted us to do what we already were — in hope of my becoming pregnant in her place.
Abraham continued to send for me — only this time legitimately.
Sarah talked excitedly about what would happen when I became pregnant — what a wonderful child we would have, and all the things we could teach him.
I knew that Sarah would treat the child as her own, and even take him from me, but at the time I did not mind — what was mine was hers.
All I wanted was to become pregnant — then I would no longer have to go to Abraham's tent and lie next to his old, drained body.
When I did become pregnant, it was amidst much rejoicing — the heir of Abraham was to be born.
The first of the many descendants of The Promised Land.
I was suddenly important.
All the servants knew my name and pointed at me as I passed them.
Abraham bought me new clothes, gave me a new place to live, and sent me the finest food.
Sarah began to be jealous of the new  attentions Abraham was paying me.
Before I was pregnant, I at least was a distraction for him — I kept him away from her tent, but now his favours were of a material kind, she did not like it.
Instead of now referring to the child as something for us to share, Sarah started saying it was hers.
I was proud of my achievement — I had managed something that my mistress had not — I was pregnant with Abraham's heir, and Sarah started to hate me for it.
Our beautiful friendship was turning sour.
Sarah began to despise me due to my pregnancy.
She would beat me, push me as I was going downstairs, and do anything she could to try and harm me and my baby.
I know I should hate her for it, but I can't.
If she had harmed Ishmael I would, but as long as it was only me that was injured, I could not blame her.
We had been so close, and yet she had always been stationed well above me.
I had violated that status.
She was jealous that I was to bear her husband's son — I could not hate her for that.
There was one thing I could do, though.
Not only to protect the child within me from her jealousy, but to help Sarah too.
I took the only option that I could see was open to me, and I ran away into the desert.
Perhaps I could stay here until nearer my time, then return for the birth?
Or should I have my baby here in the desert away from harm?
Nearing the end of my pregnancy, I had a dream, reminding me of all the good times Sarah and I had shared — the love that bonded us, and the  way she had cared for me during my life in Canaan.
I knew when I woke that it was time for me to return.
Sarah and I reared Ishmael together.
Her acts of cruelty towards me were never mentioned.
I felt it was better that way.
Ishmael grew into a wonderful child, although spoilt.
He was loving, cheerful and always ready to go to myself or Sarah for caresses.
He had a happy beginning to his childhood, and the household was a happy peaceful and loving one, until Sarah, at a very advanced time of her life, became pregnant.
The upheaval began once again when  Isaac was born.
Sarah's old jealousy had come to the fore — she wanted  Isaac to inherit all of Abraham's wealth and his elder son, Ishmael, to have none.
Once again, I lived in the desert, only this time I was sent away, and could never return.
The friendship that had lived between Sarah and myself was over.
The years of partnership were at an end.
 Unnecessary jealousies had formed a chasm that nothing could bridge.
Ishmael had been reared experiencing a hard life in the desert, suffering from hunger, thirst, loneliness — but I need not think about that again — not today.
Today is special.
Today we are ending the  loneliness and solitude for ever.
Abraham once told me that Ishmael would be the beginning of a nation — now I believe him.
Today we are becoming part of a family.
Ishmael is a new husband, and myself a  mother.
All the hurt, wasted love and tears of the years, must today be forgotten.
Today is for happiness only, and yet I find that I must think of Sarah.
Margery's conversation with her husband when she has come home from the Exhibition
Hello, darling.
It's so good to see you.
I haven't seen you since — oh, it must be seven o'clock.
I hope Alice and Christopher are doing their homework — are they?
Good.
I met Belinda — the Belinda from Sotheby's — and we had a little chin-wag before I looked round the exhibition.
Anyway, she seemed to be very worried about the state of the market: recession and all that.
I suppose she's getting election wobbles.
Which way will you be voting, darling?
I do care about the environment too, but you're absolutely right: voting Green would be wasting your vote…
That's not to say I'm not terrified about the state of our rivers and trees — but I don't think it's the best way to care for our environment.
It's up to each person to do something about it.
Anyway, voting Conservative would be considerably better for our businesses.
I just hope they don't tax company cars any more than they already have done.
By the way, did you get you car mended?
Oh, yes!
I almost forgot about the exhibition.
So Belinda was saying that the market's a trifle depressed at the moment.
Actually, that's a gross understatement; she's really very worried…
I suppose it's because people don't put canvas with paint daubed on it very high up on their list of personal needs, especially when there are bills to pay and food to buy…
Honestly, you can see why some people aren't keen on art; some of that stuff they turn out is absolute rubbish!
There's nothing I hate more than going to an exhibition where there's nobody there whom I know and there's nothing there which I like…
Yes, of course it's important to invest in  pictures and it's a very good way of getting to know people, business people and so on— and to show them what sort of person you are.
After you've worked hard carving out a career for yourself, it's no good if people can't see your personality.
It's so important to be seen at these things and — I know it sounds very philistine — to show people that you have money.
If you don't have a pleasant manner and if it looks as if you have no spare cash, people just don't want to deal with you; it's not a viable proposition.
It's the same with your dress sense.
Oh, do you know something?
No, I didn't think you did.
Sorry — I mean — I mean that it was a stupid question!
Anyway, I saw Tony from the ‘Guardian’, at the exhibition.
He was telling me that pinks and peaches are ‘in’ this season.
Isn't that good news?
No, not the flowers and fruits!
Don't you think it good news?
I'm wearing peach, darling!
Yes, I know it's from last summer and it's a bit too tailored for this season, but it'll do for work.
Talking of work, I'd better go and do the moules marinières — or do you want me to tell you about the exhibition?
There really were some very good paintings there; we should seriously think about buying some of them.
There was one particular painting which caught my eye, it was of the sea at midnight, with a full moon above it, in the sky.
It had a silver frame which just set it off…
The artist was — I'm not sure if I've got this right — I think it was — oh, it was Chinese or something — Ho Riet Minh.
That was it!
He was Vietnamese, not Chinese.
How stupid of me.
I met him.
Our  conversation more or less hinged on the fact that he was Vietnamese, so I don't know why I forgot.
It was most interesting talking to him; he really was a most pleasant man.
He was charming.
He said he lives on baked beans!
Isn't that funny?
I suppose English food must be quite different to Vietnamese food.
He was a boat person, you know.
It must have been absolutely awful.
He's had to travel across half the world and he had to leave his eight children behind, but I don't know about his wife.
I didn't have time to ask him.
Yes, I told him about Annie, but, of course, I didn't mention her name.
It was really very fortunate for her that the social worker suggested putting Sarah and George into care just when she did, otherwise Annie would never have got to where she is today.
What were we talking about?
Oh, yes!
Well, that was all we really talked about.
I left after that.
It was rather embarrassing, actually.
I wasn't going to tell you.
I didn't find out he was the artist who'd done all of the paintings until the end of the conversation and that was basically what ended the conversation: I just ran off!
I know it was silly, but I was so embarrassed!
He didn't seem that type…
Imagine how stupid I must have looked!
He must have thought I was an absolute philistine — if they have those in Vietnam — I mean China — I mean Vietnam!
I was just making small talk and some of it was the most petty talk that I've ever heard!
At least I got to know some of the background to the paintings; the symbolism and the profundity of meaning.
Knowing what he had been through just  added a new dimension to what I saw.
I felt I had to make him happy after all the sad things which had happened to him, so I told him his English was very good.
It was just average really.
I wonder whether he thought it was just the way the English talked, or whether he thought I was peculiar…
Yes, I suppose you're right, he probably thought I was just a harmless English eccentric!
Gosh!
I feel as if I ought to make a really profound statement about something!
Well!
Moules marinières, here I come