

1
As I sit down to write I have a photograph propped up on the desk in front of me.
It's an old black and white photograph which I cut out many years ago from a now long defunct feature magazine.
It shows a corner of my native city some years after the end of the last war.
At the time it shocked me to the core.
Is this what the devastation of war means, I asked myself?
I couldn't bear to look at it.
But I had to keep it.
I folded it up and put it away in a small carved wooden box in which I kept other trinkets and treasures of no significance to anyone except myself.
Now, after this lapse of time, I can look at it more calmly.
When I first saw it I was confused by a strange surrealistic image of a place I both did and did not recognise.
In the foreground a flattened wasteland, laced with puddles.
In the centre the gaunt ruined facade of the old Royal Theatre.
Just the splendid staircase leading up to the three doorways at the entrance and above that the tall windows of the first floor gallery, all open to the sky, gazing on emptiness.
Faintly I could make out, because I knew they should be there, the sculpted masks of Tragedy and Comedy above the central doorway.
Behind this monument from the past, no more than an old man's rotten tooth, rise the buildings of the new age, featureless mathematical boxes assembled from concrete, their serried rows of uniform plate glass windows catching a gleam of what is probably the setting sun.
When I first saw this photograph I wept.
I was not much more than a child after all.
Where was such-and-such street, I asked, or the beautiful shop where my mother regularly bought her hats and gloves, or the church with the gilded domes, or the cake shop which had such a show of delicate confections at Christmas time, or the butcher's where I could hardly bring myself to look at the great sides of dead meat hanging on hooks, or the musty bookshop, smelling of dust and leather, kept by the bent old man whose white hair seemed to be falling off the back of his head, leaving his bald crown all shiny and hopeful and new?
Now I see the same depredations taking place everywhere.
New cities are pushing up like mushrooms to replace the old.
New identikit cities where it will not much matter where you are in the world.
The buildings will all look the same, the same companies will sell the same goods in all their shops, the people, apart from trivial physical differences and, possibly, their own languages, will all aspire to the same condition of affluence and to look the same as everybody else.
Maybe this will be no bad thing.
Maybe it will bring about the brotherhood of man and the sisterhood of woman sooner than anything else.
I am an old-fashioned man.
I mourn for what has been destroyed.
When I was ten years old I was taken by my parents to see my first play at the Royal Theatre.
It was a gala performance of Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme in the presence of the king.
Such excitement, such a fuss.
I was dressed in a stiff new black suit, a starched white shirt with ruffles, a black bowtie and gleaming black shoes.
I felt quite pleased with myself, I must say, treading the soft crimson carpet that cascaded everywhere, down the marble staircase, across the marble foyer and along the marble corridors.
I was transfixed by the chandeliers, their crystal drops shining like jewels.
I remember the soft background music, the continual chatter, the sight of beautiful women, even more beautiful than my mother, gliding by, emanating mysterious scents, fluttering fans and trailing long draperies with a seductive swish.
At the interval I was allowed my first glass of champagne.
It was the only occasion I saw inside and it made me hungry to go again.
It has remained a special vision for me.
Somewhere that world carries on in a crowded theatre foyer, a cosmopolitan crowd, the women glittering with diamonds, unchanged by war, by revolution, by suffering.
I would, if I could, choose such a setting as my place of Paradise — a social throng of extravagant and unashamed  worldliness in compensation for the humble and unspectacular life I have actually led.
I have barely started and my sister, Irina, has removed the photograph.
’ You know it depresses you, Andreas.’
I protested.
I am a free man.
I have a right to my own possessions.
She has no right to interfere.
I had begun to look on that photograph as a mascot for my enterprise.
I had fixed my mind on that image of that ruined theatre as if it held the clue to my whole identity.
’ It will only distract you,’said Irina.
’ I'll keep it safe for you.
You can have it back when you've finished.’
Finished?
I don't know if I can carry on now.
It wasn't as if I even wanted to sit down and write in the first place.
I have no training as a writer.
I don't believe that telling a story is as easy as it looks.
Moreover, this story is a painful one for me to tell.
It concerns a man who was a friend of mine.
An ordinary man, like the rest of us, trying to come to terms with circumstances outwith his control and matters beyond his understanding.
He chose an unacceptable solution.
I was his friend and so I will not judge him.
I cannot.
People say that as you grow older what becomes important to you are the events of your distant past, of your childhood rather than of your middle years.
In my case this natural process has been disrupted.
The more recent story of Tom Watt has taken over in the forefront of my mind.
It was Irina who persuaded me to start writing.
She could see how preoccupied I was.
’ It will relieve your mind,’she said.
Occasionally she complained.
’ You're so restless since your retirement, Andreas.’
Restless?
Well, what is a man to do, deprived at a stroke of his habitual daily employment for forty years and living for the first time with his widowed younger sister who is always surveying him for signs of disorder, be they physical, emotional or sartorial, and nagging him about unpunctuality for meals.
’ And bad-tempered,’she added once.
’ Bad-tempered?
Me?’
’ Yes.
You don't believe me, do you?
Well, it's true.
I've never known you complain so much.
So many aches and pains in your old body.
So many sleepless nights.
And as if that weren't enough, so many incompetent politicians to be disagreed with.’
’ Well, perhaps I should go back to living on my own then?’
’ Don't talk nonsense.
I need you here.
Peter needs you here.
Besides, don't you remember how lonely you used to be on your own?’
’ I wasn't that lonely.
I quite liked being on my own, most of the time.’
’ Rubbish.
What you need is a regular occupation.’
’ I thought that's what I did have — helping you with the shopping and the boy.
I'm an expert nappy-changer.
You said so yourself.
That and the odd bit of gardening takes up the time.’
’ It's not enough.
Besides, it isn't natural for someone like you.
I've been used to domestic chores and looking after children all my adult life.’
’ Well, what do you suggest?
Knitting?
Crochet?
Embroidery for men?’
Out of this absurd impasse came the idea of my writing down my version of Tom Watt's story.
Irina had the idea that I knew certainly as much of the truth behind the events as anyone and possibly more.
’ After all, you knew Tom Watt.’
’ I thought I did.’
Day by day I watched Peter grow and develop.
His first uncertain footsteps, staggering like a tiny drunkard across the sitting-room carpet.
His first articulate sounds.
His healthy appetite.
His bubbling cheerfulness.
His sturdy resilience to knocks and setbacks.
His demonstrations of trust and affection.
When he holds out his tiny arms to greet me my whole heart keels over as if a great wave has hit it.
I feel as though he might be my own child.
I didn't follow up Irina's suggestion immediately.
I needed time to think about it.
I thought about it all through that long bleak first winter of my retirement.
As I went for vigorous afternoon walks along the footpath by the half-frozen river or across the frosty fields and up the sheep-tracks  on to the hills and the bare moors beyond.
Or again late at night as I stood shivering at my bedroom window looking out on the frosted garden, unable to sleep and unable to understand why.
With the spring came release.
No sooner were the purple crocuses out in the garden than I would take the morning bus into the city and spend my time in the main reference library reading and rereading the newspaper accounts of the trial.
After a few sessions I had to stop.
They still had the power to shock.
From these accounts I couldn't recognise the Tom Watt I thought I had known.
I can't say they're inaccurate.
These reporters are all experienced men.
They've seen criminals come and go.
Like policemen, they have a hardened scepticism about humanity.
I didn't mind sober editorial comment.
I did mind the sensationalism.
One day Peter would want to know about his parents.
What, in the face of this evidence, were Irina and I, acting as his foster-parents, to tell him?
It was this question that decided me.
I had no answers and precious little consolation to offer him to mitigate the facts.
And the facts were hard and incontrovertible.
They rose unchallenged, like black rocks in a stormy sea.
Tom had foundered against them.
A few miles from the house where Irina and I live lies an old churchyard.
Quite neglected now, the small church that guarded it has crumbled into ruin.
Weeds are rampant everywhere, dandelions, nettles, dock leaves, rose-bay willow-herb, wild roses, brambles .
Many of the old headstones have fallen over, their inscriptions disfigured by lichen.
But in one corner of the churchyard, not far from the rotting wooden gate in the surrounding wall, there stands a cross which someone has taken trouble to keep upright and its inscription legible.
It is some three centuries old and commemorates three individuals, two men and a woman, who died in the sectarian ‘killing times’ of this period.
They were shot by government soldiers on their way home from attending  an open air service in the manner of their religious faith in the hills nearby.
The service was forbidden.
The stone calls them ‘martyrs to their faith.’
People I have asked tell me that this faith was austere and fanatical, that many of its adherents gave as good as any of its martyrs got.
The fighting, I am told, reflected more than a concern just with forms of worship but with an assertion by this small, proud country of its own independence of spirit.
I am a stranger to such matters.
I cannot weigh them up and judge them.
What impresses me is that when the causes of this ancient conflict have been forgotten, except by those who have made a study of it, this monument remains, crudely chiselled and doubtless seldom visited, testament to three modest souls who died for what they believed in and who are otherwise lost to history.
I do not understand politics and power.
Sometimes I don't even understand individuals.
I am merely an ordinary man.
I have struggled to make sense of things.
Each night I watch the television news.
This is history in the making, I tell myself, this splash of colour on the screen showing where that bomb fell.
The explosion, the fleeing people, the shattered rubble.
You hear the planes, the ambulance sirens, the screams, the weeping.
Perhaps one doesn't quite believe it.
Perhaps it's only a film set with extras.
Tomorrow they will pack up the equipment and depart, leaving that desert town as they found it, intact.
Irina weeps over such things.
Sometimes I get up and walk away.
Often I think that this is how we shall witness the end of the world.
That box of flickering images in the far corners of many darkened rooms will chronicle it all and perhaps even then we won't quite believe it.
I fear we walk upon a glass world.
I have to say, however, that whenever he thought I was becoming a shade morbid on visions of apocalyptic doom, my old friend Archie Dow, would admonish me:’ Ach, Andra, I've been waitin' fir the end i' the world all my life.
I thought the last war would dae fir us all, but it didnae.’
I am not an optimist by nature, but since coming to this country I have blessed by good fortune.
My own country has  been a battleground for centuries.
If it hasn't been invaders from without it's been subversion from within.
Some people say this is necessary.
The logic of history and the nature of man.
I don't understand such abstractions.
This country, too, has its exiles, but more from poverty than from war.
They have left, believing they could do better for themselves elsewhere, and then having gone they dream always of returning.
The eternal tension of the exile.
I did not choose to leave my country.
I cannot now choose to return.
It is an exile with a difference.
Irina is right to say that when I lived on my own I was a lonely man.
I put a brave face on it, as one must.
I could say that in spite of ties of affection I have been lonely all my life.
As a youngster — I was twelve when I came to this country — I imagined it was only temporary.
When the war was over I would go back home.
Things might be difficult for a while but I didn't envisage any radical changes.
I would take over my father's publishing business.
I would be rich and successful like him.
I would marry a beautiful and capable woman like my mother who would look after my house and my children while I busied myself with more important matters in the wider world.
I would have been insufferably snobbish and complacent.
It is perhaps better for my soul that I have been, instead, undistinguished and obscure.
My memorial will lie in these pages alone.
In our childhood Irina and I fought like cat and dog.
In our old age we have found a more or less peaceful form of co-existence.
And now there is Peter to bind us.
Our parents long since disappeared into the  vacuum of the war.
We have no idea what became of them.
Our musical Aunt Anna took care of us in this country until we were able to look after ourselves.
Irina married.
I did not.
Some women I have looked after with hope but without good fortune.
Perhaps I was stubborn.
Perhaps it wasn't that loneliness chose me, but that I chose it, proudly wrapping myself in it, like a cloak against the pollution of the world.
And yet, until Irina described me as bad-tempered, I had considered  myself a peaceable man, a listener and an observer, occasionally a counsellor, even a mediator.
A marginal man.
I rather like to think of myself as one of those old retainer figures that you find in Shakespeare, trusted servants or common soldiers, unremarkable in themselves, but loyal in their allegiances, sadly wise but powerless to prevent calamity, useful only in knowledge to be passed to others or sometimes trusted with the guardianship of a precious child, the redemptive agent of unhappy kingdoms or unhappy kings.
These men reconcile themselves to circumstance, make their own compromises with destiny until happier times.
They are witnesses and chorus.
They have no heroic stamp.
I have digressed.
I have made much of myself.
Bear with me.
2
Friday afternoons.
I used to have a special dread of Friday afternoons.
For other people at work they seemed to be such joyous occasions.
Cartoons pasted on walls would show tired operatives, slumped on chairs, wiping the sweat from their weary brows and breathing ‘Thank God it's Friday.’
Another once proclaimed: ‘REJOICE — FOR TODAY IS POETS' DAY (Push off early.
Tomorrow's Saturday).’
Friday afternoons were for easing up and winding down.
The conscientious might make an effort to clear their in-trays, or delegate their more intractable problems to their next in line.
The procrastinators would leave theirs till Monday.
Perhaps their more intractable problems would go away.
I felt left out.
For me it was different.
The slow sliding drift towards five o'clock on a Friday afternoon would fill me with panic, as if at the presence of life ebbing.
I have no doubt this seems exaggerated.
Abnormal.
Perhaps other people don't suffer from my nightmares or waken in a cold sweat in the middle of the night, confronting fragmented episodes from their distant past, floating by them as if the detritus of a forgotten shipwreck in an Arctic sea.
No longer young myself, I feel as if in some respects I was never young.
My youth had little gaiety in it.
Likewise my middle age.
Now I look at the confident sexual swagger of young men with more than a faint envy.
I will start with one particular Friday afternoon.
It was about a year before I retired, a wet, windy day in early November.
It was one of those dreary days when it is as dark at noon as it is at dusk and the onset of the official darkness is as the rolling down of a blind on a day that has never properly existed.
For the office girls it was a time of year when summer is a past memory and a future dream.
Christmas held their attention and engaged their conversation.
I had about ten staff working for me at that time, all  girls and women, supervised by the Senior Clerkess, Emily Lightbody.
It is not a sign of high status in a man's world to be in charge of women only, but I have to confess that I didn't find it unpleasant.
The women tolerated me, even if respect was a thing of the past, and Emily Lightbody kept them in order.
At planning meetings with the senior management I often had to endure predictable little jokes about Andreas's ‘harem’, but I took them with a good grace.
I wasn't sure how many of them knew the actual meaning of the word.
Being something of a closet linguist, I was teaching myself some Arabic in my spare time.
I therefore derived a secret enjoyment from the gibes of which the  perpetrators were unaware.
Usually on a Friday afternoon I would retreat from the busy main office to my own private one which had been constructed in one corner of the large open room.
It was variously known as ‘The Cage’ or ‘The Goldfish Bowl’, on account of its having windows all round from waist height to the ceiling.
This enabled me to observe with impunity all the goings on outside.
I doubt if I ever effectively managed my staff.
I gave directions and Emily Lightbody saw that they were carried out.
On Friday afternoons I gave up all pretence and quite consciously ceded control.
I would have been a foolish man to do otherwise.
Except when there was a crisis, and these did happen, even on Friday afternoons, vast shockwaves suddenly jarring the normal smooth running of the system.
Then there was no argument.
It was all hands to the pumps, or the typewriters or the files or the photocopier, as appropriate.
But normally business just dropped off steadily from lunchtime onwards.
The girls would return from extended lunchbreaks in the city centre — a problem Personnel conceded they couldn't resolve — rustling their voluminous plastic bags whose contents they would then exhaustively compare and discuss.
The telephone would ring less frequently, although the girls might be more frequently on the telephone.
There would be fewer business visitors and more casual droppings by from colleagues from other departments for a chat and a peek inside the plastic bags.
The files they carried would be for show and had no importance.
The photocopier might be much in use, the typewriters less so.
Then there was the teabreak, another difficulty Personnel refused to tackle.
Starting at three fifteen, it would drag itself out indefinitely.
Shoes would be kicked off beneath the desks and lie untidily askew.
Trails of blue cigarette smoke would drift tentatively upward.
There were always cream cakes and I would be brought mine ceremoniously on a plate.
Every so often I stood the treat.
The girls would giggle and tell risqué stories.
My ears burned with their crudity at times.
Emily Lightbody's eye would soften, although I was sure her command never weakened.
At four o'clock there would be a housewifely tidying up.
At half past four the morose office messenger would slink in with his brief case for the last of the week's mail, ducking the cheerful insults the girls would fling at him.
At a quarter to five Emily Lightbody would dismiss the staff.
Then I would emerge to survey the scene.
We were conservative in our working habits, Emily Lightbody and I, as I am in much else.
We had worked together in that department for many years.
We were confident of our place in it and of our ability if not to predict at least to handle any untoward eventualities.
Perhaps in our limited way that remained true to the end.
We were thrown, as, it seems, was everyone else, by the arrival of Portia Forbes.
That particular Friday afternoon I was shut in my private office with Geoff Tulloch, one of the coming men in the organisation's data-processing section.
Early in the New Year the organisation was moving from the Dickensian building in the city centre which it had inhabited for over fifty years to a new purpose-built high-rise office block south of the river, an area not long cleared of old slum dwellings and deratinised.
There were in consequence substantial changes afoot.
Some of these were long overdue, given the general advances in technology which the organisation had not yet fully taken advantage of.
This included the computerisation of the organisation's archive, of which I was in charge.
I had been asked to consult Geoff Tulloch.
I had to watch my step.
There was a danger that he might be asked to absorb my modest empire.
I wanted to delay this at all costs.
I didn't  want in this latter stage of my career to be pushed out of what little limelight I had.
I didn't want to miss a trick.
I was therefore concentrating very hard on what he was telling me when we both became aware of a sudden change in the atmosphere of the main office outside.
A typewriter which had until then been conducting a passionate solo had stopped.
So had the cheerful chat and bustle that had formed the barely noticed background to our conversation.
Even the photocopier had stopped its grating hum.
It was the sort of hush that usually indicated the presence of a VIP.
A member of the Senior Management team, for instance, one of the faceless men, not known personally to the office girls, but whose importance was instinctively sensed from the way they looked, the way they behaved.
But this wasn't one of the bluff genial tones I recognised.
It was an unfamiliar voice, a woman's voice, cutting through the silence with the incisiveness of a razor-blade.
’ I'm sorry,’she was saying in an icy tone about as distant from an apology as one can go.
’ You may think it can wait till Monday, but I can't.
According to my watch there's still half an hour of the so-called working day left and I think that's long enough to locate the appropriate file, don't you?’
’ Well, that depends,’replied Emily Lightbody evenly.
’ The problem is that those files are stored in boxes in the basement and we normally ask for half a day's notice.
Unless it's an emergency, of course.’
’ I need that file this afternoon.
Monday will be too late.’
’ Very well,’said Emily Lightbody.
’ I'll go and fetch it myself.
I don't mind working late when it's necessary.
Mavis, keep an eye on things, will you, till I get back.
No one is to leave this office before a quarter to five.
Is that understood?
Let it not be said we don't have any standards in this office.
I'll take the file up to your office, Miss Forbes.’
The tall slim blonde woman in the navy tailored suit walked smartly from the office, followed at a slight distance by Emily Lightbody.
Geoff's eyes rolled ceilingwards.
I must have looked  uncomprehending, for he followed up the pantomime with:
’ You mean, this is the first Visitation you've had from the dread Portia Forbes?’
I nodded.
I had read a feature on Portia Forbes in the organisation's Staff Newsletter the previous week.
The Senior Management team were evidently congratulating themselves on having recruited such an able young lady.
Born and educated in the city, but subsequently crowned with an Oxford MA and a Harvard MBA, Miss Forbes was considered to have exceptional abilities and was expected to go far.
She was also by all accounts extremely attractive.
A great deal of the nudge-nudge wink-wink routine by the young upwardly mobile male executives was the usual response to her presence.
As yet she was an unknown quantity, a mysterious figure who kept her distance from subordinate staff and was infrequently seen and then either alone or with one or several of the Senior Management team.
’ The Queen Bee to end the syndrome,’said Geoff.
’ It's already being said of her that unlike her famous namesake she is one in whom the quality of Mercy is very finely strained.’
The suppressed anger in the tone of Emily Lightbody's departing heeltips afflicted me with a premonitory dread.
’ Does she have the same effect on everyone?’
I asked idly.
’ Like Medusa,’said Geoff.
’ She's already crossed swords with Eileen Harman.’
’ With Eileen?’
Eileen Harman, the Chief Executive's secretary, was a good friend but an uncomfortable foe.
A deceptively comfortable looking spinster in her fifties, Eileen was a formidable personality in her own right.
The Chief Executive traded on this, of course.
He wanted a dragon at his gate.
She was a longstanding institution in the place and her shortcomings tended to be overlooked because she looked after an elderly invalid mother at home and everyone wondered how she managed her dual responsibilities.
The truth of the matter was that she relied heavily on an assistant at work and a private nurse at home.
Eileen wasn't above a tidy touch of manipulation herself when it suited.
’ Eileen took exception to Portia Forbes's manner and said as much.
PF said she had a job of work to do for which she was paid.
She didn't come to work in order to be loved.’
I was intrigued.
’ And what did Eileen say?’
’ That neither did she, but she did expect common civility.’
We smiled collusively.
’ It has all the makings of a first class row,’said Geoff with evident glee.
’ That was the end of that skirmish, but war has undoubtedly been declared.
Portia Forbes had better watch out.
If she alienates all the women she could do herself a lot of harm.’
Upsets among the women were not uncommon, often needing all the oil of our masculine sagacity to be poured on the troubled waters, but a clash at this level threatened to step up the tempo.
The thought of trouble depressed me.
I hated violent confrontations.
Geoff enjoyed them.
He might even find a way of turning it to his own advantage.
He stretched himself and looked at his watch.
Our earlier discussion had reached a satisfactory breaking-off point and his attention was beginning to wander to the outer office where pandemonium was on the point of breaking out.
Mavis would be unable to control it.
I would have to see to it.
The brisk departures of Portia Forbes and Emily Lightbody had left everyone mildly shocked.
Then someone made a funny remark.
Several people giggled.
The resident mimic did her piece.
The laughter exploded.
The women's natural exuberance returned to flow unchecked, like water through a dam.
’ I'd better go,’said Geoff.
’ lie could have another session on Monday afternoon perhaps?’
’ After lunch?’
’ Two fifteen?’
’ Fine.’
He opened the door.
I could see he was bracing himself for his act.
Then he eased himself through like a desperado entering a bar and ambled across the office, cracking quips like walnuts.
Mavis blushed as she primly tried to quell the mounting hubbub.
I forget who had mentioned to me that  Geoff was rumoured to be taking more than a passing interest in her.
A smart, hard-edged bachelor with a taste for fast cars, he had something of a reputation for trawling in various typing pools.
I went out to supervise the final stampede.
The subsequent silence was like a balm and a regret.
It was at moments like this that I would reflect on concepts like the ‘community’ of work and how lost one can be without it.
Emily Lightbody returned shortly before five.
I was standing at one of the windows of the outer office, watching the rain fling itself remorselessly against the panes.
’ It's a wild night,’I said.
’ Not half so wild as that one upstairs,’came the tart response.
’ Did you find the file?’
’ Oh, yes.’
’ Why did she want it this afternoon?’
’ Search me.
She works all hours apparently.’
’ Perhaps she'll be good for us, stir us out of our lazy and apathetic ways.’
’ Well, you're entitled to your opinion, Mr. Kopek, but a lot of people are saying there'll be trouble first.
She's not going down well at all, whatever the Senior Management may think.
Not at all well.
She regards us as a bunch of peasants.
My God, she's scarcely in the door!’
I turned from my contemplation of the inclement evening and eased my buttocks on to the warm radiator beneath the window.
I folded my arms and observed Emily Lightbody as she touched up her make-up preparatory to leaving.
She was a handsome woman and no mistake.
Trim with effort, but still trim.
Neither young, nor to the minute fashionable, judging by what the youngsters wore, but presented with style.
Her carriage had a Grecian flavour, her dark auburn hair piled high on the crown of her head, balanced either side by a pair of large gilt gypsy earrings.
Her hazel eyes were shaded olive and outlined in black.
Excellently done, if God did all, Shakespeare has it.
Excellently done nevertheless, in my humble opinion.
I could see her proudly carrying on her head  an amphora to a well and disdaining all admirers.
Rumour had it that she had once been married, long ago, when she was very young.
It hadn't lasted, apparently.
Since then she had eluded definitive capture, although other rumours abounded.
She had, perhaps, more of Offenbach than Homer about her, but I regarded her with affection and respect.
’ Doing something special this weekend then, Mr. Kopek?’
She was fixing her lipstick.
Her teeth grimaced as she traced the bright orange outline, her eyes  riveted on the reflection in her lime-green plastic hand-mirror.
’ I'll probably go and visit my sister and her husband on Sunday.’
’ Yes, Sunday can be a bad day.
Don't you ever get lonely living on your own?’
’ Oh, sometimes.’
’ I couldn't live alone, not if I was paid.
It'd drive me demented being able to hear myself think.’
She screwed the cap back on her lipstick case, rolled her lips together, dabbed at the corners with a violet tissue, then snapped shut the mirror-case and zipped up all the contents of her cosmetic-bag.
’ Mind you,’she went on,’I think I drive my sister demented.
She says she can't think when I'm around.
‘Emily’ she says, ‘don't you think you could stop talking for half an hour?
I want to finish reading this book.’
She's another one for a quiet life.
Perhaps I should get you two together.
You'd like my sister, Rose, Mr. Kopek.
I think you might have a lot in common.’
She rose from her chair with a skiff of nylon upon nylon and an aroma of strong perfume.
I stood entranced, as I must confess I always did, while she slipped her shiny white military-style raincoat off its hanger behind the door and buttoned herself into it.
It strained a little across her back.
’ I should watch the Black Magic if I were you, Miss Lightbody,’I joked, noticing the familiar colouring of the box peeping from the top of one of her carrier bags.
She belted her raincoat firmly and pursed her lips.
’ You will have your little joke, Mr. Kopek.
It's my  sister Rose's birthday on Sunday, if you must know.
She likes a box of Black Magic now and then.
She's also as thin as a rake.
There's no justice in this world.
'Bye now.
See you Monday.’
And with her distinctively feminine rustle and pounding of heeltips, she was gone.
Looking round at the bare orderly room, the chairs pushed in beneath each desk, each typewriter shrouded in its plastic cover, I felt singularly bereft.
What had I to look forward to?
I took refuge, therefore, in my customary routines sketching a few brief memoranda for Monday morning, removing the paper clips strewn about my otherwise tidy desk, checking that the main office windows were all shut, even although the Security staff would be along later, and that was strictly speaking their job, and that all the typewriters had been unplugged from the wall sockets.
Although the girls could be noisy and difficult to discipline they generally observed a neatness in their work habits that continued to impress me.
A carry-over from domesticity, I suppose.
Then I buttoned myself into my grey raincoat, put on my brown felt hat, switched off the office lights and made my way along the corridor to the lift.
3
I could hear the characteristic groan in the lift shaft.
I quickened my step.
As I reached the entrance to the lift the iron concertina gate clattered open.
A clutch of long white Friday evening faces confronted me.
Although I recognised several, there was a formidable blankness about them in that setting which precluded mutual acknowledgment.
They used to remind me uncomfortably of cattle trucks crowded with suffering humanity.
Later I realised that what made me uncomfortable was not that they looked like the inmates of those cattle trucks.
These were the people who had sent them there.
I entered and with equal impassivity turned to face the corridor.
A door banged several yards along.
Someone pressed the ‘Hold’ button.
Youthful footsteps sprinted the intervening distance.
Panting, Tom Watt jammed himself in beside me.
The jaws of the lift closed.
He nodded at me, flustered with his usual shyness, and fidgeted with his umbrella and briefcase.
I looked down and suddenly realised I had forgotten to bring my own umbrella to work that morning.
Silently I cursed.
We descended in human but not mechanical silence into the Inferno of the Friday evening rush hour, the appropriate punishment, I have long since thought, for the millions in that city and in every other who live and think as we did.
Clunk, clang.
We touched bottom and, while the gate was still straining open, surged forward with a sudden collective urgency and wheeled in formation out of the entrance hall into Wymark Street.
Only then, in the shock of the open air at last, did we break ranks and go our separate ways.
The rain sliced my neck like a miniature guillotine.
I turned up my coat collar to meet my hat brim and hunched defensively, like a bedraggled bird.
The rain stung the pavement with all the fury of the arrows at Agincourt.
But within seconds Tom Watt was at my elbow, his large  black umbrella overarching us both.
’ Whew!
For this relief much thanks,’ I said.
’ I couldn't see a fellow mortal suffer,’he said with a grin.
’ It's certainly some night.’
We stopped at the traffic lights at the junction of Wymark Street and McEwan Street opposite St. Michael's Church.
Church.
Cars were edging forward with barely controlled impatience to the steady whiplash accompaniment of their windscreen wipers.
We had to stand back from the edge of the pavement as their wheels splashed along the teeming gutters.
As we waited for the lights to change I noticed a sleek white sports car which had stopped at the foot of the church steps to take in a passenger.
There was something familiar about the feminine umbrella with its orange roses and Spanish flamenco frill that was shaken firmly before the green headsquared figure bent to enter.
The indicator winked and the car pulled smartly into the slow-moving line of traffic heading uphill.
’ George Pittendrigh's got a new Sahara,’said Tom.
I know next to nothing about cars, never having learned to drive one.
I can, however, distinguish a sports car from a saloon.
’ I wasn't looking at the driver,’I said.
’ But you know all about that, don't you?’
’ All about what?’
’ Emily Lightbody and George Pittendrigh.’
I paused before answering.
’ I had heard rumours.
They seem an unlikely combination.’
’ You surprise me.
I gather it's been going on for years.’
The lights changed.
We crossed McEwan Street.
Was I jealous, I wondered?
Was that why I hadn't wanted to believe the rumours?
I wouldn't have been much competition by the side of sexy George, but still, a man has his pride.
’ I hear that George has been living it up a bit lately?’
I sought confirmation.
’ So, what's new?
He's demob happy, everybody says.
I scarcely see him from one working day to the next.’
’ He's definitely gone for early retirement then?’
’ Yes.
Next July.’
’ Ah, well.
They can hardly sack him before then, can they?’
Tom shook his head.
’ That man leads a charmed life.’
’ Always did,’I said.
’ But it can't make life any easier for you at the moment.’
Tom grimaced.
’ I've no expectations of George.
It's what the Godfathers might have in mind for when George goes that worries me.’
’ Anything in particular?’
’ There's that new Forbes woman.’
’ Oh, yes.
We had what Geoff Tulloch was pleased to call ‘a Visitation’ from her this afternoon.
I gather there's been trouble.’
’ It's been pretty trivial so far.
Upsetting secretaries and the like.
Considers them beneath contempt.
Senior Management calls it ‘women trouble’ and doesn't propose to interfere unless there's a deputation from the Union.’
‘Which there might be if Eileen Harman decided to make an issue of it.’
’ I wouldn't rate that too highly.
It may be unfortunate, but it's not a crime to be rude.
Eileen Harman's a pain in the neck when all's said and done.’
’ There was trouble with Emily Lightbody over a file this afternoon.’
’ Well, Emily can be a bit high and mighty herself at times.’
We laughed.
’ What is worrying you then?’
I asked.
Tom sighed.
’ Oh, I don't know.
Call it intuition.
Maybe it's just a fear of being overtaken by a woman.’
’ She seems an able woman.
There shouldn't be any shame in that.’
He turned to look at me.
’ Perhaps if you were in my shoes you wouldn't think like that.’
Perhaps not.
’ She works very hard, I believe?’
’ All the hours God made — and then some.’
’ What does she hope to get out of it?’
’ A complete revolution in the way we run things, probably.
That's why she's been hired.
Why else someone so well qualified?
There's also a rumour of cutbacks.
That early retirements and voluntary redundancies won't be enough.’
’ Does it make you feel vulnerable?’
’ Wouldn't you feel vulnerable in my shoes?
Besides, you know how I'm regarded in the place.’
We reached the entrance to the subway station.
A blast of warm foetid air rose up from the precipitous staircase to greet us.
The pinched woman in a pink overall and blue mittens in the ticket office squinted at our passes and nodded us on.
It was at least pleasant to be able to shelter from the rain.
The stairwell echoed with the counterpointed sounds of pounding feet, of automatic doors heaving open and slamming shut, of trains arriving and departing, slowing down or gathering speed and hurtling along the narrow cavernous tunnels.
George Pittendrigh and I joined the organisation at the same time in the grey austere years after the war.
George joined the ranks of the executive high-flyers, those with university degrees, I joined in a much humbler capacity.
George's father, Sir Hector Pittendrigh, was one of the founder directors of the organisation, so exalted, it was said, as to be invisible.
Rumour had it that Sir Hector's influence was the only reason George had been taken on in the first place.
George's law degree was undistinguished, his capacity in doubt and his behaviour showed a marked disregard for formality.
’ A stuffy set-up like this needs someone like me to redress the balance,’he would claim, usually after he had been in trouble for some misdemeanour or other.
There was no question of his following in his father's august footsteps.
The two took pains to avoid each other.
’ All he asks of me,’George would say,’is that I don't land on his carpet.’
I knew George quite well in those days.
We worked in the same section for a year or two.
He seemed to take an interest in me.
I've no idea why.
We were worlds apart.
He with his cheerfully avuncular man of the world bonhomie, always smartly dressed and often with a flower in his buttonhole, a connoisseur of fine wines and Havana cigars.
I couldn't have made more of a contrast.
A pale, bespectacled, thin central European with a diffident manner and an imperfect Command of English, more interested in reading books than in cutting a dash.
Perhaps it was the contrast which intrigued him.
Perhaps he thought I might have an interesting story to tell.
He was a social sophisticate, George, not a cultural one.
He collected people.
Types.
He would pick you up and squeeze you dry and discard you when you began to bore him.
He did this with women, too.
George couldn't understand how I managed to live on my own.
Living alone was like the idea of a hairshirt to George.
’ You're a natural ascetic, Andreas,’he said to me once.
’ You should have been a monk.
Damn it, you are a monk, you know.
To all intents and purposes.’
With George's anarchic tendencies I often wondered why he ever chose to work in such a highly structured and formal setting as the organisation.
I suspect it had to do with his relationship with his father.
He couldn't throw the old man off.
He needed security.
He needed something to kick against.
And kicking against an impersonal organisation was more fun and less threatening than confronting the old man directly.
People said that it was when his father died, rather than when his long suffering wife did, that George's drink problem got out of control.
The organisation did its best to try to rehabilitate him.
It decided that it could benefit from a smart up to date information section for liaison with press and public.
George could delegate the administration to an efficient secretary and whatever additional assistance the section was likely to need.
George could then concentrate on the social side of things.
They hoped he would be a natural.
He wasn't, quite.
He overdid the liquid lunches.
He was prone to the odd embarrassing indiscretion.
His carpetings were frequent.
A succession of bright alert female graduate assistants decided that the job offered few prospects for their particular talents and rapidly moved on.
And yet people liked George.
His humanity drew out theirs.
The indiscretions were forgiven.
He jollied people along and did get useful information out of them, made useful contacts, brought useful business the organisation's way.
He saved himself from the sack a dozen times.
Wild George.
By this time he had become an enduring institution.
It was difficult to imagine the organisation without him.
After the series of disasters with the female graduate assistants the organisation hired Tom Watt.
I didn't know Tom Watt well at this time.
George had brought him along to meet me when he joined the organisation.
He seemed a pleasant well spoken quiet young man.
Tall and slim, his frame had the lean tautness of an athlete's.
He had a shy manner which evoked a fellow feeling in me.
He would stoop slightly and listen attentively while you spoke to him, as if it were important that he heard every word, gently sliding his spectacles up the bridge of his nose as he did so.
He seemed anxious to please, but not in an unctuous way.
I had the impression of a cautious, reflective man, who would take his work seriously and perform what was required of him to the best of his ability.
A shade pedantic, perhaps?
Rumours percolated.
That he was finding George a bit of a handful.
That he was sorting George out at last.
The office had never been so well run.
That Tom was too nice for his own good.
That he wasn't very communicative, kept himself to himself.
I saw little of George at work or outside it.
Occasionally we would meet by accident in the corridor or at a bend in the stairs or out in the street.
He would give me a hearty slap on the back, comment on my expanding girth —’ Twice the man you used to be, Andreas, eh?’— say that we must meet again’for a jar, old man, but just this moment I have to rush,’look at his watch, sigh apologetically and shoot off to his next meeting or liquid lunch or whatever.
Over the years his hair had thinned, his figure grown more corpulent, his  face redder and shinier.
I couldn't for the life of me understand what Emily Lightbody might see in him, except an eternal good time.
Tom would sometimes come to the office for a file, but usually he dealt with Emily Lightbody rather than with me.
Once when Tom was on holiday George came in instead.
Of course, he had to deal with me direct, always went to the top, did George.
’ See that young assistant of mine?’he said.
’ Watt's s name.’
He grinned.
’ I had to push him into taking his annual leave.
Didn't seem to want it, for some reason.
Can you understand it?
Because if an old Puritan like you can't, then I'm damned if I can.
‘Take that young wife of yours somewhere,’ I said.
‘Paris, Biarritz, wherever you like.
Give her a holiday, for goodness sake.’
He never goes home at night either that I can see.
Not that I can see much after six o'clock or so, but there you are, we all have our little crosses.’
I hoped George was treating him well.
Tom looked as though he might stick around longer than all the girl graduates put together.
He deserved a reward for that at least, although I wasn't sure whether it said a lot for his pertinacity or little for his perspicacity.
Covering up for George would bring him little thanks.
George would take the credit for all Tom's successes and blame him for his own failures.
He was a dangerous man to work for, was George, but he was a survivor.
He had sufficient flair to compensate for his faults.
I was afraid that Tom might not know how to make capital out of his virtues.
I only once heard Tom complain bitterly about George.
’ He's impossible to pin down.
Asking him to deliver is like expected a chameleon to stay the same colour whatever its environment.
It's not in his nature.’
Tom was intelligent and cultivated, but there was a feeling that he was out of place in the organisation if he wanted to get on in it.
He had no instinct for self-advancement.
He allowed his achievements to be played down or appropriated by George.
He developed no spectacular  initiatives of his own.
He displayed a tendency to be out-manoeuvred in public situations.
And yet he worked hard.
He did what he thought was required of him.
I met him infrequently on the subway journey to and from work.
I was a solid nine to five man.
I liked the rhythm of a structured day.
Tom kept more erratic hours and the nature of his job often took him out of the office.
Sometimes he was in ahead of me.
More often he left later.
But on Friday afternoons we generally coincided.
There was some delay before our train arrived.
All around us an increasing crowd was assembling on the platform while the subterranean tunnels thundered and shook with their hidden traffic.
I asked after his wife.
I had never met her.
All I knew about her was that she was a schoolteacher, as Tom had been before he joined the organisation.
Now she was pregnant.
’ Fit as a fiddle,’he replied.
’ Never better, in fact.
No morning sickness, no backache, no obscure cravings.
I put it down to giving up work.’
’ When's the baby due?’
’ Before Christmas.
The twenty-first, if Marion's calculations are exact — and knowing Marion…’
’ You'll be pretty busy then, what with one thing and another?’
The sound of our approaching train discouraged any response.
With a roar it emerged from the tunnel and ground to a halt along the platform.
We forced our way on and found suitable straps to hand on to.
We said nothing after that, except to nod goodbye when Tom got off two stops ahead of me.
We neither of us liked to talk in the confined publicity of the train.
4
‘Solipsism’ is defined by my dictionary as a metaphysical term which views the self as the only knowable, or the only existent, thing.
‘Solitary’ is defined as ‘1.
Living alone, not gregarious, without companions, unfrequented, secluded, single, lonely, sole’ and ‘2.
Recluse, anchorite.’
My niece, Alison, tells me that the more up to date term is solo as in ‘going solo.’
My dictionary defines ‘solo’ only in reference to music, to whist and to aviation.
Perhaps, as my niece would say, I should buy myself a new dictionary.
My dictionary defines ‘solitude’ as ‘Being solitary; lonely place.’
It doesn't say that solitude much a state of freedom as of imprisonment.
Such freedom has its price.
The progress of this story was to show me the essential solitariness of other people, people whom I had not thought of as being solitary before.
Sometimes I felt as though the whole world had been bidden to a feast, except me.
The rain had stopped when I emerged from the subway exit at Fernhill.
A wind shuddered up the street.
The air smelled fresh and cold.
I felt the cares of the workplace dissolve.
It was good to be on my own territory again.
Far enough for the noise of the city to be a distant hum, near enough to hear its pulse beating.
I had been revived by my contact with Tom Watt, although a shade concerned about his anxieties.
A passing phase.
He was young, well educated, had several years' work experience under his belt.
If things got tough in the organisation he could go elsewhere.
I walked up Fernhill Rise with a feeling of proprietorial pride.
On my left were the high stone walls and pillared entrances of several substantial late Victorian grey sandstone villas, built for a once prosperous merchant class to escape the odours and the bustle of the expanding industrial city.
The sweeping driveways, thickly foliaged gardens and imposing façades underline a privacy that can only be bought or inherited.
They are self-conscious, indestructible dwellings.
My niece, Alison, who has left wing views, would call them smug and pompous.
Like me perhaps.
They are still well maintained, although no longer for the most part privately owned.
Nursing homes, student residences and preparatory schools of discreet reputation have taken over from the merchants.
On the other side of the street, beyond a row of lime trees, the broad green slope of Fernhill Park falls away in an amphitheatric curve to the river hidden between steep banks.
Beyond the river a deciduous wood rising to the rim of the inner city marks its celebrated Botanic Gardens.
In daylight in winter through the bare trees you can see odd corners of the ornate Victorian glasshouses.
At night all you can see are the lights, a breathtaking panorama.
I have a print of Fernhill as it was two centuries ago.
In the far distance the cathedral spire emerges from a compact cluster of nestling houses.
The foreground is given over to common land, undulating, uncultivated, with clumps of fern and whin, gorse and bramble.
Couples saunter forth in their Sunday best.
Small boys skim stones across the surface of the river.
Small girls gather wild flowers.
A terrier pursues a hare.
An elegant carriage bearing a fashionable mixed foursome bowls by.
It's a sentimental rendering, of course.
No sign of rural poverty or of Wordsworth's desolate vagrants or the growth of urban immigration.
A nostalgic evocation of pre-industrial innocence.
Defoe in his time called it one of the finest cities in Europe.
Difficult to imagine now, except in patches.
And Fernhill is one of those patches.
One can forget about the problems of urban decay even yet up there.
Fernhill Rise meets Fernhill Avenue at a T-junction.
To the left the avenue sweeps expansively westward through more of Victorian villaland.
To the right it diminishes gently into Fernhill Walk which runs along the top edge of the park.
On the north side is a small block of red sandstone bow-windowed apartments built at the turn of the century, after the handsome private villas.
It's a curious outcrop.
Perhaps a pilot study for a larger development that was never built.
Perhaps the speculator went bankrupt.
Perhaps he came up against the  Edwardian equivalent of a conservation lobby.
Maybe one of the powerful merchants regarded it as an eyesore.
The block is three storeys high and my apartment was on the second floor.
I had a fine view from my sitting-room window.
Living in such a desirable residential area was the one material achievement of my life.
My niece, Alison, would call me a bourgeois revisionist, but if that's what I was then I was content.
The achievement was not entirely of my own making.
I owed it to my Aunt Anna.
But it gave me satisfaction and comforted me for much that was otherwise missing from my life.
I crossed the road.
It was quite deserted.
It often was.
It was that sort of area.
Except at weekends in the summer when the crowds would come and spread themselves in an abundance of activity on the grass.
The storm-door scuffed like a heel against a heap of circulars.
I bent down to pick them up.
There was no other mail that day, or indeed much on any day.
The circulars were for double glazing, a credit card company and for small deductions on the purchase of a variety of household goods.
Personal letters were rare.
Sometimes I would think of people who wrote letters to themselves in an attempt to feel a little less lonely, a little less unfrequented and forgotten.
I have been tempted by the lonely hearts advertisements in selected journals.
It presented a challenge.
An adventure of the heart.
But I have always drawn back.
One's dreams are too sacred to be shattered.
I have been feeble and afraid.
When I straightened up I heard a slight sound behind me.
I turned just in time to see the storm-door across the landing shutting gently.
My neighbour, Miss Kilspindie, would have satisfied herself as to my identity.
She was of a nervous disposition, Miss Kilspindie.
Always on the watch.
Once inside I felt secure.
My own territory.
The domestic arrangements of an elderly bachelor like myself cannot be of much interest to anyone.
I lived modestly but comfortably.
My needs — warmth, light, food, furniture, books and music — were adequately provided for.
I did my own  cooking and shopping.
I followed routines and simple homely menus.
My apartment was cosy and compact — hall, sitting-room, two bedrooms, the one at the back being rarely used, kitchen and bathroom — all in good decorative order.
M; y niece, Alison, tells me that it's very much ‘the in-thing’ to be ‘going solo’these days.
’ No kids, no heavy relationships, no sweat,’she says in her blunt way, curled up like an imp, smoking like a chimney, in one of her mother's immaculate armchairs, a vision of bleached cropped hair, bright pink baggy cotton trousers, black eyes heavily rimmed with mascara.
I wince at her language as her father used to wince at her appearance.
Irina is, of course, sad that there are no young Kopeks to carry the family name into the next century.
She is fiercely proud of family traditions and continuity.
’ It's a great pity that matchmakers are not valued in this country,’she would sometimes say.
’ If we were still in our own country, Andreas, a man like you would have been married years ago and you would have many children to delight you in your old age.’
Her husband, Bill, was always embarrassed on my behalf, when Irina launched into this topic.
’ Marriage isn't for everyone,’he would say, his fingers twitching.
’ People have a right to choose for themselves.’
’ Nonsense,’Irina would snap in her forthright way.
’ It may be all right for those who choose happily, but think of the mistakes that could be avoided if people had a little help.
Everyone should be married.’
’ There are unhappy marriages,’Bill would say.
’ Of course there are.
People are only human.
We all need a little help.
But in spite of the unhappy marriages, people go on marrying and remarrying, don't they?
Of course they do.
So there must be something in it.’
I often wondered how different my life might have been if I had had a wife and family to come home to all these years.
Would I have cut a greater dash in the world?
’ Oh, what are a few Kopeks more or less?’
I would joke.
’ It's not as if they would add up to a great sum.’
This outraged Irina, as I suspected it would.
Her sense humour is not strong.
Bill and I had a great deal in common.
Bill was a latent bachelor, overtaken by events.
A gentle schoolmaster with old-fashioned notions of courtesy and decency, he might have led a still life behind glass if Irina hadn't rescued him.
She made the marriage, without benefit of matchmakers, and he seemed happy enough to go along with it.
I could sense, sometimes, his longing for privacy.
My sister, unfortunately, often belies the meaning of her name.
I don't think Irina gave up the idea of finding me a suitable partner, until Bill died.
Then, I believe, she was grateful that I had no prior distractions in my life.
I don't remember what I was reading that Friday evening.
Possibly a longstanding favourite, Lermontov's A Hero of Our Time.
Perhaps Pushkin's Eugene Onegin or The Queen of Spades.
Or Chekhov's tale, Lady with Lapdog, or Turgenev's Sketches from a Hunter's Album.
Static in my life, I have always travelled in my imagination.
I liked to revisit the great landmarks of the past, the classics of European literature.
But as I aged, so my powers of concentration dwindled.
War and Peace, The Brothers Karamazov gather dust.
I prefer the single jewels to the elaborate crowns.
The Russian masters are particularly close to me.
Or perhaps I took up my Arabic textbook.
Arabic was a late and  eccentric interest of mine.
A challenging language, carrying with it the sweet allure of forbidden fruit.
It is a long way from the dark pine forests and the frozen rivers of northern Europe to the sun-baked sands of Arabia.
For a long time Europe offered me all I wanted.
What drew me south at last I cannot say.
Not literature this time.
Perhaps it was a dream, an image of those enclosed and shaded gardens, the clarity of bubbling fountains, the marvellous fluidity of the script, the dazzling patterns of mosaic, the austere lines of its minarets, the absolute tenets of its Holy Book.
Or was it simply a hope at last of the services of those enchanting houris in Paradise?
Whatever I read would have been to the accompaniment of  music — one of my three favourite composers, Beethoven, Mozart or Schubert — and a long drawn out glass or two of post-prandial port.
It was after ten o'clock when I came to consciousness of the world about me again.
As the automatic needle in my music centre clicked I heard the wind outside and the steady pattering of rain against the window-panes.
The brief lull that had cheered my walk home from the Fernhill subway station was over.
I roused myself.
It was time for my nightcap.
I removed the record and replaced it in its glossy sleeve.
Then I switched off the music centre and strolled over to the window to take a last look at the night outside.
Across the street the topmost branches of the lime trees were tossing and swaying.
In the distance the several chains of lights indicating the main streets of the city were blurred, like tears.
There wasn't a star to be seen in the sky.
The window-frame juddered.
I looked down at the glistening pavements.
It was then that a familiar figure detached itself from the shadows of the trees and moved out into the dim orange light of one of the streetlamps.
A tall, broad bulk of a man, the collar of his long army greatcoat turned up round his neck.
On one shoulder hung the workman's canvas bag he always carried.
He travelled far, but he travelled light.
He looked up.
I waved and beckoned.
He nodded, crossed the street and disappeared into the entrance below.
His steps echoed on the stairs, firm but ponderous.
I went out on to the landing to wait for him.
I leaned on the polished wooden bannister until his head was level with mine and our eyes met.
We smiled, silent for a moment with old recognition.
’ Come away in and warm yourself, Archie,’I said, adopting an idiom I had absorbed from him.
I stood aside as he filled the doorframe.
He was limping slightly and he looked tired.
Inside the hall he removed his cap and dropped his bag.
His cap he put on a vacant coat hook.
His bag he left where it fell.
He kept on his coat, fully buttoned, as he  eased himself into an armchair by the sitting-room fire.
His coat was wet and travel-stained.
I trembled for the state of the upholstery.
His shoes had left dirt marks across the carpet.
What could I say to him, my oldest friend?
Archie wasn't used to the niceties of civilised living.
He had given them up long ago.
I poured him a glass of the special malt which I kept for the rare occasions of celebration or consolation in my life.
He knocked it back in one and gasped with the pleasure of it.
He returned the glass, then held out both hands to the fire and rocked on the edge of the chair.
’ Man, whit a heat,’he said.
’ It's great to be back in the lap of luxury, so it is.
It's a rough night, right enough.’
I poured him another glass.
He sipped it this time, savouring the quality.
He had lost weight, I thought.
There was an unusual gauntness about his features.
His blue eyes, which normally pierced you with their directness, were hooded and withdrawn.
And how thin his grey hair was, straggling over the collar of his coat.
’ Aye, man, but it's been a while since I tasted whisky like this.’
’ Not as long as usual.
I didn't expect you so soon.
It's usually nearer Christmas before you surface.’
’ Ach, weel.
That's the way of it.
I got a lift up frae Manchester.
I widnae hae been sae quick if I'd hud tae walk.’
I sensed I would hear his story eventually.
’ Have you eaten?’
I asked.
’ Weel, noo that ye ask — na, I cannae say that I huv — no today at oany rate.’
’ Soup?’
’ Soup wid be jist fine.’
’ It'll be out of a tin, I'm afraid.’
He grinned.
’ Weel, if ye cannae rustle up some home-made coak-a-leekie wi' prawns an' cream at such shoart notice, us gourmets of the road will jist huv tae dae withoot, will we no?’
’ You're an ungrateful bastard, Archie, so you are.’
He grinned again and went on sipping his whisky, gratefully.
I left him, sunk in bliss, and busied myself in the kitchen.
We communicated in spasmodic shouts, for Archie was growing deaf and the wind outside was showing no sign of abatement.
Archie Dow, gentleman of the road for nearly forty years, occasional docker, night-watchman, odd job handyman, may seem an unlikely friend for a fastidious, cultivated man like me.
But so it was.
And before I go on I must set one thing straight.
Archie may not have been fastidious, but in his own way he was cultivated.
Times were hard at the end of the war.
My understanding of English was competent, but my command of it uncertain.
Employers were wary of foreigners.
We might pose problems they couldn't handle.
I was lucky to be offered a job with the organisation.
Sir Hector Pittendrigh interviewed me.
One of the few occasions I ever saw him and the only one in which we sat face to face.
A tall, prematurely white-haired man in a navy blue suit, with eyes that could focus on you as if you were a fly that had settled on a distant door-knob, he could dominate a large room while seated behind a desk at one end of it and without raising his voice above a conversational level.
When I was shown into the room I despaired.
My anguish must have shown in my face and in my voice.
I stammered out my history, my eyes occasionally wandering to a winter view of rooftops, an opaque winter sky behind his head.
He listened, turning over and over in his hands a black wooden paper-knife with a carved African head on it.
He was not unpleasant.
He was entirely courteous.
He didn't use his status to intimidate me.
I just felt the immense reserves that could be brought to bear if necessary on any situation that required them.
He offered me the job on the spot.
’ The Scots are not dissimilar from the Jews,’he said.
’ Careful with money, keen to get on and great wanderers on the face of the earth.
I hope you'll be happy here.’
I was astounded.
Something in my story or my way of telling it had evidently touched him.
But he gave no sign of it.
The interview over, his eyes withdrew their attention  from me.
Thereafter, if I passed him in the corridor or on the staircase, those eyes registered no recognition.
The deal had been concluded.
There was nothing more to be said.
It was only a humble clerical post and poorly paid.
I had to find accommodation.
I wandered the streets of the city looking for a place to stay.
Baulked through my lack of means of anywhere that would have corresponded to my Aunt Anna's notions of gentility or my own aspirations, I found myself in an area of bleak but populous streets lined with smoke-blackened tenement blocks south of the river.
I felt I had stumbled on the city's ghetto quarter.
In a social sense I had.
I stopped two stout middle-aged women carrying laden shopping-bags and asked them if they knew where I could find rooms to rent.
’ Oh, ye could come in wi' me,’said one of them.
’ I could do with the rent!’
They laughed and I felt myself blush.
Then the other one, taking pity on my embarrassment, pointed to the corner of the street.
’ You could try Ezra at the corner.’
Then they went on their way, still enjoying the joke.
Ezra was a cobbler who also acted as a local estate agent, although in those days he wouldn't have recognised the term.
He inhabited a dark shop surrounded by the tools of his trade.
He was tall, thin, with sharp handsome features and a beard rimming his chin.
We recognised at once our common racial heritage.
Through Ezra I found what is known in these parts as a ‘room and kitchen’ flat.
That was an exact description.
It was on the top floor of one of those grim tenement blocks.
At the front I had my sitting-room overlooking the street.
At the back was the kitchen overlooking the tenement yards.
The kitchen had a bed recess.
In the backyards were the brick wash-houses and the coal bunkers.
There was a shared toilet on the first floor landing.
I had space, my own front door and key, privacy when the door was shut and light when the weather was bright.
And yet I wasn't happy.
I suffered a dislocation as acute  as when I arrived in this country.
Only then I had had Irina to share things with and Aunt Anna to turn to.
Now I was on my own.
A fish out of water.
Breathing in alien air.
The memory has the flavour of a nightmare.
The block in which I lived was no different from the others in that tight area of mean dilapidated streets.
It was draughty.
The wind would howl up the close entrances and whistle up the stairs.
Windows were often broken, by accident or design.
Whole families were crammed into the same space as I had myself.
The whole place reverberated with noise, feet pounding up and down stairs, children yelling, women shouting, doors banging.
Then there would be the sudden explosions of violence late at night after the men had been drinking.
There was much humour, of a strident, bitter sort.
The place was suffused with struggle and resentment and frustration.
Petty crime was commonplace.
Serious crime was the stuff of stairhead gossip.
Like so much of metropolitan Europe, it was an area that had seen better days.
But the prosperous had moved out and the poor had moved in.
There were none of the comforts we take for granted now.
Short commons bought only the bare necessities.
And such ways of life still continue, the dark underside of surface prosperity.
I kept myself to myself, which was a way to get yourself talked about in such an open community where everybody's business was regarded as common knowledge.
But I didn't offend people.
They were curious, about where I came from, what I did and why I lived alone.
But on the whole they left me to my own devices.
One evening I came home late from a concert.
I tumbled over a drunk lying spreadeagled in the close.
I didn't recognise him, nor did there seem to be anything I could do for him.
If the police didn't find him first he would eventually wake and wander away.
I climbed the stone staircase, lit by the dimmest of light bulbs.
At the top I fumbled in my pockets for my key.
A white light filled the landing.
I turned and saw that it was the full moon, framed in a space of jagged glass.
I might have reached out and tried to touch it, so large and luminous
and near it seemed.
It awed me by how beautiful it could still appear in that sordid place.
Mrs. Dow worked as an assistant in the newsagent's shop on the corner of the street opposite Ezra's premises.
She was a short, pale, perennially tired-looking woman who never smiled.
She always wore a flowered cotton overall and her thin gingery hair framed a face that made me think of a martyr in search of grace.
In my self-conscious zeal to improve myself, I had placed a regular order for the London Times, not a paper normally stocked by that small newsagent.
Mrs. Dow always kept my copy under the counter and would produce it without having to be asked for it whenever I called.
That relieved me from the embarrassment of having to ask for it in front of the stoical poker-faced brigade of women who often assembled in the shop in their curlers and headsquares to pass the time of day.
One evening I called at the shop for some matches.
It was unusually empty.
’ Whit dae ye dae wi' the papers when ye've read them?’
Mrs. Dow asked me.
The question surprised me.
I said that I usually threw them out each week.
’ If it wisnae too much trouble tae ye,’she went on,’I think my son might be glad of a read, if ye didnae mind keepin' them fir 'im.’
’ But, of course.
Would you like me to bring them in?’
’ Oh, no,’she said, looking round,’no intae the shoap.
If you could just hold on to them my son wid pick them up when he's hame.
He's awa' jist noo, but he's always hame fir Christmas.
He niver deserts his auld mither at Christmas.’
I wasn't sure if this was a reproach that he deserted her the rest of the year.
I think it probably was.
’ He's a strange lad, my son.
Gangs his ain way in the world.
It takes a lot of understanding, the life he leads.
But he's a good son tae his mither.
Say whit they like, they cannae deny that.’
’ I'd be pleased to meet your son, Mrs. Dow’I said.
It was the following Christmas Eve when Archie banged on  my front door, fit to waken the dead, and introduced himself.
I don't remember what I had expected.
His mother had been suitably vague.
Perhaps a shabby clerical type like myself, wizened with poring over books, or a small time salesman, roving the country with hopeful samples, not this large, wild, peremptory man with a laugh that filled the stairwell.
He made me nervous just looking at him, his two hands pressing each side of my doorframe.
He wore a heavy black coat, a maroon woollen scarf and a grey tweed peaked cap.
Probably I recoiled a little.
He relaxed his grip of the doorframe.
’ Dinnae worry.
I hivnae come tae eat ye.
Can I come in?’
I stepped back quickly with a sense of having failed in my hospitality.
’ Of course.
Come in.
Your mother…’
I showed him the continually growing pile of newspapers I was conscientiously accumulating in my sitting-room.
At the sight of them he laughed.
’ Forget about the newspapers.
It wis jist a notion i' ma mither's.
Mebbe she thought she wis doin' me a favour.
Mebbe she jist wanted to chat tae ye.
I can read all the newspapers I want in public libraries.
I prefer books oanywy.’
Archie was a young man then, full of health and strength and wit and vigour.
I felt not so much introduced to him as invaded by him.
It was unlikely that we should become friends, but we did.
He did the talking.
I did the listening.
He'd been a docker before the war, lucky to get a job in the Depression years.
Then he joined the army.
He was evacuated from Dunkirk and later was in the allied army of liberation that unzipped occupied Europe to the gates of Berlin.
’ It wis when I cam hame frae that,’he said,’that I took tae the road.’
As a young man Archie had been an idealist.
Seeing the poverty around him while he was growing up, he joined in with the political groups agitating for social change.
International socialism was the answer.
The community and  perfectability of man.
Full employment, welfare and equality.
An end to exploitation.
His experience of the war changed him — not in his belief that change was necessary but in his optimism that it could be brought about.
’ When you see the barbarism intae which civilised society can descend,’he said,’you despair of human nature.’
He had been with the British troops at the liberation of Belsen.
Political theories could not provide him with any answers.
Their abstract certitudes seemed far removed to him from the inherent contradictions in human nature.
So he followed his own route.
Free as air.
Unencumbered with material possessions or human relationships.
He subsisted on welfare, on charity and on casual labour.
He kept himself warm in public libraries.
Now he was an old man.
The price of his freedom was coming home to him.
I called him through to the kitchen to have his soup.
He ate some bread and cheese with it, but wouldn't touch anything else.
’ I'm out of the way of eating,’he said.
’ You'll starve if you go on like this.’
’ Oh, I'm good for a while yet.’
Over his post-prandial mug of tea I asked him what had brought him north so early this year.
’ You think there must be a reason?
Mebbe I wis jist homesick.’
’ I feel homesick myself now and then.’
’ It's a bit farther for you.’
’ Come on, Archie.
What's the bother?’
He blew on his tea as if it was still too hot to drink.
He was fighting something.
Pride, probably.
’ Ma mither's ill.’
I hadn't seen Mrs. Dow in ten years.
Not since the demolition gangs had moved into that area south of the river to knock down the old tenements and clear it for redevelopment.
She had gone to stay with her eldest married daughter, Agnes, in a council house on the outskirts of the city.
It was  inconveniently out of the way if you didn't have your own transport.
Besides, I'd never taken to Agnes.
I had moved out to Fernhill, too, leaving the world of the ‘room and kitchen’ with relief.
I still sent her a Christmas card each year, for old times sake.
’ Agnes says she'll likely not last the winter.’
’ I'm sorry, Archie.
I feel I've neglected her.
I could have gone to see her.’
’ Oh, man, she'd no recognise ye.
Ye widnae credit the change in her.
She disnae recognise me withoot bein' tellt and even then she forgets a meenit efter.’
’ Is there anything I can do?’
He crouched forward on his chair.
’ Aye.
There is mebbe wan thing.’
’ What then?’
’ Mebbe it's unfair tae ask ye this kinna favour, but, man, we cannae always be hingin' oan tae oor pride.’
’ Well?’
’ I wis jist mebbe wonderin' if ye could pit in a word fir me?’
’ I'm sure I could.
I'd be only too happy to.
But where exactly?’
’ Weel, I dinnae ken.
Oanywhere.
Mebbe they could dae wi' a night-woatchman or somethin' where you work.’
He turned his head and gave me a direct look.
I was reacting slowly.
’ Hell, man, dae I huv tae spell it oot that times are hard an' there's no work goin' at the doacks an' it's nae a time tae be existin' oan charity!’
’ Hey, Archie, steady on.’
It was the only serious favour he had ever asked me.
I could see the effort it cost him.
Sadly, I wasn't sure that I could help him.
Jobs were difficult to come by anyway.
Able-bodied youngsters were prowling the streets in droves.
And Archie with his eccentricities?
’ You'd need the smarten up, you know,’I heard myself say like a schoolmaster.
’ Oh, aye, sir.
Right ye are, sir.
I'll have a bath an' all an' my brither-in-law'll see me right for the gear.’
’ I can't promise anything.’
’ Man, I'm no askin' fir proamises.
Ye dinnae huv tae dae oanythin'.
It's jist that…’ he pressed his hands round the mug as if he would crack it,’…weel, that's jist hoo it is.’
’ You know we're moving?’
’ Aye, ye mentioned somethin' the last time I wis up.’
’ It'll be January or February.
As soon as the new building's habitable.
It's right on the old T-junction between Jamaica Street and Tobago Road.’
’ Is that a fact?’
’ Archie, I wish I could hold out some hope.
But between the unemployed and the unions…’
He nodded dismissively.
’ It wis a right they fought fir.
Ye cannae complain.’
It was nearly two in the morning before he left.
He refused my offer of a bath and a bed for the night.
I watched him down the stairs from the landing.
He needed to support himself on the bannister.
Before I shut my own door I noticed Miss Kilspindie's move ever so slightly.
She would be wondering, as ever, who my visitor was.
From the sitting-room window I watched him stride out along Fernhill Walk, every so often the street lamps showing him in relief as his bulky figure emerged from the shadows.
The sight of his limp saddened me.
His determined pride worried me.
We were neither of us getting any younger, but he was a good few years older than I and I was the one with the roof over my head.
5
I used to look forward to the Sundays I spent with Irina and Bill.
Sometimes the children were there, sometimes not.
At the time of which I'm writing Alison was in her third year studying French and Russian at university and Sandy, having qualified in medicine, was doing a year's postgraduate research in the States.
Irina and Bill seemed to contemplate their children with some bafflement.
‘Here be monsters’, Bill would sometimes say.
When Alison was at home she was an intrusive presence.
A mixed blessing.
Bill said she was going through a ‘fikey’ stage, a prolonged adolescence.
Irina worried about whether she was on the pill and all possible consequences of whether she was or whether she wasn't.
I remembered a cheeky but affectionate tomboy child, dressed mostly in dungarees.
The trousers and the cheek had grown up with her, but the affection had gone underground, at least for a while.
She seemed both fascinated and repelled by our ‘old fogeyness’ and delivered her opinions, whether sought or unsought, with unvarnished bluntness.
Her hair, her most striking feature, would change dramatically week by week from ash-blonde to lurid russet and spiky black to parti-coloured green and pink.
She appeared among us like a sprite from a fairy tale, a being from some other world somewhat lost in this.
’ Occasionally I look at my daughter,’Irina would say,’and wonder where she's put her intelligence for the time being.
Or is it just that my perspective's all wrong?’
Sandy, when he was home, was scarcely visible.
He stayed in his room and only emerged for meals.
In contrast to Alison, his appearance gave no cause for comment.
Not that we had any fundamental objection to the children.
It was just more relaxing without them.
‘Three old fogeys in a bungalow’, as Bill said.
We didn't mind being old fogey, as long as there was no one there reminding us of the fact.
Bill took a great pride in his garden.
Since his  retirement books and his garden occupied his whole interest.
The bungalow huddles, one might even say broods, above an outcrop of ground high above the main road beside which it was built.
It's a grey stone bungalow of some vintage.
Dark to look at, but comfortable to live in.
It looks out over a peaceful rural landscape.
A broad strath with a river meandering through, the upper reaches of one of the tributaries that flow through the city to join the main river estuary.
On the other side of the river is a low ridge of foothills, parallel to the one on which the bungalow is situated.
In the far distance on clear days one can see the higher peaks well known in mountaineering circles.
To the west above the city you can see at night a white glow in the sky from the concentration of reflected lights.
There was always colour in the garden when Bill was alive.
Even in winter there were blood red berries on the holly bushes.
Bill made a rockery at the front.
Snowdrops, crocuses, daffodils, aubretia and several varieties of heather bloomed there at their respective times.
In autumn a rowan tree at the front gate was showered with berries.
At the back he eroded the once rectangular lawn into undulating islets of herbaceous beds and fruit trees.
Irina would companionably help out with the weeding, the tedious uncreative side.
Bill and I would watch her sometimes, bemused by the eternal conundrum of women — grey hair straggling from its bun, a tweed skirt, stout shoes, rubber gloves, a rubber mat, oblivious to the way she looked, her mind fully on the job.
’ Aye, aye,’Bill would joke.
’ Down on her knees on her prayer mat.
Where all women ought to be.’
And we would smile collusively.
But Irina was no soft touch.
She drew the line at mowing the lawn.
’ I'm not going round shaving a jigsaw piece,’she said.
These Sundays were the oases of human contact in the desert of my loneliness.
I didn't go every Sunday.
Perhaps it was only once or twice a month.
But they refreshed me, sustained me through the subsequent days and weeks, like water in a camel's hump.
During the winter when we couldn't sit  outside and Bill had fewer tasks to fulfil in the garden, we would sit by the fire and indulge ourselves in what Bill called ‘Kopek nostalgia sessions’.
It was Irina who started them.
Observing her as a well-balanced and apparently fulfilled woman, it surprised me to discover that she still lived with the unexorcised ghosts of a disrupted childhood.
I might content myself with thinking about it.
Irina had to talk about it.
I was afraid that Bill would feel excluded.
He was troubled, I could see, because, being unable to share these memories, he could not disentangle truth from fiction or creative embellishment from accurate detail.
Nor could Irina and I after all those years.
We were only children when we left, after all, bundled on a train with a few provisions under cover of darkness, far too young to understand the forces that were shaping war and persecution.
We knew nothing of Auschwitz, Belsen or Dachau until their purpose had been served.
He only have our nostalgia for our personal lost Eden.
Our lives have been a picture torn in two.
Set side by side again the pieces don't exactly match.
’ Do you remember the winters, Andreas?’
Irina might begin.
People in this country don't know what winter really means.
They don't know about cold so intense that rivers freeze over so you can drive a horse and cart across them.
They don't know about frosts so hard that birds can fall dead from the sky.
They don't know about wolves gathering at nightfall on the edge of the forest and prowling round one's house in search of food.’
She was thinking of our grandparents' home in the country, our father's people.
’ Whenever there were wolves about we would be called inside and the outside doors would be locked.
I remember standing at the kitchen window watching them outside in the snow.
I would shiver to myself and say ‘This is fear.
This is fear.’
But those thin grey shapes themselves didn't look vicious.
They might have been stray dogs.
It was what we were told about them that made us frightened.
I used to wonder why father and  grandfather never shot them, just to get rid of the fear.’
’ There would always be more wolves,’I said,’to revenge and replace the dead ones.’
’ Poor wolves,’said Bill mischievously.
’ Bill, what do you mean ‘poor wolves'?
Don't you know how dangerous they are?’
’ Victims of prejudice,’scoffed Bill.
’ I never understand the sentimentality the British have for animals,’said Irina.
’ It's as if you prefer animals to people.’
’ Quite right too,’said Bill.
I often wondered whether Bill were not a little jealous of the past that Irina and I shared.
His own life had been so sheltered, so steady, so predictable.
During the war his home had been far away from bombs and at the end of it his father had come safely back.
Bill didn't lack imagination.
His background had merely never encouraged him to develop one.
The wolves were real enough, although there are times when I think I must have imagined them.
It is only with the help of adult hindsight and historical analysis that I can detect a period charged with political tension, of  doomed innocence in waiting.
The snow, the ice, the frost, the winter winds, the wolves, might be not so much facts as symbolic images with which Irina sought to disguise what was innately disturbing about our childhood during those years before the war.
’ When we were very small,’Irina would recall,’our parents used to take us through the city streets on small sledges.
This wasn't unusual.
Lots of small children were taken about like this in winter.
Once, when we were going up one of the main avenues in the city a lump of thawing snow fell from a tree under which we were passing and hit me on the face.
I was so surprised I howled with indignation.
I howled even more when I saw that everyone was laughing at me, Andreas, my mother, various passers by.
Then my father swung me up out of the sledge high above his head and down again, trying to distract me, to make light of what had happened and make me see the funny side of it.
But I couldn't see it as funny at all.
I had been humiliated.
I had been shown up as small and vulnerable.
I was still a child no matter how grown up I felt.
It was a long time after that before I regained my confidence.
I didn't want to be taken any more in a sledge.
I wanted to walk as the adults did.’
A log might shift in the grate and the fire breathe out a puff of blue smoke.
Bill might lean down and poke the crumbling framework.
Sparks would shower and settle.
A new flame would spring up to lick and gnaw the log.
Fire fairies.
A vision in a child's eye.
All of life and what to do with it?
What would the two children we once were have thought of the two adults we had become?
What would our parents have thought?
Would they have been proud of us?
Children, in spite of their actual uncertainties, are confident of their future.
They are the heroes and the heroines of their lives.
They won't muff their lines or fall short in a crisis.
If there is good to be done they will do it.
If evil stalks abroad they will stand and fight it, not turn and run or give in and live with it.
Or has the shadow of a nuclear holocaust changed all that?
’ I used to keep a diary,’said Irina.
’ It was a blue leatherbound notebook with a lock and key.
Aunt Anna gave it to me for my tenth birthday.
Andreas was always trying to steal the key so that he could read it.
But I kept the key on a chain round my neck.
No one, but no one , was allowed to read my diary.
I destroyed it eventually.
I don't know why.
I was sorry afterwards.
An adolescent fit of rage or scorn, perhaps.’
I was tantalised by the mysterious secrets of that diary.
I schemed and schemed to get that key, but Irina was too clever for me.
I couldn't understand why she couldn't share her diary.
I couldn't understand what was so secret about it.
I had few secrets from her.
Many years later Alison behaved in exactly the same way.
Something about women.
The way they are.
The way they grow up.
I adored my mother.
I am not sure whether she realised this.
In memory her face is always turned away from me.
Looking out of a tall narrow window at a winter sky, the only source of light in a darkened room.
I am trying to catch her attention.
My sums are ready for checking.
In a moment she will turn round.
But it is that moment, the moment before she turns, that stays with me.
For when she turns I shall see that she is unhappy and I shall be powerless to cheer her up.
She is a distant figure now.
Not so much a mother as a series of snapshots from an old family album.
She was tall and slim, her hair, her dark dresses immaculately tidy, her movements poised and graceful.
I recall her pacing the sitting-room while I am doing my homework, pausing every so often to stand at one of the windows and look down into the busy street below.
I used to think she did this because she loved my father so much she couldn't wait for him to come home.
But then when he did come home much later in the evenings she was often brusque and cross with him.
I don't remember her smiling.
I don't know what the cause of this tension was.
I can only speculate.
The boredom and frustration of a confined life.
Always waiting.
Never initiating.
Her only diversion, apart from keeping house, looking after her children and entertaining my father's business associates, was in books.
And books can't feed the hunger of a soul in need of a larger sense of purpose.
My mother may have been trapped by conventional circumstances.
Her younger sister, Anna, was equally trapped by unconventional ones.
My mother tried to contain her frustrations.
Aunt Anna rebelled against hers.
She was a more volatile personality than my mother.
Their father was a professor of letters at the university.
They were attractive, well-educated women, brought up in an atmosphere of formal manners, orthodox religious belief and high-minded conversation.
They were expected to be decorative and subservient.
Anna came to London to study music some years before the outbreak of war.
She was a talented violinist, but her hoped-for concert career did not materialise.
Instead, she married her tutor, a much older man.
He died soon after.
When she met us off the train in Paris she was living alone.
She taught music in a private girls' school in Edinburgh.
She must have had her disappointments, but they never showed.
She shared her home with Irina and me and watched over us as fiercely as if we were her own children.
She could be brisk and tender by startling turns.
She was more demonstrative than our mother, more daring, less inhibited, more fun.
She once confessed how unhappy she had been at home.
’ Even if there hadn't been the war, I would never have gone back.
I would have stifled.
And now I have you two.
What more could I ask?’
And so, while the image of my mother remains forever youthful, but forever sad, forever turned away, forever, it would seem, unfulfilled, I saw Aunt Anna grow old and grey with sparkling eyes and a smiling mouth, putting a brave face on destiny.
With the legacy she left me when she died I bought the little flat on Fernhill.
Observing Irina in her advancing years, it is only occasionally that she reminds me of my mother or Aunt Anna — a look, a gesture, a sudden exclamation.
More often she reminds me of our paternal grandmother, plump, practical and down to earth, ruling her household and large family with a shrewd capacity for command, always in an overall, her hair never tidy, her arms often covered in flour, talkative and affectionate.
These were the women who influenced my life.
I was often to think of them when I reflected on the career of Portia Forbes.
Irina talked, Bill dozed, my mind went on automatic pilot.
’ Oh, Bill, you haven't been listening to a word I said!’
Bill would roll his head up from where it had fallen on his shoulder and open his eyes cautiously.
’ Hm?
What's that, my dear?
Nonsense, I heard everything.
I only dropped off for a second.’
I looked at my watch.
It was after four.
It had been a heavy lunch and a pleasant wine.
Darkness was already falling.
Irina eased herself to her feet.
She liked to  snuggle up against Bill's legs by the fire.
’ I'll see to the tea,’she said.
’ That would be very nice, my dear.’
I looked at Bill.
I couldn't see his face clearly in the firelight, but I was struck by an attitude of extreme fatigue.
It gave me a premonition of mortality.
Irina drew the curtains and switched on the standard lamp beside Bill's chair.
Another Sunday afternoon.
Like so many.
It was after ten o'clock when I get back to my flat that Sunday evening.
I was so immersed in my thoughts that it was several seconds before I realised that the sound dinning in my ears was the telephone ringing.
I lifted the receiver.
It was Tom Watt.
’ Andreas?’
’ Yes?’
’ Thank goodness I've got through to you at last.
I've been ringing off and on since lunchtime.’
’ Yes?’
’ It's about George.
Bad news, I'm afraid.
He had a heart attack on Friday evening and died yesterday in hospital.’
For a moment I couldn't speak.
My mind was so wrapped round with skeins of my own distant past that I couldn't immediately come to grips with the demands of the present.
’ Andreas?’
’ Yes, Tom, I'm sorry.
I've just this minute got back to the flat and I'm having some difficulty taking in your news.’
There was another pause.
I could sense that Tom had some other concern that he was holding back.
’ Has the funeral been arranged?’
I asked.
’ Not yet.
It's likely to be Tuesday or Wednesday.
Once it's fixed, I'll be sending a note round all the departments.’
’ There'll be a big turn-out.’
’ Yes.
There's talk of hiring special transport and shutting down most of the offices for the morning or the afternoon, whenever the funeral happens to be.’
’ It won't be the same as when his father died.’
’ Before my time, I'm afraid.’
’ You'll have a busy time ahead of you now.
The next few weeks.’
’ Yes.
I'm afraid it couldn't have come at a worse time.
With Marion's baby due next month and my being absent on leave, I wouldn't put it past the ‘high heid yins’ to cook up some deal to my disadvantage.’
I took a moment to absorb this.
After the news of George's death I had no reserves to respond adequately.
’ Oh, I'm sure you needn't worry, Tom.
With the big move scheduled for February I'm sure the Senior Management will have enough on their minds as it is.
They're more likely to leave George's reins to you for the time being.
Portia Forbes is far too new anyway.’
’ I don't think they would see that as a deterrent.’
There was another pause.
’ Look, Andreas, I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have said that.
I was forgetting your old friendship with George.
Sometimes I think I'm in danger of getting things out of proportion.’
I was grateful to be let off the hook.
Later, perhaps, after the funeral, I might find the energy to show more sympathy.
6
George's funeral was arranged for the Wednesday morning.
It was a raw, chill winter day.
You weren't aware of the sky, just a thick layer of opaque cloud.
The wind was sharp.
There was a hint of snow to come.
It wasn't the sort of day George would have chosen for his send-off.
He would have seen a judgment in it.
People standing around in heavy winter coats, stamping their feet and rubbing their hands, keen to have it over and done with.
If it had been someone else's funeral George would have been looking out for the nearest pub.
The fact of the funeral cast a gloom upon the day.
Not everyone would be going, of course.
Very few of the lower ranks, the secretaries, the clerkesses, for instance, would go.
Senior Management would be there in force, travelling in their private cars.
Others, like myself, who knew George, or like Geoff Tulloch, who thought they ought to put in an appearance, travelled by the special minibus hired for the occasion.
As there were fewer of us than had been anticipated it wasn't necessary to close any of the sections down.
For those who were not going, however, it still wasn't a day for giggling or cream buns, for showing off lunchtime shopping or for mocking the office messenger.
Everyone was in a state of suspended animation.
Whether they knew George Pittendrigh or not they felt a need to be solemn, to show at least an awareness of mortality.
Tomorrow they could return to normal.
For a man of my age I haven't been to many funerals, the result of belonging to a much reduced family and having a limited acquaintance.
Aunt Anna's was the only one of great personal significance.
I remember Sir Hector Pittendrigh's, however, some ten years before.
It was spring.
The heady scent of blossom had hung about the churchyard.
There had been no minibus for the office staff and everyone had dressed in black.
George had done his duty in supporting his evidently  grieving and heavily veiled mother in spite of the smell of drink on his breath.
Sir Hector Pittendrigh was buried with full ecclesiastical honours.
A solemn occasion for an important man.
George, by contrast, was not an important man.
Everyone's scandalous rogue and lovable rascal.
There were no tears in evidence at his funeral.
No grieving widow, no bereft children.
Instead, his two stony-faced sisters, who had never approved of him, led the mourners with their husbands.
They were supported by a phalanx of the Senior Management, only one or two of whom were in black.
The rest were drab but decent, in grey, in beige, in brown.
Portia Forbes was absent.
Tom Watt hovered in attendance.
A few superficially disreputable characters merged into the background.
I surmised that these were George's drinking companions, men who wouldn't make a habit of going to funerals, but there out of friendship, respect for the dead.
And then there was Rose.
Emily Lightbody had not turned up for work since the preceding Friday, a rare occurrence in all her thirty years of service.
I had arrived at work late on Monday morning and in none too good a temper.
I hadn't slept well.
I had been upset by the news about George.
When my alarm clock rang at seven I wasn't ready for it.
Then I discovered a button missing from the shirt I had planned to wear.
Being a methodical man, I tried laboriously to sew it on.
In doing so, I burned my toast.
Then the subway train was held up for twenty minutes.
There had been an accident on the line.
When I reached my office, cross and flustered, it was to find the office girls clustered round Mavis's desk and Geoff Tulloch in the middle of them.
There was no sign of any work being done.
The morning's mail still lay unopened in elastic-banded bundles on Emily Lightbody's desk.
’ Miss Lightbody not in yet?’
I asked in some surprise.
It is difficult at my age to adapt to disrupted routines.
Mavis detached herself from the group and looked as though she thought she probably ought to be making an effort to take charge.
’ No, Mr Kopek.
Have you heard the news?’
’ Yes, I have.
But I don't see that that's any reason why the mail hasn't been attended to.’
’ Miss Lightbody is very particular about the mail.
She likes to distribute it herself.’
’ Well, you have my permission to go ahead and distribute it this morning.
If Miss Lightbody arrives later and says anything just refer her to me.’
’ Yes, Mr. Kopek.’
Really, Emily should be training this girl up and delegating more.
I would have to speak to her.
’ And Mr. Kopek…?’
’ Yes?’
’ There was a telephone call for you earlier.
I've left a note in your office.’
The note said: ‘Miss Rose Lightbody rang.
Please ring back.
813456.’
’ She left no information?’
Mavis seemed to cower.
’ No.
She wanted to speak to you personally.’
’ Get me the number then, please.’
Mavis obliged.
The voice at the other end was light, gentle, diffident.
Not accustomed, like her sister, to asserting herself.
’ Emily's had a gastric upset, I'm afraid.
The doctor says it isn't serious, but he thinks she should rest in bed for a few days.
She says she's very sorry and hopes you'll be able to manage without her.
She'll be back just as soon as she can.’
I didn't need any more information to understand the situation.
I said I was sorry and hoped she'd soon be better and to tell her not to worry, that of course we'd manage.
In fact, I'd become so accustomed to relying on her that I wondered how I would.
When I'd finished Mavis came in with the mail.
’ Would you check it with me, Mr. Kopek, I don't know exactly where everything goes.’
’ Did Mr. Tulloch want to speak to me?’
Mavis looked guilty.
’ No.
He just brought along some typing.
I was going to do it myself.’
’ I trust it is a business and not a personal matter?’
’ Oh, a business matter, Mr. Kopek.’
’ All right then.
I would just like to know how much real work that young man gets through in a day.
He spends a lot of time hanging round offices and chatting.’
Mavis was silent.
Immediately I regretted what I had said.
But I wasn't going to take it back.
I motioned to her to sit down and we started on the mail.
And so it was Emily who, if all that had been said about herself and George was true, would miss him most and she was absent from the funeral.
She had sent Rose as her proxy.
I picked her out almost as soon as she arrived, the only woman present whom I did not know or, in the case of George's sisters, could not identify.
She arrived alone, a pale, slim woman with short, blonde hair, wearing a black coat and a black beret and carrying, like a good Sunday School child, a hymnbook and Bible.
She seated herself in the row in front of me, but before she did so she looked round, perhaps to see if after all there was anyone present whom she recognised.
To say that she looked like Emily would be an exaggeration.
There was no more than a shadowy echo.
There was a plain but attractive stylishness about her appearance.
Whereas Emily glowed with a rich, mature sensuality, her sister had an aura of virginity which might bloom as uncorrupted goodness or corrupt with a sense of its own moral rectitude.
A certain erectness in her posture seemed to contradict an initial impression of comparative fragility.
I wondered how they lived together, the one all sin, the other all chastity.
No one spoke to her, but she did not look as if she expected anyone to do so.
I debated whether to introduce myself once the committal was over.
I found myself staring at her, my mind devolving from the content of the short and impersonal crematorium service.
She must have become conscious of my appraisal, because she suddenly turned and glanced at me directly.
Embarrassed, I dropped my eyes  to the hymnsheet in front of me.
Thereafter I didn't dare push myself forward.
The curtain parted.
George slid from us into the darkness.
Music softly played.
The curtain closed behind him.
With a sense of relief we looked around.
No one was willing to take the next step.
But we had no need to worry.
George's sisters rose with their husbands.
Their heeltaps echoed across the parquet floor.
Shufflingly and silently we followed them.
There were no hands to shake, no words of sympathy to bestow, no reception to dispel the tension and revitalise our spirits.
The cohort for the minibus gathered.
I watched Rose stride purposefully ahead of us towards the gate.
Already another funeral was assembling.
It had been an oddly unsatisfying service.
There was an emptiness about the evident lack of emotion which seemed to do George a great injustice.
His sisters and brothers-in-law would now concern themselves with his property, his effects and his will, assuming that he had left one, which, having known George, wag by no means a foregone conclusion.
Meanwhile, their collective duty done, his colleagues from the organisation would turn their backs on the smoking chimney and return to work, shaking off the morning's cold in the warm and reassuring office routines that marked their days.
The minibus passed Rose about a hundred yards from the crematorium.
She was still walking steadily.
I wished we might have stopped and offered her a lift.
If I had had a car of my own I would have offered her a lift, however far out of my way it might have taken me.
As we passed, however, I averted my eyes.
I didn't want to seem too curious.
I didn't want to be offensive.
Because of the upset and confusion of the Monday morning, I had to postpone the continuation of my consultation with Geoff Tulloch until the Wednesday afternoon.
I hoped that Mavis hadn't passed on my thoughtless, remarks about his easy-going approach to work and was therefore somewhat self-conscious when he appeared in my office at half past two on the dot.
Geoff gave no impression of offence having been transmitted or received.
His mind was gleefully revolving a fresh piece of office gossip.
’ Have you heard about the big stink along in Information?’
’ I'm scarcely back from George Pittendrigh's funeral.’
’ Oh, it's only just blown up.
It's still making waves.
It seems that Portia Forbes took advantage of Tom Watt's absence at the funeral to have a look through the Information Office files.
She says the files she looked at weren't confidential and were freely available for consultation by any senior member of staff.
George's secretary says she didn't know what to do.
There was no one senior in the building to ask.
She couldn't stop Portia.
Tom Watt's furious.
He claims that even if the files are confidential they are the responsibility of the Information Office and anyone wishing to consult them would normally be expected to ask permission.
If Portia Forbes wanted to consult them this morning why didn't she ask him before the funeral.
She says she didn't feel under any obligation to ask his permission.
Pulling rank, you see.’
I frowned.
It sounded a trivial enough disturbance on the surface, but it seemed as though there might be substance in Tom Watt's fears after all.
But why had Portia Forbes been so provocative?
She must have known that an action of that kind would cause trouble.
Or was she relying on the unlikelihood of Tom's being able to defend his own corner effectively?
He was essentially not aggressive.
He didn't like direct confrontations.
He wasn't highly regarded as having senior management potential.
’ I think she's part of a plot,’Geoff went on.
’ A plot?’
’ To bring George's office under tighter control.’
’ But why don't they just do that?’
’ They don't want to get their hands dirty.’
’ What with?’
’ Oh, gentlemen's agreements, that sort of thing.
Tom's been around a few years now.
He expects promotion.
They don't want to give him any.
So Portia Forbes is given the task of drawing his fire.’
’ And what's she going to get out of it?’
’ Promotion.
Token woman status.
She's tough.
They admire that.
She can be useful to them.
Propaganda purposes.’
’ You don't mean me to take this idiotic interpretation of events as gospel truth, do you?’
Geoff shrugged.
’ Suit yourself.
Watch how it goes.
See if I'm right.’
We then readjusted our attention to the future of the organisation's archive.
At three fifteen Mavis brought us in our tea on a tray with a plateful of shortbread biscuits.
Geoff ambled out in quest of what he referred to as ‘the bog’.
Suddenly my conscience smote me.
I hadn't done a thing about Archie.
I buzzed Mavis.
’ Get me Alan Prentice in Personnel, if you can, please.’
Presently she came back to me.
’ I've got his secretary on the line, Mr. Kopek.
Mr. Prentice is at a union meeting.
It's likely to take all afternoon.’
’ Let me speak to her.
It's an urgent matter.’
Sylvia de Groot was a difficult woman to talk to.
She guarded Alan Prentice with bars of steel.
She spoke as if she were a machine on automatic pilot.
’ He might be back before five,’she said,’but you can never tell with these meetings.’
’ Would you leave a message with him to say that I'd like to speak to him rather urgently, please.’
’ It isn't about taking early retirement, is it, Mr. Kopek?’
’ No.
I wouldn't have characterised that as urgent.’
’ Don't you?
A lot of people seem to.
I asked because all these inquiries are now being directed to Mrs. Taylor, the Assistant Personnel Officer.
Mr. Prentice is hands are full with union matters.’
When I put down the receiver I heard Geoff Tulloch's voice out in the main office, impressing the young women with his irrepressible personality.
I went and stood in the doorway of my office, indicating that I was ready to  start work again.
The giggling subsided and Geoff came in, meek as a lamb.
He knew how to walk his tightrope with finesse.
I hadn't expected to be able to speak to Alan before the end of the week, but at a quarter to five Sylvia de Groot telephoned to say that he was free now if I still wanted to see him.
I drew my session with Geoff to a rapid close.
We had covered all the significant points of the computerised plan.
It was up to Geoff now to present me with the detailed documentation in writing.
Then it would have to go to the Senior Management Committee for approval.
Then it might be implemented.
But not before we moved into the new building.
’ Don't take the girls' minds off their tidying up,’I joked as I left.
He gave me a look which made me wonder whether Mavis hadn't, after all, spilled the beans.
Maybe I would explore the possibility of early retirement in the end.
Maybe the imminence of the new technology was the moment to hang up my briefcase and say good luck to the thrusting new young generation.
But if I didn't work, what would I do?
There was a cause for panic greater than the office silence at five o'clock on a Friday afternoon.
I turned my mind to Archie.
What were my problems in comparison with his?
Alan Prentice was a sandy-haired man in his mid-thirties.
An energetic product of accelerated promotion, he was known as a tough union negotiator.
Face to face he could give the impression of being a rather mild, good natured, even compassionate man.
Human, like the rest of us.
In fact, he was brutally cynical, ruthlessly efficient and hardened to every sob story under the sun.
If he hadn't become a personnel officer he would have done rather well in the police.
I would have to think carefully how to present Archie's plight.
’ Mr. Prentice is still dictating,’said Sylvia de Groot when I arrived in Alan's domain.
I sat down.
Sylvia was typing a sizeable-looking report  on to a word-processor, a sleek grey machine with a green monitor, almost soundless in its operation.
She was a slim blonde girl in her twenties who might have stepped out of a fashion advertisement in a women's magazine.
She wore a very sparkly large diamond engagement ring and had done so for about a year.
Rumour said it was all for show, to ward off the office wolves.
Geoff Tulloch referred to her as ‘that frigid bitch’.
’ Can't understand any guy putting up with her,’was his sour comment.
He'd had his go, if all that was rumoured was to be believed.
There were two or three other typists/clerkesses in the same outer office.
Two inner offices, panelled in frosted glass, concealed Mrs. Taylor, recently promoted from being a Senior Clerkess, and Alan Prentice.
From the half open door of Alan's office I could hear, albeit indistinctly, the unhesitating flow of his address to his machine.
What dreary offices we inhabit, I thought as I allowed my gaze to travel round this miniature version of my own.
Nothing to cheer the soul or raise the level of one's imagination.
No wonder the men liked pretty or lively women.
What else was there to appreciate?
After two or three minutes, by which time the typists were switching off and covering up their machines, Alan emerged from his office and handed Sylvia a cassette.
’ I'll need it by lunchtime tomorrow.
Can you manage?’
’ I'll have to set this report aside.’
’ That's all right.
I don't need that before Monday.
Is there any chance of your working late…?’
Sylvia looked at her miniature gold watch.
’ I could manage an hour.’
He put his arm on her shoulder.
’ Good girl.’
Then he turned to me, apologising for keeping me waiting, and showed me in to his office.
’ Andreas.
Long time no see.
How are things down in the bowels of the archive?’
We exchanged pleasantries.
He squinted at me through his  spectacles.
He had a freckled face, pale and pointed, rather earnest, still schoolboyish.
He seemed ever such a young man to me.
Young and fit and keyed in to the processes of organisational power.
I explained as succinctly as I could Archie's difficulty.
I could see his features become grave.
I could be putting him on the spot.
’ I stress, of course,’I concluded,’that I would consider myself personally responsible for this man's reputation.’
Throughout my account he had steadily tapped his biro, a steel-plated one, end over end on his desk blotter.
When I stopped he pushed himself back in his comfortable armchair and put the end between his teeth.
Then he removed it, laid it on the desk and leaned his chin on his clasped hands.
’ It's a difficult one,’he said.
’ I know.
I realise perfectly.
It's just that I'm all he has.
I'm the only person outside his family who knows him well enough.’
’ I'd have to see him first.’
’ Of course.’
’ And I can't guarantee anything.
We have to be very careful these days with the unions.
Can't move a muscle without their consent.’
’ I understand.’
’ Well, look, spruce him up and send him in.
Sylvia'll give you a time.
There is a vacant night-porter's job we might be able to fill on a temporary basis.
But I can't give any promises, you understand?’
’ Of course.
Thank you very much.’
’ You're one of the organisation's institutions, Andreas.’
’ Don't make me sound as old as I sometimes feel.’
’ I'm sorry.
I didn't mean to be patronising.’
’ Well, it's nice to know I have the organisation's seal of approval.’
Especially if it gave me the credibility to help a friend in need.
I fixed an interview time with Sylvia on my way out.
7
Emily Lightbody came back to work the following Monday.
I had a split second of panic when I came into the office and saw her sitting quietly behind her desk, studying her image in her hand-mirror and conscientiously patting a stray red-gold hair into place.
The office was empty apart from the two of us.
I had come in half an hour early in anticipation of another week of battling short-handed against the tide.
It was her usual time.
She liked to establish a territorial presence before anyone else arrived.
She looked up at me steadily for a moment before she spoke.
She was as well-groomed as ever, but her expression was tired and worn.
She looked as though the glow had gone out of her.
That readiness to make a joke of life had been temporarily eclipsed.
She didn't smile.
’ Well,’she said,’the prodigal has returned.’
’ It's good to see you back.
I hope you're feeling better.’
’ Oh, much,’she replied, with an offhandness that seemed to convey, ‘Oh, come off it, Mr. Kopek.
We both know exactly why I've been off work.
Let's not make much of it, shall we?’
’ We've missed you.
Mavis has done her best, but it hasn't been the same.’
’ I know.
I'm sorry.
When these things hit you there's not much you can do about them.’
’ Of course not.
Don't think about it.’
We were interrupted by the distant sound of the clanking lift and a sudden burst of footsteps and voices in the corridor.
Emily snapped her mirror shut and replaced it in her handbag.
’ We must have a talk about the computerisation of the archive,’I said.
’ I had another session with Geoff Tulloch last Wednesday.
What about coffee-time?’
She had just time to nod before the advance guard entered.
Mavis, Clare and Ada.
There were excited exclamations at the sight of the returned Emily and they flocked round her desk to welcome her back and pass on the gossip of the preceding week.
I disappeared quickly into my own office, leaving them to the buzz of their womentalk.
Soon the rest of the girls would straggle in, the mail would arrive and another week would be under way.
At half past ten Emily came into my office carrying two cups of coffee, her own and mine.
Under one of the saucers she carried an open shorthand notebook.
Her biro was stuck behind her right ear.
With a neat and elegant sideways kick of her high-heeled white sandal, she closed the door behind her and sat herself down opposite me in my visitors' chair.
’ You know,’she said,’I can tell two things from the way everybody looks at me this morning.
First, that I look awful and, second, the reason why.’
’ Well, all I can say, Miss Lightbody, is that you don't look the slightest bit awful to me and, second, that your sister's explanation as to why you were absent last week is good enough to me.
People talk because they need distraction.
It'll pass.
Next week there'll be some new drama to take up their attention.’
I made it clear that I wanted our discussion that morning to focus on business matters, but I realised that she had a need to talk to someone, preferably someone discreet.
I was probably as safe a person as anyone in that ferment of gossip and political manoeuvrings.
So I asked her if she would have lunch with me.
She looked surprised, taken aback even.
‘Mr. Kopek, I didn't know you had it in you,’ was the phrase I could see written all over her expression.
But she recovered, composed herself and accepted, gladly, too, it would seem, much to my own satisfaction.
I wanted to cheer her up if I could.
I needed her cheered up in the office.
I needed her as ally in the forthcoming moves and changes.
I left her in no doubt as to my view of Geoff Tulloch.
’ That man's mobility is supernatural,’she said.
’ Now you see him, now you don't.’
She took notes steadily throughout our discussion.
I reflected that I was sitting there letting her do so on the assumption that those notes would be our reference point for what we did over the next few weeks.
Emily took pains to  make sure that details of operations were accurate.
Whatever she took in the way of rough spontaneous notes during a discussion would later be typed up in immaculate form.
It mattered to her how something looked as much as what it contained.
Usually, however, she was keen to contribute ideas to our discussions.
This morning she was unusually quiet.
She listened to me and she took copious notes, but it was as if her understanding was glazed over.
’ You know, Mr. Kopek,’she said at last,’I don't know whether it's this new technology or just the way I'm feeling this morning, but I just don't seem to be able to take this in.’
’ Don't worry.
Nor did I when Geoff Tulloch started.
I just said to myself ‘Don't let the bastard wear you down.
'I'll arrange some training sessions for you in the data processing section.
It's a question of familiarity.’
She laid her notebook down in her lap.
’ I hate to say this, Mr. Kopek, but I think I may be too old to start all over again on something as new as this.
I'm used to my ways, Mr. Kopek.
This makes me feel at a disadvantage.’
’ You'll soon get used to it.’
Her response was firm.
’ I don't think so.
I may as well tell you.
I've arranged an appointment with Elsie Taylor tomorrow to look into the possibility of early retirement.’
’ You don't want to rush into something like that.
I know the events of last week have been difficult for you, but you shouldn't allow them to panic you into a hasty decision.’
’ Oh, I won't.
It's been creeping up on me for a while.
It wasn't just George.
I've run out of steam.’
I looked at my watch.
’ Let's go to lunch,’I said.
’ Where would you suggest?’
’ There's a basement Wine Bar in Wymark Street where George and I used to go.
It's usually fairly quiet at lunchtime.
Most people prefer to drink in the evening.
Not old George.
He would start before breakfast and would carry on all day.’
It was a new experience for me, a city basement wine bar  at lunchtime.
I wasn't sure what to expect.
My lunch hours were generally spent with sandwiches and coffee at my desk or with a plate of fish and chips or roast pork and two veg in the organisation canteen.
Occasionally I treated myself to a half hour browse in a bookshop.
It was the degree of darkness which took me by surprise.
Candles flickered on tabletops that bore some resemblance to wine barrels sawn in half.
They may have been exactly that, but it was difficult to see.
Several profiles were spotlit in the candle flames.
My problem was to make my way from the entrance to a vacant table.
I kept stumbling over objects, like bar stools, or bumping into people who turned out to be barmen or waitresses.
’ Here, let me go ahead,’said Emily, catching hold of my hand.
I left it to her.
’ Why so dark?’
I asked, when we were safely disposed at what seemed to be a vacant table.
’ Ambience,’said Emily.
’ But you can't see anything.
Do the barmen have x-ray eyes or what?’
Emily giggled.
’ In a few minutes you start adjusting.’
’ What will you have?’
Emily considered.
’ Would you like to give me a nice treat?’
’ But of course.
Whatever you like.’
She mentioned a concoction which I had never encountered before.
It was a modern cocktail, apricot-coloured and served in tall narrow glasses with ice, a glacé cherry and a slice of lemon.
Not knowing what I was letting myself in for, but feeling in the mood for experiment, I said I would have one too.
I couldn't see Emily's expression as I did so.
Together we peered over the contents of a large glossy menu of unusual composition.
Emily recommended a savoury pancake with prawns and mushrooms and much else.
I went along with that too.
’ It was the drink that did for George in the end,’said Emily.
’ No question.
He was lucky to be spared a long fuddled decline into the garbage heap.
Without exaggeration, left to himself, that's where he would have ended.
At least he could  still enjoy himself.
Went out enjoying himself too.’
She paused.
’ I should know.
I was there at the time.’
A movement like a camera shutter whipped across my mind, blacking out an injudicious image of two rather large seals on a pebbly beach.
I found myself wondering anxiously whether anyone we knew could overhear us.
At last I blessed the enfolding dark.
Emily went on, oblivious.
’ You can imagine the state I was in, between shock, embarrassment and unconsummated frustration.
I tried the Kiss of Life.
Hah!
Can you imagine?
In that state?
There was nothing doing.
He was out cold.
So I covered him up decently and rang for an ambulance.
Then I got myself dressed so that I'd be in a fit state when the ambulance men arrived.
I mean, I couldn't pretend we weren't doing what we were.
It's no crime and they'd have known anyway, but you might as well hold on to your dignity if you can.
I went to the hospital with him, but there was no point in hanging around.
In cases like that it's the next of kin they want.
They don't recognise irregular relationships.
It made me angry, I can tell you, but there was no point in making a scene.’
The drink was cool and refreshing.
A sharp bitterness kicked at one's palate amid the blandness of the blended fruit juices.
’ But we had fun together, George and I. That was all he wanted, all he ever led me to expect.
The likes of George don't marry women like me.
I used to have these dreams, you know, that it might be possible.
But what with Rose to think of and George's drinking we just stayed the way we were.
It suited George, so I went along with it.
Not that I regret any of it, you understand, but it's not an enviable state being someone's mistress.
Fifteen years it lasted, Mr. Kopek.
Imagine.
Fifteen years and all those other chances passed over.
Sometimes when I think about it I do feel a little cheated.
That was what upset me last week.
Not George dying.
He'll be cheering himself up in one or the other place by now without a backward glance.
No, it's the realisation that you're alone at last, all that emotional energy expended over  the years and where's it got you?
All washed up, bereft and unprovided for.
All the money we spent on this stuff,’ she indicated her drink,’could've floated a battleship over the years.’
I felt that any response I might make to this sad ending would be inadequate to the occasion.
The arrival of our savoury pancakes with our cutlery tightly wrapped in napkins provided a welcome diversion.
’ I saw your sister at the funeral,’I said.
’ Yes,’said Emily.
’ She did mention.’
’ I hope she didn't think me rude or anything.
I wanted to introduce myself, but I was afraid she'd think me…’
’ Pushy?
Not in a million years, Mr. Kopek.
You're not the type.
She was a brick to go.
I couldn't face it, what with the family and everyone from work, but she offered.
She's worth her weight in gold, my sister.
But she did find it a bit overwhelming on her own.
She'd have been glad of someone to chat to.
I should've arranged it, now that I come to think of it.
Wisdom of hindsight.
She barely knew George.
She'd met him a few times, usually when he was drunk.
She preferred not to after that.
Didn't think he was good for me.
Couldn't understand why I was potty about him.
Nor did I when I thought about it.
But there you are, Mr. K. that's life.
Hits us below the belt as often as not.
Would you like to meet my sister?’
The question, coming as it did unexpectedly at the end of her monologue, disconcerted me.
Even more so as it caught me with a mouthful of pancake and hot sauced prawns.
’ 'That's what one might call a loaded question, Miss Lightbody.
Damned if you say yes and damned if you say no.’
’ Once I make up my mind to do something, Mr. K., wild horses won't shift me.
I didn't fancy staying on after George retired anyway.
I wanted to keep an eye on him.
Keep him from chasing younger birds — if he could've summoned up the energy.
But there you are.
No need to in the end.
Freedom at last.
Rose and I together, we'll manage.’
The pancakes were slipping down rather well.
So was the extraordinary drink.
’ Have another,’said Emily.
’ On me this time.’
I felt powerless to refuse.
We treated ourselves to a sweet as well.
Substantial slices of rich creamy chocolate gateau, also decorated with glacé cherries.
I began to feel that it couldn't possibly be encroaching on a Monday afternoon and that Emily and I had an office to go back to.
I was also beginning to have some difficulty focussing on what Emily was saying.
’ What do you reckon on this Forbes woman then?’she asked when our pudding plates were scraped clean.
’ I hardly know her.’
’ I gather she's been causing more trouble.’
’ So the rumour goes.’
’ One of these days she'll go too far.
Mark my words, Mr. K. They'll give her just enough rope to hang herself.’
I didn't want to become embroiled in yet another discussion of office politics and personalities, but there was one question I wanted to ask, if I could prevent the words slurring round my mouth.
’ Tell me, Miss Lightbody.
Why is it that women are so bitchy towards each other?’
’ That's a total myth, Mr. K. A total myth.
You send a ripple through the typing pool and see how these girls stick together.
Try it sometime.
Men are every bit as bitchy to each other.
Look at that Geoff Tulloch.
He's the organisation's prime male bitch, for all he thinks his feathers are so bonny.
It's a question of common interest.
The typing pool's all on the same level.
Few of these girls have any chance of promotion.
Most don't stick around long enough.
They go off and get married.
They don't see themselves in competition with each other.
Not at work.
But when a woman comes along with a  superior set of academic qualifications and a superior status and treats you like shit, then that's a different matter.
She's on her own.’
’ You could hardly expect Portia Forbes to start off in the typing pool.’
’ No, but she could make an effort to be civil.’
’ Perhaps she's insecure.’
’ That's her problem.
I've enough of my own to cope with.
If I have a choice between working for a nice man who let's me get on with my work in my own way and as far as possible on my own initiative and a difficult woman, then I'm not going to hesitate, am I?’
Our coffee arrived.
Hot and black.
In eggcupfuls.
I felt ready to consume gallons of it.
’ I think you should bring Mavis on a bit,’I said.
’ She could do with more responsibility.’
Emily sipped her coffee.
’ You think I'm too strict with her?’
’ Perhaps you could delegate more.’
’ Grooming up my successor?’
’ The show must go on.
Things won't be done exactly as you would do them, not at first.
But the girl has to learn.
’ She'll probably marry that awful Geoff Tulloch before another year's out.’
’ All the more reason for providing her with a diversion.’
’ I'll think about it.’
’ Do I qualify as a nice man who lets you get on with your work in your own way and as far as possible on your own initiative?’
She laughed.
’ Mr. Kopek, you are beyond criticism and above praise.
No one could be nicer to work with.
In fact, I'd go so far as to return a compliment I've had paid to me by men many times over in my eventful life.
I'd accept you as an honorary woman any day!’
She looked at me with a defiant grin and a twinkle in her eye.
Was there a gleam of malice?
Surely not.
We had been colleagues for years and, as I say, I was having difficulty focussing.
Bemused, I attempted to look at my watch.
’ Goodness me, Miss Lightbody.
It's nearly half past two!
I'd no idea we'd taken so long.’
’ Never mind, Mr. K. You've done me a power of good.
I was really depressed at the thought of coming in to the office this morning.
It's been most kind.’
I waved aside her gratitude, being much more keenly preoccupied by the difficulty I was having in making myself stand upright without hanging on to something.
’ Oh, dear, Mr. Kopek,’she said, immediately realising my predicament.
’ I think I've been luring you into bad ways.’
She took firm hold of my arm.
I couldn't understand what had come over me.
She didn't seem at all the worse for drink.’
’ Need to go wary on the Apricot Sunsets in future,’she said as she helped me slowly up the basement steps to the street.
For a moment the daylight was as blinding as bright sun.
I began to panic.
I couldn't go back into the office in this state.
It would be all over the organisation in minutes.
Whatever should I do?
Emily took charge.
’ I'll take you up to Jean Walkinshaw.
She's seen worse, including George.
She'll have you right in no time.’
I groaned aloud.
Honorary woman or not, my modest male dignity was all gone.
Miss Walkinshaw was the matron in charge of the organisation's sick room.
An augustly respectable middle-aged woman, robust dispenser of aspirins for headaches and mysterious female ailments, first port of call for migraines and dead faints, epileptic fits and heart attacks.
However would I face her?
What on earth would she think?
‘I'm terribly sorry, Miss Walkinshaw, but I seem to be a trifle under the weather this afternoon.
I was wondering whether you had an aspirin or something that would help?
You see, I really have to get back to my office as soon as…’
’ Well, well, well, Mr. Kopek.
This is a surprise!’
’ Oh, don't worry, Miss Walkinshaw.
It was all in a good cause.
I can assure you it won't happen again.’
’ Well, I should hope not, Mr. Kopek.
We can't have you, of all people, sliding down the Primrose Path to the everlasting bonfire, can we now?’
‘Oh, no, of course not, Miss Walkinshaw.’
But as she administered to my addled wits I felt a surge of rebellion.
Why should I meekly sit down and take her schoolmistressly primness like a naughty boy.
No reason.
Except that I couldn't sit up straight.
Emily left me, mouthing as she went out of the door that she was going back to the office.
’ Open wide now,’said Miss Walkinshaw.
’ Swallow it quickly and you won't notice the taste.
There's a good boy.’
Mother knows best.
No more Apricot Sunsets for you, young man.
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
As I lay back on the clean white sheet tucked round the hard mattress of the sick room bed and faded into a temporary oblivion, I thought to myself that perhaps early retirement would be no bad thing to consider after all.
8
’ She lives alone,’Tom was saying,’in one of those upmarket West End flats near the Botanic Gardens.
She can't be short of a bob or two.
Those particular flats have a preservation order on them.
Art nouveau stained glass windows, famous local architect due for a reappraisal, that sort of thing.’
I had invited Tom to have lunch with me in the canteen.
After my experience with the Apricot Sunsets I was playing safe with my digestion for a while.
The canteen made a perfect backdrop for depressing conversations.
It was in the basement.
A bare, barracklike room.
The walls were washed a pale green that never looked bright and fresh and clean.
There were places where the plaster had chipped and no repairs had been done.
The cement floor was covered by a worn brown linoleum.
The tables were red formica-topped, the chairs black polyprop for easy stacking.
There was a row of frosted glass windows down one side, each fitted with an electric fan.
When the windows were open, as they often were because of the heat from the kitchen area, you could see the legs of passers by on the pavement above.
The form was self-service.
The food was adequate but unimaginative.
It made no pretence of catering to faddish tastes like vegetarianism or high fibre diets.
Some would say it made no pretence of catering at all, but if you weren't fussy about what you ate, if your lunch was no more than a fuelling stop to enable you to work through the afternoon, then what was on offer was tolerable.
Chips with everything from the leathery slices of roast meat, through the squidgy fish cooked in cardboard batter to the limp arrangements of greenery that passed for salads.
The women who served behind the counter in their green overalls and caps were non-committal about the quality.
It was a production line job for them.
Theirs not to reason why.
In consequence it wasn't heavily patronised.
There were plenty of more interesting places to eat out in the city  centre.
You never saw a secretary or a typist or a clerkess eating there.
They preferred to have a quick yoghurt at their desks and spend the rest of the time shopping.
Once a week my entire office went somewhere special for lunch together.
When these women ate they liked to eat well.
The denizens of the canteen were mainly the accountants and the data-processing buffs, huddles of grey or navy blue suits exchanging the distinctive jargon of their respective trades, the young upwardly mobile middle managers.
Geoff Tulloch was usually here.
Tom went sometimes.
So did I. Occasionally it would be invaded by a phalanx of senior management, easily identified by the smarter cut of their suits and the ringing individualism in their voices.
It was never clear whether they were carrying out a routine sample spot check on the facilities or merely seeking a quick meal before a meeting.
It was a dismal place.
It didn't exalt your notions of food.
But the organisation kept it going on principle.
When we moved to the new building we were promised vastly improved facilities, not a canteen but a carpeted restaurant, with special facilities for conferences and for private business lunches.
I doubted, however, if they would get the length of Apricot Sunsets.
I was wrong.
But that is to anticipate.
’ Why did she come back from America?’
I asked.
’ With her qualifications this is hardly the city you'd choose to come back to in the middle of an economic recession.’
’ Family commitments, possibly,’said Tom,’although it's hard to see how she could fit any in, the hours she works.
Geoff Tulloch got hold of the idea that she'd worked for some corporation in Detroit for a year.
An economic forecaster or something.
As it wasn't mentioned in the Newsletter write-up Geoff's theory is that she was booted out.
He reckons that's a sign she can't be any good.’
’ She could eat Geoff Tulloch for breakfast.’
’ Well, you know what he's like.’
’ What happened about the files?’
’ The ones she looked at when I was at George's funeral?’
I nodded.
’ She's established access.’
middle of his half-eaten plate of fish and chips and pushed it away.
’ This stuff's inedible,’he said.
But I sensed there was more to it than that.
As I laboured through the rest of my own meal we turned our attention to less personally charged topics, like the latest terrorist attack in Northern Ireland and the growing tension in the Lebanon.
Then Tom said,’ Speak of angels.’
From his side of the table he could see the self-service counter.
I had to swivel round.
Portia Forbes had come in and with a tray in her hand was studying the menu.
I turned back to my plate, registering as I did so that Geoff Tulloch, who was with a group of his data-processing colleagues at a nearby table, had noticed our interest.
Geoff's continual nosiness was an irritation.
One tried to ignore it.
It wasn't as if one could do anything to stop it.
People would say he was harmless, but I didn't like the idea of my remarks and behaviour being stored up for him later to gossip about or pass judgment on.
He afflicted one with a sense of unwarranted intrusion on one's private concerns.
It was as if he were building up his own mental data bank of the organisation's inter-personal relationship patterns, which was a form of words I was sure he would understand.
He seemed incapable of forming any relationships.
Even those he tried to establish with office girls seemed to founder fairly rapidly.
Perhaps his failures fuelled his own curiosity.
How do human beings tick?
What was disturbing about him was the impression he gave one of the potential of undercover intimidation, difficult to pin down and therefore impossible to counter.
In the curiously claustrophobic, hierarchic world of the organisation, with the competitive pressures for promotion and jockeying for status, and the paranoid reactions this could induce, a few words spoken with a confident air of authority in certain ears at certain times could do incalculable harm, in my view.
The morning I woke up and realised that perhaps the reason I resented young Tulloch s much was because I too was an observer of human beings and that this most likely derived  from an equal failure to establish satisfactory human relationships, was not a happy one.
I justify myself on the grounds that I don't indulge in idle gossip and have never sought to aggrandise myself or to do harm to others.
I merely seek to understand.
But I digress again.
Forgive me, I am an old man now.
On this occasion in the canteen I was more interested in Tom's behaviour.
With my back to the self-service counter I followed Portia Forbes's progress along it through Tom's eyes.
They never left her.
’ She isn't happy with the selection,’he said.
’ I wonder if she's even been down here before.
With a figure like that one would hardly take her for a chips and stodge consumer.
She's arguing with the serving woman who's lifted all the lids from the hot dishes to show her the succulent variety.
None of it will do.
She's settled for some biscuits and cheese and a yoghurt and a glass of orange juice.’
As his commentary stopped I realised that she must have completed her purchases and was very likely surveying the room for somewhere to sit.
Tom's head sank into his shoulders, as if he were trying to make himself invisible, but his eyes remained restlessly curious.
The next moment I heard the confident heel taps behind me.
She was coming up the central passage between the rows of tables.
Tom seemed to freeze.
I wondered if she would join us.
But no.
In a minute she was past us, making for a table at the far end of the room.
I could tell from the blank embarrassment in Tom's expression that she had not acknowledged him.
I watched her as she settled down.
She was a beautiful woman and no mistake.
Tall, slim and dressed with an elegant simplicity.
She looked like a fashion plate.
Today's Executive Woman.
Or should it be today's Woman Executive?
Or did it make any difference either way?
It is rare that an ordinary man like myself encounters women who look like this, other than on celluloid.
These flawless features and immaculate presentation fill me with awe.
Are these women actually made like that or is what one sees the result of hours of patient effort and painstaking attention to detail?
If so, when do  these women find the time to sleep?
On this occasion, as on many others, Portia Forbes was wearing a tailored navy pin-stripe suit, an open-necked white shirt and a red scarf at her neck.
Geoff Tulloch once advanced the opinion that it made her look like an air hostess.
Never having flown in an aeroplane, I was unable to corroborate this view.
Beside her meagre meal Portia carried a slim black zip-up file case and a copy of the Financial Times which I recognised by its distinctive colour.
I knew that the eyes of at least half the accountants and data-processors at the neighbouring tables were on her as well as my own.
I expect that she knew too.
But she didn't give us the satisfaction of raising her eyes to confirm the fact.
She struck me as a rather isolated figure, psychologically as well as physically, sitting at that distant table.
Not frail or vulnerable.
Proud, undoubtedly.
Most of the organisation's employees had some group loyalty within the overall structure.
Portia Forbes so far had shown no interest in establishing any.
In fact, she seemed to be paving the way for positive alienation.
How long could she survive that?
’ Let's go upstairs for some coffee?’suggested Tom.
So we handed in our trays at the kitchen hatch and left.
I decided that I would keep an eye on Tom after that.
I felt that he needed a friend within the organisation.
He was going through a difficult period.
Pressure at work, pressure at home.
If I had married and had a son, I reasoned to myself, that boy would be about Tom's age.
But, as luck would have it, I didn't have an opportunity to follow up my intention at the time.
Marion Watt went into hospital some ten days earlier than expected.
There was some anxiety about the child, but he was born safely several days prematurely.
Tom went off on paternity leave and his secretary organised a whip-round to send a card and a gift.
I sent a card of my own.
It was a long time since I had bought a card to celebrate the arrival of a new baby.
But I chose it myself.
Many of my male colleagues would have asked their female secretaries to go out and choose one for them.
The assumption seems to be…
But again I digress.
I thought that the birth of his son was a good omen for Tom.
I hoped that it would distract his mind from his problems at work.
I also hoped that the speculation at work as to what was going to be done with George's office would die down for a while.
After all, we were coming up to Christmas, season of goodwill.
In fact, the free-wheeling speculation continued unabated.
It probably even gathered momentum from Tom's absence.
Geoff Tulloch pondered opening a book on the issue.
I made no secret of my disgust at the way people were behaving.
I was ignored.
The gossip went on regardless.
It was a degrading situation for Tom and would be a humiliation if he were passed over.
I had not realised that one innocent man's plight could arouse such blood lust.
If the gladiator fell how many of his colleagues would wave a handkerchief of mercy?
In the end, the matter was summarily despatched.
On the morning of twenty-third December, the last full day before the Christmas break, a memorandum was sent round all Heads of Department and Heads of Section.
It was tersely worded.
From 1st January, 198-, the work of the Information Office would be subsumed under the wider remit of Miss Portia Forbes.
T. H. Watt would continue to discharge his former functions there as Information Assistant.
There wasn't anything that could be said.
I just hoped that Tom would feel better about the situation when he came back to work in the New Year.
But then there was Archie.
My doorbell rang about ten o'clock on the Friday evening before Christmas.
When I opened the door I hardly recognised him.
Gone was the beard.
The straggly hair was trimmed and washed.
He was wearing a slightly baggy brown suit, a yellow shirt and a dark red tie.
’ Hah, man, I nearly fooled ye!’he said with glee, thrusting a bottle wrapped in brown paper into my hand before I had time to take stock.
’ Well, stranger!’
’ Hoo d'ye like it, eh?’
He  stretched out his arms and then turned slowly so that I could view the recycled Archie  from all angles.
’ It's no exactly my own idea of good taste and I could do wi' a suit that's a better fit, but beggars cannae be choosers, as they say.
My brither, George, has put on an awful lot of weight since I wis last hame.
Ye should see him.
An' that pair wee wife of his.
I dinnae ken hoo she pits up wi' him.’
’ Archie, you look the soul of respectability.
Come in and tell me your news.’
The sight of him like that gladdened my heart because I knew his news must be good.
It was.
Alan Prentice must have been impressed.
He would have given Archie a hard time, I'm sure of it.
He gave everyone a hard time.
But Archie wouldn't talk about the interview.
The following night he was starting as one of two night porters assigned to the new office block.
’ Three months probation, eh?
So I'd better mind my Ps and Qs.
Now let's have a wee look at that bottle I brought ye.
Gie oorsels a wee celebration.’
I unwrapped the bottle.
It was my favourite malt.
’ Archie, this must have cost you a fortune!’
’ Oh, I widnae worry aboot that.
I thought yer ain bottle wis gettin' a wee thing on the low side and could dae wi' a refill.’
He was right, of course.
But it had never struck me that it was something he would notice.
I fetched the glasses, broke the seal and we set to.
After he'd been offered the job Archie had been taken over the new building to see the general layout.
’ You have the edge on me now,’I said.
’ My reconnaissance visit is scheduled for some time in January.’
’ Man, it's a futuristic dream, right enough.
I couldnae get used tae the silence.
Ye ken, ye walk up tae a door and it opens of its ain accord.
It's eerie.
Ye're aye lookin' ower yer shoulder, wonderin' whae's watchin' ye.
The world of Big Brither.
But, man, is it no luxurious!
All chrome and carpets.’
’ And what did you think of the area?
What they've done to the streets you used to know so well?’
’ Aye, weel,’he considered,’there's no much i' it left, is there?
Not a sock or a shirt or a kettle or a jam jar or a jawbox or a cludgie.
Stamped oot.
Wiped aff the face of the earth.’
’ They were hard days, Archie.’
’ But I wis born tae it.
Hooever bad it wis, ye feel differently aboot it because it wis yer ain place.
There's somethin' offensive aboot seein' it destroyed as if it had nae right tae exist.
as if it wis an abomination.’
’ Will you mind working down there in the new building then?’
’ Let's say, it'll give me food fer thought.
But in a rather more comfortable environment than I'm used tae.
The duties arenae whit ye wid call onerous.’
We went on talking.
The level of the malt in the newly broached bottle went down and down.
We were oblivious of the passage of time.
Some time in the early hours of Saturday morning Archie staggered to his feet and said that he'd have to be on his way.
I offered, once again, to put him up in the spare room for the night, but, once again , he wouldn't hear of it.
’ How will you get home then?’
He shrugged expansively.
He would walk, he said.
’ And if I cannae manage I'll sing myself tae sleep in Central Station till the trains start rinnin' in the mornin'.’
’ You will not, Archie.
You will not jeopardise that job I perjured myself to get for you by a vagrancy charge tonight of all nights.
I'll call a taxi.’
’ Ye'll never get a taxi at this time of night.
They'll a' be in their beds like decent folk.’
’ Rubbish.
There'll be plenty of people needing taxis on a Friday night.
Now just you sit there and wait.’
Grumbling away in his cups, he complied.
I dialled two or three numbers and was eventually able to get someone to come.
I helped Archie to his feet and after a necessary detour into the bathroom launched him on to the landing.
He insisted on trying to go it alone and lurched against the bannister where he hung on for dear life.
’ Ach, man, watch oot!
There's an earthquake,’ he said.
He wouldn't accept my guiding arm down the stairs.
In any case, I wasn't all that steady myself.
Archie got a surge of confidence after successfully negotiating a step or two.
He waltzed and pirouetted and then, to my horror, he lost his footing.
I couldn't look as I stood helplessly at the top of stairs listening to him bumping and thudding from step to step until he reached the bottom.
When all was still I peeped tentatively through my fingers.
At first I thought he must be out cold.
But in a moment he sat up and dusted himself.
’ Man,’he said,’life is full of eventualities.’
Then I heard the taxi's arrival, that unmistakably expectant panting.
’ He isn't violent,’I assured the driver.
’ Just happy.’
’ Lucky man,’said the stoical driver.
Archie wasn't the first drunk man he'd driven home in the early hours of the morning.
Together we assisted him into the taxi.
We'd just settled him along the back seat when I realised that he would need some money.
I ran upstairs and back down again.
I gave the driver what he estimated the journey would cost.
I couldn't help reflecting that it would almost have bought another bottle of malt, but I didn't grudge a penny.
I hoped that Archie would recover in time for his first night on duty.
As I climbed the stairs for the second time that morning, more wearily this time, I heard the sound of a keg being gently turned in a lock.
The next moment Miss Kilspindie's front door opened and a white mask surmounted by a minefield of curlers peered out.
I gave her a deep old-fashioned bow, a legacy of the East European courtesies in which I had been raised.
’ I'm sorry if you were disturbed,’I said.
’ But everything is quiet now.’
She stared at me in a kind of shocked silence and then gradually withdrew into the shadows of her front hall, closing the door in front of her.
This was followed by several slow and gentle clicks of a key.
I waited for another few seconds and then crossed the landing to my own flat where I completed my own process of locking myself in for the night.
I was ready for bed.
But I suffered all next day.
Oh dear, I thought, feeling very sorry for myself, and I'm not even a drinking man.
To be thus punished twice in a matter of some three weeks seemed grossly unjust.
9
If you walk through the centre of the city today you will find a gaping hole in place of the old building where I used to work.
It is surrounded by a high creosoted wooden fence to which are attached glossy placards displaying the names of a well known firm of demolition experts and of the construction company in charge of the future redevelopment work.
Tomorrow or possibly the day after, you may find that the redevelopment work has begun.
A new hotel and leisure centre.
Right in the heart of a city that has become accustomed to being regarded as an eyesore.
Another phoenix is arising, with mutated plumage.
The other day I went back into the city to walk round some of my old haunts.
To recapture old memories from a flavour of the present.
The gaping hole stumped me.
I stood in front of that fence for a long time, trying to reconstruct the presence of that massive Victorian red sandstone building in which I had spent nearly five sevenths of my life for thirty years.
I couldn't do it.
Working day at least in all that time I had entered or come out from that building and its reality had gone for me.
I might picture it in my imagination, but it was a precarious, ghostly structure.
It reminded me of that episode in Rudyard Kipling's Kim where the boy is confronted with a shattered pot and comes under pressure to reconstruct it in his mind as it once was.
He can't do it.
This shows his integrity.
He is not amenable to insidious influence.
If I have understood the episode correctly.
I have always felt ambiguously about it.
In a street not far from Wymark Street the same demolition firm was disposing of a row of tenements.
These tenements had been empty for several years, the small shopfronts that once elbowed each other along the street boarded up.
Then the buildings had been gutted from within.
Carious teeth.
Windows open to the sky.
Danger notices had been put up and largely disregarded.
On this particular day the street had been cordoned off.
I stood with a group of officials and other bystanders.
We didn't have long to wait.
The explosion was timed to the second.
A puff of smoke, the walls falling inward like dominoes, a cascade of masonry and through the submerging tide of dusty plaster, broken tiles and splintered wood there emerged, untarnished and intact, one metal bath.
The bystanders gave a cheer.
The officials congratulated each other.
Someone offered to auction the bath.
I have a confession to make.
I actually enjoyed the bang.
Perhaps the little boy once starved of such innocent enjoyment resurfaced.
I also enjoy ripping up the rejected drafts of this manuscript.
There is a satisfaction.in the feeling of having improved upon one's original ideas.
No.
I am no more consistent than I am perfect.
A pity, perhaps.
But there we are.
Christmas that year came and went.
So did New Year.
I spent both as usual with Bill and Irina.
After that my attention was taken up by the organisation's move to the new building.
Emily Lightbody and I worked together very closely over the move.
Geoff Tulloch ran computer programme after computer programme in an attempt to arrive at the most efficient method of organisation.
He might as well have been devising a new war game.
We couldn't wait for him.
Emily and I put our heads together after office hours and came up with the answers we needed.
Our cherished records were enfolded by large new cardboard boxes tied with pink tape and marked with inscrutable computer codes.
The boxes were stacked on desks and tables and covered the floors as fast as the shelves were emptied.
The girls' typing desks were pushed together into a fortified ghetto behind the stacked boxes.
There were a lot of jokes about establishing gun-emplacements and throwing hand grenades.
Emily was altogether more cheerful than I would have expected from her circumstances.
Her tough combative spirit  seemed essentially unimpaired.
I think she was glad of the diversion, the challenge of the move.
In private there was no doubt it was a difficult time for her.
Her grief had none of the sanctions of legitimacy.
People couldn't offer her expressions of sympathy.
She had none of the widow's aura, none of the comfort of children.
I had expected a sharper tongue in the office, a brisker and more brittle approach to the anarchic thoughtlessness of the girls.
But I had underestimated her.
She seemed to have her own armour plating to protect her emotions.
She wasn't a woman you would be tempted to pity or patronise.
She didn't want your pity or your patronage.
She had her pride.
Already she was talking about her forthcoming summer holiday plans with Rose.
’ I thought I might splurge my lump sum on a cruise this year,’she said.
’ Either the Mediterranean or the Bahamas.
Rose worries about the expense.
She'd rather invest the money.
But I keep telling her you can't take it with you.
She says she's not banking on a short life for either of us.
But I say you never can tell, can you, Mr. K?’
We've never quite got on to first name terms, Emily and I. Even in our respective retirements.
Old habits die hard.
Besides, in those days, the girls would have been on to it quick as a flash and we didn't want that.
Occasionally, after a particularly trying day, we would go out for a drink together — but no more Apricot Sunsets, thank you very much.
Then she would be franker.
’ You wouldn't believe the sufferings of scarlet women, Mr. K. George and I never went on holiday together.
He was always vague when I brought the subject up, so I never pushed it.
Since then I've often wondered whether I shouldn't have gone ahead and simply presented him with the bill.
But it would have taken more courage than I could muster.
Besides, I didn't really know what he could afford.
He was vague about that too.
If I'd been his wife I wouldn't have hesitated.
But as it was I felt it would have been presumptive.
Much too risky.
Besides, the sorts of holidays Rose and I usually go on wouldn't have been up-market enough for George.’
Once she turned to me and said,’ You're not half such a stuffed shirt when you've got a drink inside you, Mr. K.’
And I didn't know whether to laugh with pleasure or to cry with pain.
’ Oh, well, Miss Lightbody, we can all benefit from a change of routine now and then.’
’ Well, here's to a new life rising from the ashes of the old, eh?’
But such occasions marked the limits of our intimacy.
I must own that the possibility of taking matters further did cross my mind and infiltrated my uncensored dreams, but it would have been unwise at the time and later I was glad we had left things as they were.
I have no regrets.
Emily would have been too strong for me.
Then there came the day of the invasion by the removal men.
They were a hearty task force and created havoc in the offices with their rolled up shirtsleeves and open collars revealing their tanned and hirsute chests and arms.
They enjoyed showing off their muscular masculinity.
The girls giggled and pretended to be unimpressed.
Emily regarded them with cynical appraisal.
’ By God, you lot fairly fancy yourselves, don't you.
God's gift to women and I don't think.’
They made me wince.
I kept as much as possible out of their way.
Being subjected to volleys of ‘Cheer up, grandad, it may never happen,’ was not calculated to endear me to them.
But they were quick and efficient.
They knew their job and they got on with it.
Which was more than could be said for Geoff Tulloch.
He would pop in and out of the office now and then, fulfilling his supervisory role and looking as if he were a man with an important but very secret mission.
He had given us the computer codes to chalk on the outside of the boxes, but you wouldn't have caught him packing files into the boxes or wrapping them up with pink tape afterwards.
But he wanted to make it clear that he was there to be called on in an emergency.
We ignored him as much as possible.
And then suddenly it was all over.
‘The hairy men’, as the girls had called them, were gone.
The furniture and files and all our other pieces of office equipment had been  unpacked in the new building.
Emily and I let the girls home early and then returned for one last look at the old building.
We surveyed the denuded rooms.
The wooden floorboards underneath the worn linoleum echoed to our steps.
Already it seemed less familiar.
’ Well, no skeletons in the cupboard after all,’said Emily.
’ It has its character,’I said with sentiment.
’ You can keep this sort of character, Mr. K. The lavatory tiles and the stone cold corridors, the cobwebs and the draughty windows and the five star views over tenement backyards.
Give me warmth and comfort and twentieth century mod cons any day.’
Once we'd established that nothing had been left behind Emily went off to catch a bus and I decided that no one would mind if I popped my head round the doors of the suite of rooms which George had occupied.
I had expected to find them empty.
There were three rooms.
In the first room you entered George's secretary had kept guard with the assistance of an office junior.
On the left a door with a frosted glass panel in it led into Tom Watt's office, a long narrow north-facing room with a tall sash-window at the far end.
With the brimming in-tray on his desk and his faintly harassed short-sleeved appearance Tom always gave the impression of having snatched organisation from the brink of chaos.
George's room was something else.
Likewise north-facing, and therefore never filled with much light, even in summer, George's office had been fitted out in style.
The walls had been panelled in varnished oak.
The carpet was frayed and faded imitation Persian.
‘Much prayed upon,’ George had joked.
His splendidly preserved antique desk had been placed like a barrier solidly across the room about two thirds of the way up.
Behind it, when he was in session, George would swing to and fro in his green leather swivel armchair smoking a cigar.
There had been a leather blotter on the desk and an in-tray, never very full.
‘Mainly useless circulars,’ Tom had said.
Down one side of the room two waist-high bookcases had housed George's law books and other miscellaneous works, such as well-known guides to toastmasters and speakers.
In front of the desk were two  comfortable low modern armchairs for visitors.
Tom had referred to the place as ‘George's smoking room.
If it were any bigger it would constitute a club.’
All the furnishings were gone now.
But there was a figure at the window, looking silently out at the opaque sky.
I started.
So did he, turning round at the sound of my entrance.
’ Tom!’
’ Welcome to the decline and fall of the Roman Empire.’
’ How are you?’
’ Oh, bearing up.’
He smiled thinly.
He looked tired.
He leaned against the radiator that stood under the window.
It was as if he had no energy to move.
I felt obscurely guilty.
He had slipped from my mind during the preoccupations of the intervening weeks.
’ You look as though you could do with a drink.’
He nodded.
We went into the lounge bar of an old hotel beside the subway station.
It was a quiet time.
The barman was doing his accounts.
An elderly man sat at a table beside an open fire, a large pint of beer and a small glass of whisky on the table, an alsatian stretched out asleep at his feet.
In the background schmaltzy music played softly.
Tom looked at his watch.
’ I'll need to keep an eye on the time,’he said.
’ I'm expected home on time these days.
Bath duty every second night.’
I didn't quite know what to make of this dismal phrase immediately.
’ You know,’he went on,’I often wonder what it must have been like before people's working lives began to be separated from their personal lives.
In the days of self-sufficient man, for instance, when he ploughed his own fields, grew his own food, herded his own flocks.
Weren't people less competitive, more fulfilled, wouldn't you say?’
’ More resigned probably.
To poverty and the omnipresent threat of natural disasters.
Women died in childbirth, everyone succumbed more readily to disease and people still  coveted things which didn't belong to them.’
’ A world away from complaining about having to get home for bath duty every second night, you mean?’
’ Well, that was considered women's work.’
’ Some people — most people, perhaps — would probably still consider it women's work.
Surely things worked better when men and women knew their place in society?— that sort of thing.
Not that I mind all that much.
He's a lovely little boy.
I never thought I'd feel so…
I don't know how you'd put it, but if this is how ‘paternity’ feels, then I'm happy to feel ‘paternal’.
Marion's much more detached.
To her it's just another chore.
Another aspect of the white woman's burden to be shouldered and borne with.
Already she's talking about playschool and going back to work part-time.
Sometimes I think I should offer to stay at home and look after the wee fellow myself.’
’ Why don't you?
Many couples seem to be experimenting with their roles these days.’
’ Oh, that wouldn't suit Marion either.
I'd be failing in my duties as a husband.
It's one of those curious double binds.
Prejudice, habit and expectation all die hard.’
’ How are you getting on with Portia Forbes?’
The question slipped out before I gave myself time to consider the wisdom of it.
For answer Tom's whole body on the bar stool tensed up.
His arms lay folded on the counter in front of him.
His hands alternately gripped and caressed his upper arms.
He looked at me and then away again.
’ I wish people would stop being so interested in my working relationship — or rather, my lack of one — with her.’
’ I'm sorry, I didn't mean…’
’ No.
I didn't mean you, Andreas.
I meant people like Geoff Tulloch.
D'you know that guy comes into my office about twice a day and perches on my desk like a bird of ill omen all ready to commiserate with me about my wretched lot?
I don't know where he gets the gall.’
’ You haven't been confiding in him, have you?’
’ I wouldn't call it ‘confiding’exactly, but I can't pretend it's altogether a matter of indifference to me, can I?
Besides, the continual cloying presence of a bugger like that can wear you down after a while.’
I was concerned at what Tom might have unwittingly given away.
’ The good news is that he may not do you any positive harm.
The bad news is that he's so irresponsible he may.’
Tom paused for a drink.
’ I think he has quite a genuine scientific interest in how promotions may be engineered.
He wants to learn what he can from my failure.’
’ I would still be very wary of what you say to him.’
’ Don't worry.
I've come to the conclusion I don't care any more.
If I can't get promotion on the basis of all the hard work I've done for the organisation over the last five years then I don't know how I can get it.
My face doesn't fit.
It never has.
I don't know why.
I've done my best.
I thought that was what I was being paid for.
It seems I was wrong.
It's the polite way of showing you the door.
In some firms you come in one morning and find you no longer have a desk to work at.
That's all the warning you get.’
That was the first time he let me see the extent of the bitterness that was poisoning him.
’ I was thinking only the other day,’he went on,’that if I didn't have a wife and child to support I would throw in my resignation, take the voluntary redundancy on offer, sell the flat and go.
I don't know where I'd go.
I'd just set off wherever the mood took me.
I'd bum round the world looking for a lost cause and then if I found one I'd settle down and try to save it.
Sometimes one feels that one gets no pleasure from all one's possessions and commitments.
The burden is too heavy.
One should jettison the lot.’
’ I have a friend who did exactly that.’
’ Did you?
What happened to him?’
’ He hasn't changed.’
’ No regrets?’
’ Not that he's ever said.
But he's an old man now.
It's difficult to be a nomad in a cold climate when you're old.’
’ So you understand the impulse then?’
’ I understand that there's a price for everything.’
’ Sometimes it may be a price you're prepared to pay.’
’ It could be a drastic decision.’
’ Sometimes drastic decisions are the only ones.’
I didn't take this too seriously at the time.
Young men like to lash out a bit at times.
Tom finished his drink and then said he had to go.
Bath duty called