

For Ben
Where Cretan Ida from her snow-flecked peak
Looks down on flower deck'd fields and olive grove
 Progenitrix of myths and mighty Jove's
Fair family,— where columned courts and frescoes speak
Of moon-made  Minotaur and dancing Greek,
Of orphic goddesses and Minos' treasure troves
In palace stores with spoils from wine dark coves
There Claire and I had passed a pleasant week,
Whilst, far, 'neath some earth mother's southern sway
By Rainbow Serpent sent and bull roar called
By songmen danced and magic stones enthralled,
Ben came prepunctual to the light of day:
So in his dreaming may he share the best
Of dreamlands both; and so be doubly blest
Farewell to Danube Street
Familiar door with crooked swing,
The puddled plat and common stair,
The passage under everything
Which took one to the garden where
Behind the tall stone buildings staid
Small fences closed the green around
In which Macdonald children played
And, stalking birds, stray cats were found —
All these outside were part of me
And with my neighbours gladly shared
Ten happy years of amity
With stair and roof and lums repaired.
One calls to mind the days gone by,
The Darkes, old Douds, the D.H.S.
Chris Taylor but so fleetingly,
The  Connellies and once Macbeths.
To each my neighbours much I owe
For once your presence in my life
No grudge you'll bear since now you know
I left to join a loving wife.
The Whirligigs.
God blew, and all the whirligigs of time
And space revolved about eternity:
Each  minuscule of life took up its place
Seeded and loined so that the world might grow.
Chaotic purpose shaped a lifeless earth
Which spawned primordial ooze conceived within
Azoic consciousness.
What mindless mind
Conceived the rocks made flesh, what proto Christ
Spoke to the sterile elements of sea
A gospel of new life and growth and death?
What first born got by cataclysmic spark
Published its generative being, thence
Returned to elemental pristine waste?
As incognisant time went rolling by
Until organic life's first inward eye
Discerned the difference twixt the id and I,
Not just the elements gave rise to life
But life responding to the subtlest change
Of earth's environment made every birth afresh,
New inspiration quickened by the forming mind.
The word had come, engendered in the flesh
To shape a further consciousness.
For once 
Enwrapped within the womb of time, once cramped
Within the womb of earth, once  the child
Within the womb of God, now spirit free
Man blows for he has come of age, heir to
The void, and all the whirligigs of time
And space revolve about eternity.
For KDD.
There is a whitebeam grows aslant the road,
Each spring it signals life with glaucous green,
Joins malus, may and lime to make a screen
To hide the architraves which winter showed.
Another whitebeam you had once bestowed
To mark the Langford summer cricket scene,
Planting the commemorative tree between
My house and hedge and where the batsmen strode.
Lover of local things, complex in art,
Word spinner, weaver, faithful to your past,
A Tusitala: uncompassed by your will,
Time's tangles took us different ways apart,
But common clay and common grounds outlast:
I have a whitebeam to recall you still.
For JSM
Neighbour, I called you as we'd meet
On mundane march twixt shop and Street,
Breakfast I'd say and Oxbridge fare
And Oxbridge talk we'd often share;
We'd speak of ships and times at sea
Of missing wives and family,
Of God and Buddha, bears and bulls
Of plants and fresh culled daffodils.
While I'd in my allotment toil
Contentedly you'd till your soil.
Now, gentle neighbour, take your way
To where tomorrow's yesterday.
The Two Centurions
‘I remember’ said he, ‘my tour at the gate
Of a small mountain town in Judaea —
Some thirty years past — the season was late
And the weather that year was severe.’
‘The troubles began when some tribesmen came in
And demanded to see the new king.
‘What's wrong with Herod?’
I said with a grin,
And what's all these baa lambs you bring?’’
‘Then three easterners came of superior class,
They'd followed some light in the sky.
I said ‘It's a comet and certain to pass,’
But they claimed it had halted near by.’
‘And later that year a man and his wife
Passed the gate with a child on her arm,
They were off to the Nile to seek a new life,
I said ‘It won't do you no harm’.’
‘I remember them well — not the Antipas guy
And the havoc his hooligans wrought —
It was something about a sure light in their eye
And a look of the seeker and sought.’
‘That's curious, Dad,’ his son, Lungis+, replied,
As today I was on at Skullshill,
I saw the same look on a fellow who died
When I ran my spear in for the kill.’
+ The name, traditionally, of the centurion at the crucifixion.