

INVASION OF PRIVACY
From where she stands she can see the soft brilliant green of a lawn through the low sweeping branches of the cedars.
If she goes forward now she will be visible; the wide expanse of grass leads to stone steps with a balustrade.
Behind there is a gravelled drive, and then the house, Georgian, three storeys with a half-hidden basement.
She hesitates, reluctant to commit herself.
They will not be expecting her, they will see her as an intruder.
She could still return through the woods, retracing the silent path, past the clearing and its ancient Eros with blank sightless eyes, moss flaking from its pedestal like old scales, to find her car beyond the padlocked gates, its paintwork shimmering in the heat.
A group appear from the house, a motley collection like a  troupe of clowns.
An old white-haired woman in a wheelchair, her legs covered by a tartan rug, wearing a canary yellow blouse.
Beside her, anxiety in the curve of her spine, another woman runs to keep up.
She is exceptionally small, a dwarf, with one shoulder twisted above the other.
And, pushing the chair, a tall young man with dark hair, in a shirt and jeans.
A white terrier bounds through the grass, down the steps and over the daisies.
The trio use the bank at the side of the steps, the wheelchair tips, its passenger leaning forward, voices break the silence suddenly, laughter as the man pulls back on the handles, displaying his strength to the hunchback.
The dog weaves in and out, leaping excitedly, then suddenly he stops, pointing towards the girl waiting under the tree, his hackles rising.
It is too late to run back.
They pause, watching her long walk across the grass, a supplicant walking up the cathedral nave, she has a sense of awe, her hands are cold and damp in spite of the heat.
In the distance a field of yellowing barley ripples, while a tractor moves ant-like up the hill to a distant steading.
It is the hunchback who approaches her, the face very much alive and curious, like an intelligent cat with small slanting eyes.
‘Who are you?’
‘I wrote.
I thought you might be expecting me.’
‘She never has visitors, not now.
Go away.’
‘Who is it?’
An imperious voice, low and powerful, belonging to another age.
Someone who will say what she thinks, eccentric and knowing it.
The old woman's eyes are very blue, reflecting the sky but not its heat.
Her twisted fingers grip the metal arms of the chair.
‘What are you doing here, child?’
I am not a child.
But she does not say it, although her anger dispels the nervousness.
‘I wrote to you saying I would come.’
‘Did we answer?’
‘No, but I didn't think you'd mind.’
‘I never have visitors.
Thorny won't allow it, will you, Thorny?’
The dwarf smiles.
‘I call her that because she is so prickly.’
The smile fades at a joke too often made.
‘I'm Stephen.’
‘A martyr to us both.’
The man grins, a welcoming face, this will break the tedium of his afternoon.
He is not much older than her, a lean figure, his jeans  patched, not deliberately to fake age, but because they need it.
His shirt is frayed at the sleeves where he has rolled back the cuffs, his skin shows brown down the open front, there are small dark hairs, a glistening drop of sweat.
‘So what are we going to do with you?’
‘Nothing now, Thorny, it's time for my sleep.
Stephen will entertain her, won't you?’
‘Of course.’
His teeth are slightly crooked, but very white.
‘Go for a walk or something, won't you.’
The hunchback takes the chair and begins to push it slowly across the grass.
‘Would you like a drink?’
She accepts, feeling it will give her guest status, imply obligation.
‘This way,’ he says with a mock bow.
The house is cool inside, the hall wide, with two pillars and a staircase leading up to a landing with a high round window.
‘Not up there, duchess.’
They go through a dark door at one side, into the back regions, with stone-flagged passages, occasional belongings leaning against the walls, a set of fire-irons, old pairs of boots, a stack of blue and white Dutch tiles.
The kitchen is a large low-ceilinged place, full of light though the windows barely reach above the gravel but instead look into a grassy bank.
An enormous table stands in the centre, littered with stuff that would be in cupboards in better-ordered houses.
Packets of sugar leaking crystals, biscuits, flour seeping on to the scrubbed surface, plates with the remains of a meal.
‘This is Thorny's domain.
She can't reach the shelves, that's why everything is on the table.’
She has a vision of the hunchback standing on tiptoe gazing into large saucepans, or moving crabwise round the table.
‘The old lady comes here too sometimes, but I have to bring the chair through the back.
It's ground level there, no need for stairs.’
He pours out some wine from a jug on the table, a thick golden liquid.
She sniffs at it, not recognising the scent.
‘Not your usual plonk?
Elderberry or dandelion, I think.
All alcohol, anyway.’
She wants to ask him why he is here, but he moves away, brings over a loaf of bread, freshly baked, still warm in the centre.
‘There you are duchess, something to eat.’
‘Don't call me that.’
‘Oh, I do apologise, madam.’
His voice changes, becomes an imitation of her own, disconcerting her.
‘I'm not really an oik, a yob, whatever you call us.
I have a pedigree too, you know, only I don't flash it about.’
‘Neither do I.’
‘Good school?
University, Daddy something in the city?’
‘He farms.’
‘His own estate?
Why deny it?
So why are you here?’
‘I sent her some of my writing.’
‘Do you have any idea how many people do that?’
‘Some, I suppose.’
‘Lots.
Endless manuscripts, half of them can't  spell either.
Can you?
Oh, I forgot, Oxford, wasn't it?
‘Cambridge.’
‘Ah.
Does it make a difference?’
She does not answer.
‘Don't sulk, will you?
It's nice to have someone else here, even if they're like you.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘'The right sort of person'’
‘I'm not that kind, not really.
And what are you doing here?’
‘What's a nice guy like me doing in a place like this is what you should have said.
Oh I cook, wash up, move the chair around, drive.
Thorny's not strong enough, not as much as she would like, though she has very strong arms compared to most women.
But I act as general dogsbody, carry books, go fetch, good boy, that kind of thing.
And the food is great.
Thorny uses all kinds of things I would never have known about, she finds fungi in the woods, horrible brown oozing stuff, and cooks them so that you would never know.
Some of them have a construction like meat or that soya substitute, you can't tell the difference.
Vegetarian, we are here.
No steaks.
I catch fish when I can't stand it any longer and grill them.
It annoys Thorny.
He only does it to annoy.
You looked like Alice walking across that lawn.’
‘How’?
‘In the wrong world.’
‘It's not as odd as all that.’
‘Isn't it?’
His eyebrows flicker up and down as he speaks, he reminds her of an actor she used to know.
Every gesture, each movement has something planned, even the way he arranges himself in a chair, his hands behind his head, catching glimpses of himself in the polished surfaces, squinting at his reflection, all with an inquisitive vanity.
‘Finished that stuff?’
‘Yes, thanks.’
‘Always polite, Alice, wasn't she.’
He walks out of the kitchen, holding the door for her.
‘Where are we going?’
‘Wait and see.’
She follows him through a courtyard at the back, under an archway, and then on to a rough grass path that disappears into the trees.
He begins to jog, kicking off his sandals, leaving them where they fall.
‘Ever go barefoot?’
‘Not often.’
‘You should let your mind go barefoot.
It feels more that way.’
‘How?’
She walks swiftly after him, but will not be drawn into running.
‘Strip it.
Kick all those old inhibitions away.’
He pauses for breath.
His knowing attitude irritates her, a kind of mocking challenge.
‘There's the lake.
The fishpond in the old days.
Full of fat carp then.
Someone stocked it with trout once.
Supposed to be an old pike in there too.
Sometimes I think I see him, a great shadow moving in the darkness, like a nuclear submarine, instant death.’
Trees surround the green water, dark and deep, very still, sunlight  reaching only the centre where the water reflects the heat of the sky, opalescent at the edges of the shadows.
Flat-footed water lilies balance at the far end, quivering at a sudden movement, a bird diving.
A landing-stage has been built at the end of the path, but there is no boat, and on the far side stands a stone summerhouse, the door ajar.
She cannot see in, the sun catches the windows, but there is no sense of being overlooked.
‘Like to swim?’
‘I don't know.’
‘I'm going to.
A kind of baptism.
I come here every day, get born again.’
He peels off his shirt, unbuckles the belt, lets the jeans slip to the ground.
Balancing on one foot, toes digging into the grass, he steps out of his underpants, the skin white and pale.
She looks incuriously for a moment, not to be outfaced, and then turns away.
The exhibition is a challenge too, she is aware of that, but does not know whether to accept.
His feet echo on the boards, a pause, then splashing and spluttering as he dives low out into the lake.
She expects him to be an untidy swimmer, but is irritated to find that he has a smooth powerful crawl which takes him through the water swiftly and seriously.
She pulls off her t-shirt, she is safe while he is swimming out to the centre, she slips out of the rest of her clothes, kicks off the espadrilles, and running along the boards dives in.
The water is a cold green gloom in front of her eyes, with splintered light from the surface, long tentacles of weed.
She comes up gasping, the air warm about her  face, hair dank and smelling of mud as her feet touch the bottom, sinking into its softness.
She turns on her back to get her breath, then swims a slow breaststroke out to the centre.
In front he duck-dives, the ripples widening near the water-lilies, then something touches her ankles, his head surfaces, sleek with running water, grinning.
‘Race you back.’
She is too slow, he is already out, waiting, standing unembarrassed on the platform ready to give her a hand.
Aware of being  outmanoeuvred she pauses, then gives in, clambering out, water trickling down, darkening the boards.
She pushes her hair back, squeezing out the water, takes her t-shirt and rubs her arms, her shoulders, then pulls it over her head, great dark patches spreading on the blue cotton.
She feels his arms come round her, the roughness of his shirt, he kisses the back of her neck.
She twists her head.
‘My eyes are open too.’
‘It's not that.’
‘Well then.’
His mouth moves down between her shoulder blades, his hands are warm against her skin.
‘Here?’
‘Why not?
All quiet, isn't it?’
He kneels still kissing her, then pulls her down beside him, rolling over.
There are small twigs digging into her back, she is angry, pushes against him, but he pays no attention, carries on, his hands exploring, he is smiling down at her and when he lowers his head the water from his hair seeps into her mouth so that she tastes the lake, the fish smell of deep water, sees the sun brilliant through the branches behind his head, blinding her eyes, sun  specks floating, she closes them as he moves against her.
Sitting up, knees hunched against her breasts, it does not seem worth dressing now.
She scrambles to her feet and dives into the water, the wine haze clearing from her mind, hearing coots fighting in the reeds.
Lying on her back, floating, she looks  towards the summerhouse.
Someone moves behind the glass, waves; the hunchback appears through the door, she is pulling the wheelchair down the step.
In anger she swims back to the landing-stage where he sits, his feet dangling in the water.
‘They must have seen us!’
‘So what?’
‘But you never told me they would be there!’
‘You never asked.’
‘How could you?’
‘You mean with her and old Thorny watching?
They probably enjoy it.’
She feels stripped and humiliated, she has been performing publicly.
Perhaps they predicted her actions, a rat in a pre-set maze.
She pulls on her clothes in haste as he watches.
‘What's wrong with people seeing you as you really are?’
‘That's different.’
He tucks his shirt into his jeans.
‘Come back, you can help me get tea for them.’
‘Tea?’
‘Alice always had tea, didn't she?’
‘For God's sake.’
‘Why are you so uptight?
They're a couple of harmless old girls.
Well, not harmless mentally, but I doubt if they can do much physically.
Not now anyway, though  God knows what they got up to in the past.
Or haven't you got the nerve to face them now?
After all, if you sent her your book, isn't that indecent exposure of a kind?
Hot stuff too, wasn't it?’
‘Did you read it?’
‘Why not?
She doesn't hide things from me, why should she?’
‘Just who the hell do you think you are?’
‘You mean when I'm not being a satyr, gross and lustful under the trees.
I'm her godson, that's what I am.
Apart from being an historian, currently engaged on research into the Welton family, whose ancestral home happens to be a couple of miles away.
Convenient, isn't it.
Oh I am qualified if that's what's worrying you.
PhD and all that.’
She pulls at the grass, throwing handfuls of dry stalks into the water.
The criss-cross pattern on the backs of her legs is fading.
‘I'm going back.
Cheer up, put it down to my charm.’
The sound of the slap surprises her, she drops her hand, tingling with the force of it.
He moves back.
‘You have got problems, haven't you.
Well, if you won't accept my favours, tell me next time.
Leaping nude into the water does tend to give me ideas, and afterwards, well, I didn't have the impression you were loathing every minute.’
Her eyes are hot, she stares out at the water, at the summerhouse.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Did no one ever tell you apologising is a sign of weakness?’
He is trying to joke, she senses he is at a loss for the first time that afternoon.
‘Stay for tea, won't you?
Complete with Mad Hatter.’
‘You're crazy.’
‘Beg pardon, duchess.’
He throws himself at her feet in mock subjection.
‘Oh, for God's sake.’
She walks on through the trees, while he capers at her side, an unlikely jester.
Then he straightens up.
‘If not a truce, how about armed neutrality?’
‘All right.’
He walks in front, holds back branches, waiting for her so that they don't whip back in her face.
She accepts the gesture, shrugging through, water from her hair dripping down her neck.
Small blades of grass fall from her legs as the skin dries and they come out into the sunlight.
‘So there you both are.’
The same low voice.
She looks down at the figure slumped in the chair, sees the skull under the frail skin which hangs loosely from the bone, at once tight and yet with too much of it, the bony fingers picking at the fringes of the rug.
The eyes have sunk back, they peer against the sun, one hands lowers the brim of the straw hat.
‘Did you enjoy yourself?’
‘Performing for your benefit?’
‘I rather thought it was for yours.
Presumably you didn't have to.’
‘I don't know how you could.’
The eyes held hers, amused.
‘You invaded my privacy, don't you think that entitles me to invade yours?
Most writers are voyeurs of a kind anyway, that's why you  climbed the fence, isn't it, to see what was hidden here?’
The heat spreads over her face.
‘You were quite safe, you know.
I can't see further than twenty feet anyway, and I don't need to live vicariously.
I doubt if Thorny was interested either.
Have some tea.’
The dwarf pours tea steadily into a blue and white cup and then offers it.
Her hands shake as she takes it.
Thorny presents sugar lumps in a plastic bowl and smiles; she expects something sinister  in the smile but it is guileless.
Stephen is lying full length on the grass, the dog curled inside his arm, snuffling against his shirt.
His feet curl, prehensile like a child's.
‘He said you had read my book.’
‘Did he?
I've read so many now, I get confused.
Thorny thinks I'm senile, don't you?’
‘Mad, not senile.
Writing all those books.
Where does it get you?’
‘Practical, isn't she.
It got me here, Thorny, it got me you.’
‘I wondered what you thought of it.’
Then feels she has blundered, asked a question better left.
‘What would you like me to tell you?’
He has turned his head away, she is glad, she does not want his mocking face listening.
The dog gets up and shakes his ears noisily.
‘Perhaps he needs some of those drops again, Thorny.
He is always having problems with his ears, they say it's the grass seeds that irritate them.’
Finishing her tea, she puts the cup down purposefully, hoping to precipitate some action.
‘I hoped you would say what you thought.
Honestly.’
‘Did you?’
The eyes are the blue of a shallow sea, watering slightly at the corners, a trickle of moisture sinking into the parched skin.
‘A sign of adolescence, isn't it, to want a mentor.
I did too, but I never found one.’
‘I'm not…’
‘…an adolescent?
It's not a question of years.
Outlook, really.
To think that there is someone out there, some guru, some wise man, who can tell you the purpose of life.’
‘All I wanted was what you thought.’
‘An opinion?
I'm not a doctor, not even a book one.
Oh, you're not the only person, they arrive often through the post, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and with all manner of letters.
I don't know why they think I can help.
I don't have any answers.
I always felt it's asking that matters.’
She wants to persist, but feels the opportunity is slipping away.
‘Please.’
‘You're polite at least.’
The face smiles, creasing like silk in a flash of humour.
‘Have some more tea.
Thorny, pour some for Spider.’
The audience is ended.
Thorny puts down a saucer of tea with milk and sugar for the dog.
He laps it up neatly, licks the dish, and then waits, poised, anticipating a biscuit.
‘You shouldn't spoil him,’ Stephen says, sitting up.
‘One of the pleasures left to an old woman like  myself.
Now, why don't you see her on her way.’
‘Time,’ he says, forestalling the protest.
‘She's had enough, she's tired.’
‘My manuscript?’
‘Goodbye.’
The dwarf holds out her hand, it flutters in hers like a caged bird.
‘I shall look forward to hearing of you.’
He pulls her to one side.
‘Come on, this way.’
‘I know it, thanks.’
‘Oh, I forgot, trespassing, weren't we?’
‘What has she done with it?’
‘The book?
Oh, it's probably around.
And don't tell me you didn't keep a copy.’
Silence means consent.
‘So what does it matter?’
‘It doesn't.’
‘Good, that's the way she likes it.’
 She walks under the cedar branches, ducking her head, aware that he is having difficulty keeping alongside.
‘She says you're the only one who can tell anyway.
Her approval doesn't change anything.’
They follow the drive, heat from the cracked tarmac rising in their faces, then they turn off along the path, dry grass scratching her legs.
‘About this afternoon.
It was the idea of being watched, that's all.’
‘Conventional, aren't you?’
‘If I was, I wouldn't have.’
‘So it was nothing to do with my magnetic personality, outrageous sexuality, fantastic charisma?’
She turns to face him, angered by his maddening faun-like smile.
‘You're about as bloody complacent  as that statue over there.’
It looks different now, the shadows deep behind it, only the face still in sunlight, the eyes fixed forever in blind knowingness.
‘Does that mean I can apply for the job?’
‘What job?’
‘You're slowing up.
Your mentor.’
‘Oh, but you do, you know.’
She stares, uncertain, the smell of recently scythed nettles still pungent in the humid air.
‘Even now, you don't know whether to be cross or laugh.’
He hesitates.
‘This afternoon, well, she told me once, you have to disorient someone to make them lose their inhibitions.
It's what she does in her books, to see what they really are, so they can see it too.’
‘Do I pass?
And am I supposed to be grateful?’
‘It's not like that.
I just thought it might explain.’
His sudden concern confuses her.
‘Thanks for the experience.’
‘I just co-operate to prove her point, of course.’
The mockery is back.
‘Brute.’
‘Alice always was an innocent.’
‘Then I can't be her, can I?’
He laughs.
‘Don't drop down any more rabbit holes, will you?’
Then he turns and walks away, leaving her standing the clearing, with a feeling of having lost a struggle.
She begins to run along the path, past a stagnant ditch, birch leaves flickering in the yellow light, slowing as she enters a fir thicket.
The wire fence by the road twangs like a badly tuned instrument  as she climbs over it.
The car is still there, no longer in the sun.
Relieved because she has been afraid that somehow it would have disappeared, she pulls out her key, but the driver's door is unlocked.
She opens it, letting out the old used air, and clambers in.
There is a parcel on the passenger seat, a padded envelope, which looks familiar.
It is the one containing her book, perhaps with her letter full of contrived excuses about being in the neighbourhood and calling to collect it.
Idly she picks at the flap, but it is still stuck down; no one has opened it, no one has read the book, it is still intact.
They said you had to get up again, you had to go on.
It was bad for the horse if you didn't, it spoiled him.
He wouldn't jump again unless you mastered him.
Pilots who had a crash were always sent up again as soon as possible, grandfather had said, otherwise their nerve went.
Don't think about it, just get up, like Uncle Jamie had done that time out hunting, broken arm and all.
If you do that you're all right.
Jamie had been a spitfire pilot, he went back up again.
His brother Peter was there, waiting, beside their cousin Andrew.
Relaxed but alert, Peter slouched in the saddle, reins dangling, while the sweating ponies snatched at their bits and fidgeted.
He knew why they waited.
It had been the same at school, when Davies had shoved him against the wall to see what he would do.
Someone had said unfair, don't, it's a shame, and Davies had shoved him again, jarring his shoulder against the brick.
He hadn't answered, just existed, staying there, stoical, not crying because you didn't cry.
Something unpushable about him had made Davies hesitate, and he'd been all right, there had been nothing to fear; he and Davies were friends now.
But he remembered how the others had watched, not interfering, waiting to see what he made of it, as Peter and Andrew were now.
He could see Conker's large rump with the scruffy outdoor tail swishing as the pony  grazed , one ear towards him, the foam round his bit turning green as he munched the soft grass.
Stiffly he got to his feet and walked over.
Conker raised his head warily, then decided to wait for him.
He grabbed the reins, making Conker shift his foot.
Broken reins might mean a contribution from his pocket money.
His father had given them a lecture on the evils of saddlery repair bills.
It had happened every holidays, part of a lunch-time routine, the same as the lecture on table manners, Suez, and what did they teach them at school these days.
The reins were in one piece; no one had noticed the previous time, he'd been able to make an extra hole and buckle them.
He clambered up on to Conker's back, feeling the chafed skin where the stiff new trousers had rubbed.
At least he'd fallen off this side of the wall, he wouldn't have to jump it again.
Peter had been trying to prove they should have left  him behind ; it had been his father's  idea that he should go, needing the practice if he was ever to go hunting.
So he'd rushed to the field, catching a sun-dazed pony, scrambling onto the broad back, hair and scurf whitening the new trousers, cantering over the paddocks and clattering into the yard where Peter and Andrew were almost ready.
He'd bundled the tack on, and trotted out of the  yard trying to make the pony keep up.
Conker hurried to begin with, gregarious as usual, then he slowed and tried to snatch grass from the hedgerows, the long stalks of cow parsley dangling from his mouth.
They'd gone through the big field and up on to the common and the slope beyond which was where the wall was, half-ruined and easier to jump because of the gaps.
He'd fallen off there, Conker expertly dipping a shoulder as they'd landed.
They know if you're afraid, Barnes said.
Always know, can't fool the horse.
Not so much fear  as knowing Conker wouldn't do what he wanted.
The fear was in not being able to keep up, in looking stupid; it kept him going, he didn't want them to know he was scared of falling too.
He always did sooner or later, the telltale grass stains easy to see when he got back to the house, leading to ridicule.
‘Let's go back by Hangman's wood, we'll get a gallop on the track.’
It was windy up on the ridge, and the ponies jogged impatiently as  they reached the stretch of open turf which led over to the wood and the track through it.
‘Say go,’ Peter ordered him.
The race was between Peter and Andrew; by making him starter he knew he wasn't considered.
Conker wasn't fast enough anyway.
His mouth was dry again, last week Conker had shied at a gorse bush and he'd come off.
‘All right.’
He shortened the reins, grabbed a fistful of Conker's wiry mane.
‘Ready.
Get set, go.’
The two horses in front swerved as they were kicked forward, Andrew and Peter leaning half-way up their necks, shouting encouragement.
Behind Conker whinnied and plunged, then scrabbled forwards, his short legs beating a frantic rhythm, the mane blowing back into Michael's face, stinging a little.
A lump of turf from a careless hoof hit his hat with a thud; he crouched lower, his knees taking his weight.
Flecks of foam from the bit splattered Conker's sides.
A pheasant exploded out of the whin and the grey horse plunged and bolted, Andrew slipping, rolling off to one side.
Peter sent his pony round in a circle, jumping off.
Michael sat down and pulled Conker's reins, but the pony stiffened his neck and hurtled on in pursuit of the grey.
The galloping horse raised dust out of the dried mud in the gateway to the wood, an overgrown piece of covert which was the delight of the hunt; the path was barely wide enough, badly kept, branches low across it, dark after the bright sunlight on the heath.
He pulled occasionally, his arms tiring.
Conker slowed a little, but the branches were  coming too fast, he had to lean right forward and couldn't use his hands.
He remembered the gate at the end of the track, had time to hope it was open because he didn't think Conker could jump it.
Something knocked his hat over his face, he pushed at the peak, saw the grey's hindquarters lift elegantly over the gate and out into the light, felt Conker steadying and kicked him on swiftly because there wasn't time to stop, he swung his hand back and hit the pony who lifted suddenly, landing with a jolt that made him grunt with effort.
Michael, still in the saddle, stood in his stirrups and yelled with exultation, kicking on the slowing pony for a few more strides.
Conker walked, blowing heavily, sides heaving, stretching his head down.
The grey came trotting gracefully  across the field, tail lifted high.
Exhilarated, Michael dismounted, noticed that the muscles in his legs were twitching, he couldn't stop them.
Walking over, he caught the grey and started back down the hill with both ponies.
He was aware of a slow feeling of triumph, a sense of release as if he had just won some physical competition; without the fear there wouldn't have been this strange sense of excitement and content.
He waited while Andrew and Peter came out of the wood, the former a little defensive.
The leather broke, he said angrily.
Dangling from his hand was the iron.
Peter was staring at Michael.
‘How did you get through the gate?’
‘I jumped it.’
He was aware of the flash of approval in Peter's eyes.
They were silent on the way back, walking to cool the horses; if his father saw the state they were in he would be angry.
They were late but no one had started to worry.
 Michael had time to put Conker out before running in to wash his hands and slick his hair back wetly.
In the afternoon Andrew and Peter played tennis.
Andrew had been annoyed by his fall and on the court he went at it as if trying to prove something, beating Peter easily.
Then the rain which had been around all day drove them inside the house, where, bored, they wandered restlessly though the rooms.
‘Let's go up to the attic.’
A storehouse of old things, partially cleared to provide a space for the trains.
The narrow wooden stairs echoed as they ran up.
Michael was already there; he sensed their disappointment when they saw him, they had wanted it for themselves.
Doggedly he stayed.
One of the engines was his, and some of the rails.
Andrew picked up the old leather helmet on the chest of drawers and put it on.
‘Whose was it?’
‘Uncle Jamie's.’
‘What was he?’
‘A Spitfire pilot.
Killed in the war.’
Grandfather always talked about him, Jamie, the athlete, scholar, then a young flier in the Battle of Britain, one of many in the long hot summer, surviving a couple of incidents.
It was how they knew about pilots going up again as soon as possible after a crash, grandfather had told them.
‘Never let anything put them off.
Even when he was small, out hunting, and broke his arm, couldn't wait until he got back on the horse, used his stock for a sling and rode home.’
He'd become a secret hero to the boys.
Michael knew that Peter didn't like Andrew touching the hat, could feel him tense because he felt there was something irreverent about it.
Peter wanted to be like Jamie, he said he would fly too when he was older.
Michael was not sure, because the only time he had flown, to Dublin, he'd been sick, aware only of noise and vibration, and his ears behaving strangely.
He had been frightened somewhere in a tight locked-up place inside him because it seemed impossible that they would  land safely, and the final swaying descent had made him ill.
Jamie was why you got back on the horse, why you didn't say if you were afraid when they stitched the cut on your face after the brakes on the bike failed.
They didn't talk about it, not to outsiders, not to Gillian because she said it was all stupid and Jamie had probably been scared out of his wits only no one guessed it.
But then perhaps that was the point, Michael had thought.
Andrew put the leather helmet down and wandered over to the window.
It looked out to one side, the stable yard, coach houses converted to garages, the clock and the archway with the stone eagle on top that framed the entrance.
‘What's it made of?’
‘What?’
’ The eagle?’
‘Stone,’ said Peter.
‘Looks like wood.’
‘Father said it was stone.’
‘Bet it isn't.’
‘Why does it matter?’ asked Michael.
They ignore him, caught up in the argument, the damaged self-respect of the morning.
‘Ever climbed up there?’
‘What, to the eagle?’
‘Yes.’
‘It would be mad.’
Peter was scornful.
‘Bet you I can.’
‘Don't,’ said Michael.
‘It's stone below.’
‘A stupid thing to do,’ said Peter.
He had picked up Jamie's helmet and put it on, the sides hanging well below his ears, his eyes hardly visible.
Michael could see the way  his mouth had tightened, making a thin line.
‘Who's scared?’
‘I'm not.’
Peter's white face stared at Andrew.
‘Prove it.’
‘Okay.
Tonight.’
‘You can't,’ said Michael, frightened , knowing the challenge was there, and that he would be bound by the rules to keep silent, like a second in a duel.
Gillian would have told, perhaps he should let her know, she would pass it on.
Watching Peter's face under the leather helmet, staring at Andrew, he felt Peter had become Jamie for a moment, able to do anything, nothing would stop him.
Michael felt sick suddenly, the choking kind that made it difficult to swallow.
‘Don't.’
‘It's all right, don't worry,’ said Peter.
His face was tense, quivering with excitement, drunk on the challenge.
Andrew went out of the attic, hands in his pockets.
‘Aren't you scared?’ said Michael, before they followed him.
‘No.
Were you scared today.’
‘A bit.’
It didn't matter admitting it now that it was over.
‘When are you going to try.’
Their parents were going out to drinks, there was no problem.
Mrs Murphy would be in the kitchen, Barnes would have gone back for his supper.
When the car had left the front door and they had promised to behave, Michael was sent to check on Mrs Murphy, up to her sleeves in the sink.
The kitchen windows looked out the wrong way anyhow.
He returned to the yard.
‘I couldn't see Gillian.
Mrs Murphy's okay.’
‘All right then.’
Peter looked up at the  archway which reached a peak just above the level of the garage roofs.
The eagle sat perched in the centre, looking to the right.
On the lefthand side was the shed where they kept the saddlery.
It was possible to get on to the roof by the window and climb up the slope to the wall and the projecting archway.
‘What're you waiting for?’ said Andrew.
‘Working out the best route.’
Michael loved Peter for the answer, the quickness of it; he hated Andrew, the carping at his defeat in the morning which was the reason for the dare.
Peter walked over to the shed, climbing on to the sill, then levering himself up on to the roof, which was not very steep.
Once he was up, he moved on all fours along to the wall, his long thin legs light against the dark slates.
Michael  stared up, wondering how Peter could be so calm.
As long as he didn't look away nothing would happen, please god.
Dusting his hands, Peter stood with one foot on the parapet of the wall, which was about ten inches wide, made of long flat slabs of stone.
He spat on his hands as if to give himself courage, then settled on the wall on his hands and knees.
‘Look at the eagle,’ said Michael.
The fear was there again, from last summer, when Peter had climbed the long ladder up to the clock tower and had frozen near the top; Barnes had had to talk him down.
‘Leave it,’ said Andrew suddenly.
‘It's off.’
‘Why?’
Peter paused, looking down.
‘Just is.’
Peter looked along the arch, curving gently.
He saw the outline of the eagle, it looked very close, solid and heavy.
‘Come down,’ sad Michael urgently.
Then he saw Peter's face, the excitement in his eyes, and remembered the morning and the crashing gallop through the wood, and being aware afterwards of what he had done, something that would have seemed impossible before.
Last summer was in Peter's mind too, he had seen it as a failure, here he was going to put it right, he was enjoying the fear, he was Jamie dogfighting in the  sky , he was very calm, very cold.
They were still as they waited below.
Peter looked at the stone bird, moving his hands along the parapet.
A small piece of lichen covered stone flaked under his hand and hit the ground at their feet.
He put one hand on the eagle, straightened a little.
‘How about that?’ he said, and shouted suddenly, a defiant yell in the soft evening light, and Michael looked up at him, his brother exultant, triumphant, and he yelled too.
The shout made Peter unbalanced, he grabbed at the eagle which should have been fixed to the stone.
It pivoted slowly, Peter's face opened in horror and Michael was running as the stone bird fell from its worn perch taking the thin figure with it.
‘You killed him!’ he shouted at Andrew.
‘You made him!’
He wasn't dead, concussion and a broken leg.
‘Lucky,’ was the doctor's comment, irritated by such an unnecessary accident.
Asked for explanations, Michael had fumbled for words; there were ideas somewhere, but he had  learned how to voice them yet.
‘He wanted to show he was brave, like Uncle Jamie.’
‘Jamie would never have done a silly thing like climbing up the archway.’
They were reducing it, they would be calling it childish in a minute.
‘It wasn't just doing it, it was being afraid and getting there, like Grandfather's story about Jamie hunting.’
His eyes were hot, he wanted to shout at them.
‘You don't want to believe all grandfather says, he's getting old.
Old men get things wrong sometimes.’
‘Told you,’ said Gillian next day.
‘You two don't know anything.
Jamie had a nervous breakdown, he was scared, he refused to fly again.
They said he had an accident while cleaning his gun.
He shot himself.
That's why Daddy never talks about him.
Only Grandfather, he never believed it.’
Michael ran up to the attic and took the helmet off the chest, holding it by the strap.
Then he ran down the wooden stair, through the house, out to the lower lawn.
Barnes had been burning leaves by the haha, the bonfire still smouldered, the smoke drifting over the paddock.
Michael collected sticks from the shrubbery and threw them on, making small flames leap up.
He put the helmet on the top, watching the leather blacken.
The fire smoked, he was afraid it wouldn't burn.
He took a stick and poked the leaves till they glowed, orange flames flickered around the strap and the helmet began to shrivel, slowly becoming unrecognisable, so that Barnes wouldn't pull it out later and bring it back to the house.
No one would pretend to be Jamie again, no one would get hurt.
The stick he was holding caught fire and he held it as it flared up, watching the flames draw  near his hand, feeling the heat on the skin, then the pain.
He waited till it grew too strong and dropped the stick into the fire, picking up a handful of wet leaves to cool the burn.
Then, in the smoke and pain he smelt  the fumes, the cold fear bursting through the ripped fuselage, the noise, the vibration, the acrid smell of cordite from the dulled barrels of a shotgun.
As the flames died down he felt cold air on his face.
When he stirred the embers there was nothing recognisable left in the gray flaking ashes.
It gave her a shock to see Nicholas there, although she had known it was likely.
His figure was so familiar, the hair clipped close to his collar, the clumsy movements of his hands when he stuttered over a word.
‘Come and meet the Pages,’ said Lydia, and took Jeff's arm, bringing them into the group.
It would be all right for her to talk to Nicholas then, it would look natural, no one could read anything into it.
Be careful, he had said, until we decide.
Don't let them stampede us into anything, we'll make up our own minds.
The glass of wine chilled Sara's hand, she listened to the sharp-ended sentences flicking through the air as her husband and Nicholas spoke.
Perhaps Jeff already suspected.
Nervous, she drifted away towards another couple still standing by the door.
‘I don't think I caught your name.’
She still didn't catch it when they told her.
‘My wife and I are from Prague,’ he said.
‘Oh, how lovely.
How long are you over for?’
‘For ever.
We have left our country,’ they said in unison.
For a moment the grammar-book phrases were without meaning, then she realised.
‘You mean you are defecting?’
‘Yes, we are leaving.’
‘But why, how, I mean where will you go?’
Sara was unprepared for this, it was a dinner party after all, no one should spring this on her.
And weren't defectors like displaced persons, small and shabby with cardboard suitcases.
This man's suit was as well-cut as Jeff's, his tie matched his shirt, while his wife looked like a model, with gleaming fair hair, and a dress that had surely cost more than her own .
‘We were too afraid to stay.’
‘Very brave of you, but how will you manage?
Oh, Jeff, these people are defectors.’
She sounded to herself as though she was saying giraffes or zebras, some moderately exotic species.
‘From where?’
Jeff was obviously on at least a second drink.
‘The South-East, Wales?
Don't blame you!’
He snorted through his nose instead of laughing, and emitted a curious whistling sound, reminding her of his snoring at night, which made the whole room vibrate and set ornaments rattling.
She had had to stick felt to most of them.
‘No,’ she said frantically.
‘Real ones.’
‘Oh my God, I didn't realise.
But what are you doing here?’
‘Lydia asked us.’
Lydia had always collected curious specimens for her parties, frequently foreign: South Africans who could tell her what it was really like over there, Nigerians in brilliant robes, an Asian boy with almond eyes who had stayed for a month until Gerald heard the scurrilous talk and kicked him out.
But these were different, how could she have found them.
‘Aren't they marvellous?’
It seemed as if Lydia would take them like a new baby and display them triumphantly to the assembled company.
‘So brave, and Paul is a doctor, he's going to Canada.’
‘A dentist,’ said Paul.
‘I mean dentist, of course, but isn't it incredible everyone, they're here, they managed it, I don't know how!’
‘We flew,’ said the girl.
‘But it must have been very frightening, what you must have gone through.
Really, I'm sure everyone should congratulate you!’
‘Hear, hear,’ they said uneasily, raising glasses, and Lydia began to coax everyone through to dinner.
‘Don't be long or the soufflé will sink.’
It wasn't a soufflé, Sara noticed, but something soft and avocado-coloured, with delicate pink shrimps piled high and tiny strips of raw carrot arranged to give a starfish effect.
Paul had been placed next to her, and when she looked across the table she caught Nicholas' eye with its suggestion of complicity.
She tried to think of something that might interest a defector, but failed.
The first course passed in silence.
‘I don't normally eat veal now,’ she said after dissecting the course that followed.
‘Not since I realised how it was reared, think of shutting out the daylight all their lives.’
‘Please?’
‘They keep the calves in the dark so that the flesh is whiter.’
‘And does that make it taste otherwise?’
‘I don't know.
I've never had veal that isn't, only cow, if you see what I mean.’
She felt that English must be an impossible language to learn.
Paul was puzzled but polite.
‘It must all seem so complicated to you.’
‘It will take us time.
First, I have to find work.’
‘And your wife, what will she do?’
‘She has to learn English.’
‘I thought she spoke it.’
‘Not yet, not enough.’
Like being a child again, she thought, not understanding the long words, the adult jokes.
Having to laugh when everyone else does so as not to appear stupid, hoping no one would be shrewd enough to ask for an explanation.
‘Your family, how do they feel about it?’
‘I have only my brother.
I think he will not be allowed to come, not to travel perhaps.
For us it was easier, we were at a conference.
We do not have children.’
‘How  did you meet Lydia then?’
‘She has a friend at the  university , he introduced us.’
It was a relief when they could get up and move back to the sitting-room.
Lydia went to find a bottle of some Czechoslovakian wine she said she had discovered.
‘Bit tactless to remind them of home, surely,’ said Nicholas, sitting down next to Sara and putting his arm round her shoulders.
‘Careful,’ she whispered, enjoying the feeling of managing something illicit in front of the rest.
‘They'd think it odd if we didn't.
My divorce comes through in two weeks.’
‘So soon?’
‘The lawyers got it speeded up.
So?’
She was silent.
‘You did say you would let me know.
Please.’
Before, it had been a game; now in this room full of people the future altered, it was like a never-ending series of Russian dolls opening out, each the same, yet different.
‘It's not that easy.
He'll be so hurt.’
‘But you said you didn't want to stay with him.’
‘Darlings, do move up, there's just room for tiny me if you do!’
They shifted hastily to make room for Lydia's hospitable bulk, ill-at-ease, aware of her speculative eye.
She took pity on them .
‘Why don't you both fetch some more coffee?’
Lydia's kitchen was littered with left-overs, stacks of plates balanced at crazy angles and glass bowls full of capsizing mousse.
‘Haven't you told him yet?’
‘I was waiting until it was definite.’
‘Well, it is.
You're not going back on what you said, are you?’
He was staring at her over a tray of empty glasses.
‘It's just, well, I wasn't expecting it tonight.’
‘We can't wait for ever.
They didn't, did they, just made up  their minds and went.’
‘Who?’
‘Ly…
Lydia's exhibits.
They weren't afraid.’
His stutter annoyed him, he stirred one of the bowls with a wooden spoon, reducing the food to a dingy pulp.
‘Make up your mind, won't you?’
‘Darlings, don't get too involved and forget the coffee, will you?’
‘Oh, I'm sorry, it's almost boiling.’
‘They'll never notice.
Here, Nicholas, take that through, would you?’
Vampire-like, Lydia hovered close to Sara.
‘You are all right, are you, dear?
I couldn't help hearing a bit.’
Somehow during her affair with Nicholas Sara had lost her ability to defend herself against Lydia.
She was aware that Lydia collected people and their problems like someone collecting butterflies.
Perhaps she had rooms full of glass cases upstairs with people stuck to sheets of cardboard, the pins through the spines quivering as the limbs twitched.
‘Are you going to leave Jeff?
Can't say I blame you, though I'm not sure I'd choose Nicholas either, all those odd people he goes round with.
Still, it's up to you, isn't it?
Could you get me some cream out of the fridge,— oh aren't you feeling well?’
Clasping a handkerchief to her mouth by way of explanation, Sam rushed out of the kitchen; the heat, Lydia's closeness and the smell of her scent had been suffocating.
She ran upstairs to the bedroom where she had left her coat.
It was unlit, but she could see the Czech girl leaning out of the open window, gazing over the lawn.
‘Hullo.’
The girl turned, startled.
She was very tense, it was like touching glass and hearing it ring.
‘I'm sorry, I didn't mean to disturb you.’
‘It is okay.’
‘I can't imagine what it must be like for you.’
‘It is like that.’
The girl pointed to the open window with a Wagnerian sweep of her arm.
‘Air?
Cold?
Room to breathe?’
Like some absurd guessing-game.
‘No.’
The girl ran over to the window and made as if to step out.
‘Don't!’
Sara cut back the scream.
‘I don't, I just show.’
‘Like dropping off the edge of the earth.
Is it worth it?’
‘Yes, oh yes,’ said the girl, her face lighting up suddenly.
They smiled at each other, and Sara felt as if she was balanced on the brink of some great truth, that the world outside the window was waiting for her too, opening up, spreading out into the darkness.
She walked over and leaned out, inhaling the scent of roses, staring over the houses to the hills beyond.
‘There are foxes on the lawn sometimes,’ said Lydia.
‘Is that why you haven't got the light on?’
Glancing down, it seemed a long drop to the gravel and the sleek cars waiting below.
Sara shivered.
When she came downstairs, Nicholas was waiting in the hall, his hands twisting together.
He stuttered again, ‘We…well?’
‘I'm sorry, I can't.’
‘What do you mean, you can't?’
‘It's asking too much, it's too big a step.
I'm not a believer.’
Or a defector, she thought, a word that contained echoes of betrayals, a brother left behind.
‘What the hell's that got to do with it?’
‘You have to have a faith to defect.
I don't think I have.
And I don't like being shouted at.’
She left him standing under the light and walked into the warm cigar-scented room beyond, knowing  that the last Russian doll, like all the others, would still be herself.
THE BAMBOO MAN
The path was narrow and winding, barely visible in places because of the mud and wild grasses, but the two children had no difficulty in following it.
Although the sun was bright overhead, here in the bog, a scrubby area of marsh and pools on one side of a stream, and a wood on the bank where they walked, only small shafts of light penetrated the green gloom.
The rotting leaves on the ground softened their footsteps, only the buzzing of flies and George's hoarse attempts to whistle broke the silence.
Libby was quiet, it was one of her special places, she wished that she was here on her own without George, able to let the wildness absorb her.
They couldn't see the house or the road from here, there were no signs of people, it was a curious damp world of fungi and tall plants.
They were going to cut bamboo stems from the thicket at the end of the path, not for the garden this time but for themselves.
George made long driving whips from the tall canes, tying lengths of string to the knotted ends, running over the grass driving imaginary teams of dogs or horses.
Libby liked the smooth feel of the stems, the way they splintered.
She had tried to make a pipe once by hollowing out the pith, spongy like the white stuff inside a peeled rush, carving holes with an awl, but the pipe had never done more than make thin sounds magnifying her breathing.
George stopped in front of her, holding up his hand.
Libby paused, looking over his shoulder.
‘Something moved.’
‘A rabbit?’
‘No, it was large.
A deer perhaps.’
Libby knew there were no deer, only rabbits, but George often pretended there were.
‘A cow?’
It wouldn't be though, because cows lumbered and splashed, clumsy domesticated animals who didn't obey rules of survival.
Something else had moved out there in the trees, possibly a bird.
There weren't many here, a few along the stream, a dipper flicking white-chested over the water, pigeons clattering out of the fir near the drive, a tangle of hemlock and cow parsley along the fence hiding pheasants.
The man was standing beside the stream, arms folded, gazing down at the water.
He wore a pair of khaki shorts and a faded blue shirt, with sandals on his feet.
His hair was hidden by an olive cotton hat.
His stillness made them hesitate; he might have been watching for fish but the stream was hardly large enough for trout, only minnows or sticklebacks Libby pressed close to George, they stayed on the path watching.
The man still stared at the water, then suddenly he dropped to his haunches, squatting like the children did sometimes at play when the ground was too wet to sit.
He covered his face with his hands, then took them away and looked down at the earth.
‘Is he praying?’
‘Don't know.’
He had the same aura of privacy that a person at prayer has, the same do-not-touch-me signal of adults that the children recognised, it was in the rigidity of the crouching figure, in the way he stared at the stream without seeing it.
‘Look.’
Libby followed George's pointing hand.
A small brown tent had been erected near the bamboo clump, partly on grass, partly on earth, with one flap rolled back and neatly tied.
Inside there was a bundle of blankets.
A rough fireplace surrounded by stones had been built about two metres in front of it, and grey ash fitted the centre of the ring.
A water can, the base blackened by smoke, lay at one side.
Behind the tent the bank rose steeply to the hedge at the top which screened the fields.
Beyond was the bamboo, a dense clutch of stems, too close for the children to push through.
‘Why is he there?’
‘D'you think we can go on?’
Although it was their wood, a place where they often came, Libby felt herself to be an intruder, she did not want to disturb the figure by the water, who was now breaking pieces of stick and dropping them at his feet.
‘Let's go on.’
George did not mind interrupting people.
‘D'you think we ought to?’
He was already plunging down the path.
‘Hullo,’ he called.
The man spun round so swiftly that George was taken aback and tripped, falling onto the soft mud.
Libby stared into the gaunt white face, the bluish growth on the unshaven chin, but the eyes glanced away and the man started to run from them, hurtling through the trees, towards the bog and the clumps of grass like stepping stones in the stagnant water.
‘Sorry,’ Libby called.
She wanted to tell him they didn't mind his being there, it didn't matter, he wasn't trespassing.
‘Perhaps he's a poacher.’
‘With a tent?’
‘A tinker.’
‘They wouldn't stay there.
We should go.’
‘I want some bamboo.’
‘He might come back.’
‘We've come all this way.’
‘Well, all right, but quick.’
‘Why do think he's afraid of us?’
‘Is that why he ran?
He looked ill.’
‘If he was ill, he'd be in bed, not here.’
Libby hated waiting while George cut the bamboo.
It never broke cleanly but flaked apart into strands that cut their fingers if they weren't careful.
She pulled at the stalks to help George, twisting the canes to free them.
Then George peered into the tent.
‘Come on,’ said Libby.
‘Oh do come.’
The man had run away with the fear and speed of an animal, graceful rather than awkward.
Libby began to feel that he had not been real, but the tent was there, a packet of cigarettes on the rolled mattress, and the smell of smoke filled the airless canvas space, scents of sweat and soap, adult tainting.
Libby smelt sickness in the brown canvas walls.
They went back two days later, having kept the secret to themselves.
They  called him the bamboo man when they finally dared to discuss it.
Giving him a name reassured them; he was not some strange exotic phenomenon but something familiar like the title of a book.
This time they approached from across the field above the bank, a roundabout route.
At first they giggled and ran calling to each other through the long grasses, timothy and cocksfoot, clover swaying unsteadily under the weight of bumblebees, clumsy like clowns blundering across the meadow.
Heavy-uddered Friesians turned their heads and snorted.
Then the bank was in front of them, they slipped through the hedge and into the shade and became silent.
They moved stealthily, the switches in their hands grasped like weapons through the rank smell of wild rhubarb and down towards the damp growth by the stream.
George stopped and Libby crouched beside him, waiting until her eyes saw the figure by the tree.
They could see the whole area from here, the open patch of grass and moss and earth, behind the fan of bamboo stems, and at one side, about twenty metres from the bamboo, the stream.
He was standing with his back to them; they realised he was urinating and Libby giggled nervously.
George sighted along his stick as if taking aim.
Then the man moved away, buttoning his shorts, and began to walk slowly, pacing his steps evenly and steadily.
He made patterns in the space, first up and down, then diagonally across, always within the open area between the stream and the thicket.
To Libby it seemed as though he was marking out boundaries the way she and George had done the winter it snowed; making footsteps in the dense white stuff, indicating territories.
It was as if he was playing an elaborate game, and had to wait there until it was finished; they did the same when they played Roundheads and Cavaliers in the old quarry.
If you were caught, you had to wait there until the end.
George grew bored and picked fern leaves, stripping them, only leaving the stem, then he stood up and walked back the way they had come.
Libby stayed.
The man had stopped pacing now; he was talking, at first quietly, so that she could only see his lips moving through a screen of ferns, then he began arguing, gesticulating, running through the phrases again and again like an actor in rehearsal, pleading with someone who wasn't there.
Finally he broke away and went and squatted on his haunches by the stream.
She wondered why he didn't step across it; he reminded her of the white mice they had let out of the cage one day.
It had taken the mice a long time to explore, they had made short excited scurrying runs across the floor, then back to the hutch, nervous, unsure, limiting themselves to a small prescribed space, only later stepping out of it, extending their freedom.
After a while he boiled something in the blackened tin suspended over the fire, stirring it with a white peeled twig, and then plunging the tin into the stream to cool it.
She heard the faint hiss as the metal struck the water.
Then he ate.
Libby had never seen anyone eat that way before.
He used his fingers and the stick, he scuffled food into his mouth from the pan which he held close by his mouth so that any pieces that fell from his fingers or lips would go back into the container, not onto the ground.
He ate so swiftly that Libby couldn't take her eyes off him; she remembered all they were told about behaving properly and eating slowly.
He was like an animal, like the dogs with their bowls, snapping and bolting their food to prevent the others getting it.
Afterwards he washed the tin out in the stream, splashed water over his face and hands and wiped them dry on a handkerchief.
Then he searched his pockets and took out a cigarette packet and shook it, but it was empty.
Instead of throwing it away he took out the foil and smoothed it on his knee, then folded it very small and slipped it into his shirt pocket.
The cardboard he threw into the tent.
‘Libby!’
An urgent whisper.
‘It's lunch time.
Daddy'll be furious.’
They arrived breathless and slid into their places, faces down, not wanting to attract attention.
‘What were you two doing this morning?’
‘We were in the hayfield.’
George's glib lies always took Libby by surprise, while she was still thinking.
It was at the end of the meal that the announcement
‘By the way, could you stay away from the marsh at the top of the ten-acre  field.’
‘The marsh?’
‘Where the bamboo is.’
‘Why?’
‘Because there's someone camping down there.’
‘We saw a tent the other day,’ said George.
‘Why is he there?’ asked Libby.
‘Dr Connor thought it might help.
He's been ill.’
‘Shouldn't he be in hospital?’
‘It's not that kind of illness.’
‘He's a soldier, or was.
In the war.
He was a prisoner, in the jungle, he finds it difficult to get used to everything being normal again.
Dr Connor thought if he stayed down there it might help.’
‘Because it's like the jungle?’
‘Yes, I suppose.
Though I don't see what good one clump of bamboo will do.’
Libby got hold of George afterwards.
‘We must take him cigarettes.’
‘Why doesn't he go and buy them?’
‘He's sick.
Perhaps he can't.
And we found him.’
The wood had a different feeling now.
Wherever they were, they couldn't help sensing the presence of the man with the tent at the far end of the bank; it was there with them as they crossed the field and pushed through the hedge, in the musty smell of nettles and the white lumps raised on their skin, in the bramble scratches, and the brown fungus that hung from dead trees Libby felt it but she was also attracted by the thought of someone who was ill, someone she could help or look after, like the white mice or the jackdaw with the damaged wing.
There had been a long list of such casualties in Libby's life, this was just another.
She marched through the wood with a purpose, cigarettes stolen from the box in the sitting-room, a packet of matches.
‘Where shall we leave them?
He'll see us.’
’ D'you think he'll run away again?’
‘Perhaps.’
‘I don't want to meet him,’ said George.
‘If we make a noise, he'll hear us coming, and hide.
Then we can leave the things and go.’
They sang the songs they learned at school.
Early one morning, and then half-remembered hymns, lines from Onwards Christian Soldiers and All Things Bright and Beautiful.
There was no one there.
They looked round, curious, scared.
‘Let's make somewhere to leave them.’
They collected flat stones from the stream, made a small slab with them, and put the cigarettes and matches on top.
Then they moved back.
That afternoon the demands of civilisation descended on them briefly, taking them to another house, to play with strange children.
Libby kept wondering if the cigarettes had gone.
Early next morning, before breakfast, they crossed the grass leaving a dark trail of foot prints in the dew.
It was cool, with the sun just beginning to warm their arms and the stones in the wall along the drive.
There was no sign of movement from the tent, and the flap was closed, possibly tied from inside.
They edged down the bank, slithering on the grass.
‘He's taken them.’
They ran back to the house for breakfast, George excited at their success, Libby content with the same feeling she had had when she first persuaded the old pony to come up to her and accept sugar from her outstretched palm.
Previously it had laid back its ears and moved away when she approached.
After that, the days were marked by the offerings they took and laid on the stone, more cigarettes until their father began to suspect Mrs Turner who cleaned the house, fruit from the garden, a punnet of redcurrants which disappeared from the small basket.
Birds, said George, he'd have taken the punnet too.
So they didn't try fruit again.
Then, when Uncle Guy arrived from Dublin he brought them a present, an enormous box of chocolates which was made like a chest or jewel box with trays that pulled out like small drawers, containing different foil-wrapped  shapes.
‘We must keep some for him.’
George objected, but Libby said chocolate was something prisoners were sent during the war.
In the end George ate all of his, but Libby faithfully saved a few and wrapped them in a paper bag.
She left them on the stone and again they disappeared.
Sometimes she was afraid that animals might take them, but when they went noisily along the path she still hoped that one day the man would be waiting there for them, beside the pile of stones.
They met him once unexpectedly, further up the stream.
Libby and George had been trying to build a bridge with logs pulled from the wood and tied with twine from the farm to stop them rolling apart.
Libby had been heaving and pushing at one of the logs, covered with rotten bark that peeled off, revealing orange insect eggs and small white channels like blood vessels covering the surface.
She brushed a woodlouse from her skirt and then realised that George was staring at something behind her.
Turning round she saw sunlight gleaming on fair hair and brown skin, the flash of blue from his shirt; he was standing about thirty feet away, watching.
‘Hullo,’ said Libby.
She wanted to go up and touch him; he looked out of place there, almost lost.
Then she saw he was holding a large stick in one hand.
‘Don't go close,’ said George, his voice higher than usual.
Libby stared at the man's eyes; they were blue, but she didn't take in the colour, just the fact that they did not seem to see her, they looked at something else They were like the eyes of the blind man in Mallow, which looked everywhere but did not see as he tapped along the pavement.
The blind man's eyes did not let you into his mind; they were the eyes of a doll or a toy animal.
Libby was frightened suddenly.
‘Let's go.’
They dropped the log and scrambled away from the stream and through the hedge, running over the field, then stopping half-way and looking back.
There was a movement in the trees, then stillness.
The damp close air was heavy about  them, it slowed their pace and they were glad to get back to the steading and watch Sullivan repairing the tractor.
The harvest had started, everyone else was out in the fields, afraid it would rain, and for the next few days Libby and George joined in, stooking and carrying sheaves which they could seldom get to balance.
They watched the horses follow the tractor round the ever narrowing stand of corn in the centre of the field, and the tinkers who came to get work stood by with dogs and shot the rabbits that came surging out.
Libby would not watch; she hated the high-pitched squealing as the rabbits panicked, hearing a stick thump or a shot ring out, seeing the warm fur parting in the breeze as someone threw it down beside the other corpses.
They could sense a difference in the days now, sometimes there was almost a rime of frost on the shady side of the woods, and the old pony's cost was thickening; in the mornings they went off to school.
‘D'you think he's still there.’
‘Don't know.’
‘Let's go on Saturday and see.’
There was cub-hunting on Saturday on the next-door farm; their father talked of going.
The cob that pulled the cart on weekdays was brought in and cleaned up, the saddle softened with the yellow soap that stuck in the holes of the stirrup leathers.
‘He can't stay there all winter,’ said Libby as they slipped out early, the house having been woken by their father getting up, trying to pull his boots on, shutting the dogs in the boiler shed so that they would not follow.
There was a haze over the fields, a thin aqueous mist, turning the trees into one-dimensional blobs of blue grey colour.
Some of the pools of water on the drive had a thin film of ice at the edges that smashed like glass when George stepped on it.
Libby's jersey felt rough on her arms after the bareness of summer, they wore wellington boots, not sandals, and the black rubber glistened with damp by the time they had crossed the field, disturbing the sleeping cows.
In the distance they heard the noise of the horn.
Libby did not know the  calls but George said it was the gone-away.
‘Will they come this way?’
‘Father said they might.
There's a litter of cubs in the bog somewhere.’
‘But if he's still there.’
‘He'll be in the way.
We ought to tell him.’
‘I expect he knows.’
‘I don't suppose he does.’
‘Not if he's…’
’ Mad.’
‘He's not,’ said Libby.
‘Sullivan said he was.’
‘Sullivan doesn't know.’
’ Does.’
‘Doesn't.’
‘Ssssh.
He'll hear.’
They pushed down the bank, pausing at the bottom, nervous again.
‘He won't be there.’
‘The tent is.’
‘We'd better warn him.’
Libby was Jim Hawkins going to warn the Squire and Dr Livesey, she pushed aside the ferns.
The tent had a damp patch where it sagged between the poles
‘Wait,’ said George.
‘He might wake up.’
They waited while the mist cleared a little in the valley, and the cows in the field raised themselves awkwardly, leaving patches of crushed grass, and began to graze.
They heard the horn again, the sound of hounds carried on the still air .
‘It's closer,’ said George.
‘I'm bored.
What are you going to do?’
In the field, the sunlight was clearer, brilliant on the dew on the grass stems; here in the wood the ground was drier, the air cool.
‘I'm going.’
George began to scramble away.
‘Look,’ said Libby.
A figure had crawled out of the tent, rumpled, wearing trousers and a sweater; the man stood up once he was clear of the canvas and stretched, yawning.
He stepped over to the stream, crouched and splashed water on his face
‘It's the hunt,’ said George ‘You can hear.’
Libby heard them as well, a steady clattering of ironshod hooves on the road, an uneven pounding rhythm, faster than marching.
Then the horn, and a hound yelped briefly as a whip cracked .
The man below had heard it too.
He stopped with his hands full of water; it dripped and fell in little runnels on the earth, but he did not notice.
‘They're going to come in at the far end.’
The riders were in the field.
The cows had galloped clumsily, tails in the air, to the far corner and stood staring, flanks heaving.
Libby and George could feel the ground vibrate, they heard a voice swearing at a hound, and odd growls of encouragement from the huntsman.
Riders broke away from the group and came to stand near the fence, waiting almost motionless in the still morning, while the horses shook their heads, grass foam dripping from bits, stamping impatiently.
‘He's got to get away.’
He was rolling his things together, the can, the sleeping bag.
‘He'd be better to leave them.’
When he had rolled a bundle together he began to take down the tent, grabbing at the guy ropes.
A hound spoke at the far end of the wood.
The man jumped to his feet, he ran to the trees and then to the edge of the clearing as if uncertain.
‘He's afraid to go,’ said Libby.
’ We'll have to help him escape.’
‘Escape?’
‘Yes, don't you see?
He's still a prisoner.’
They walked out into the open space.
‘Here,’ said Libby.
‘It's us.’
The man faced them, startled; he unbuckled his belt and held it swinging in his hand.
‘We're your friends,’ said Libby.
‘We've come to help you escape.
But  you'll have to hurry.
Please.’
His face was moving a little, twitching by one eye, but he saw them this time.
‘This way.’
She was calm, authoritative, in the way she would be with injured animals.
The belt still hung from his hands.
‘We brought you the food.
Come on.’
In the field a bit clinked in a horse's mouth, a saddle creaked under the rider's weight.
Libby turned and walked along the path.
‘He's coming,’ said George.
They followed the stream, their feet quiet on the soft mud, the boot soles leaving patterns in damp places.
He was close behind George now, breathing heavily.
There was a sudden uproar from the wood, hounds finding something, a hare or a cub.
A gentle drumming sound came from the riders as they tapped their saddles with their crops.
Something moved ahead of them, a dog-fox, full-grown.
His mouth was open as he paused, one paw raised, his fur light-coloured.
Then he loped away as a hound came running silently through the trees, nose to the ground, scenting slowly.
When it saw the three figures it stopped, then, perhaps with memories of puppy-walkers, still with a broken leather couple round its neck, it approached the man whimpering softly, its tail waving.
Suddenly the man bent and grabbed the leather thong, swinging the hound off its feet and hurling it against the tree.
The hound grunted with pain and he let it fall limp at his feet, a small dark trickle of blood flowing from one nostril.
‘You're not supposed to do that.’
George was tearful.
‘He wants to let the fox get away,’ said Libby.
She took George's hand.
‘It's all right, it's not us.’
They began to run, their feet padding steadily.
Above them someone shouted ‘Seen anything?’ and there was an answering ‘No, not yet.’
Then they were amongst the conifers near the road, a smell of resin and dead bracken, twigs catching their legs.
A pigeon flapped out of the trees  and George went in front to the fence.
‘It's clear,’ he said.
They scrambled over the rabbit netting and stood on the muddy track, flushed and panting, mud stains on their legs and clothes.
‘You're free now,’ said Libby.
‘The hounds will stay in the wood.’
A distant clamour rose from the bog.
‘They've got one.’
Libby was watching the man's face.
It was moving again, his eyes held hers and he suddenly smiled.
‘Thank you,’ he said.
He held out his hand and Libby found hers being shaken, slowly at first, then harder, until she began to laugh because when he looked at her his eyes weren't like those of the blind man any more.
‘We'll have to go now.’
‘Yes.’
He let go of her hand and walked away down the road towards the village, the bundle swinging against his back.
‘D'you think he'll be all right now?’
‘Yes’ Libby sniffed.
She wiped her nose with her sleeve, leaving a snail's trail on the rough wool.
WET WEEKEND
The haze of his first cigarette clouded the room briefly and in the streak of light from the curtains he saw the heaped clothes and the mark on the hotel carpet where he'd knocked over the glass of water.
The smoke reached Amanda and made her sneeze; she wriggled under the blankets and Cormack looked down at her shoulder.
The tan seemed to have faded since last night.
One blue eye, half-alert, looked up at him.
‘You're not still worrying about that man are you?’
‘No,’ lied Cormack.
She turned over and appeared to go back to sleep.
He inhaled and stared at the ceiling; smoking in bed was something his wife didn't like, it was only on business trips that he managed it, depending on the company.
Everything had been going so well this time; leaving Glasgow on Saturday anticipation had been high, Amanda had even been waiting for him on the pavement outside her flat.
He'd been afraid in the rain blurring the windscreen that she'd have called off, he hadn't known her all that long.
The first time he'd seen her had been at Dave's, and Dave had kept a possessive arm round her all evening, warning others away.
Then Amanda had turned up on her own at Meg's leaving party, and he'd managed to monopolise her in a corner of Meg's kitchen.
His wife Margaret hadn't been there; she'd gone to a meeting of her rock garden club.
He'd asked Amanda to lunch once, then again, and finally he had sounded her out, not minding the way she'd sized him up, considering.
It implied she wouldn't have gone with just anybody.
Then the excuse for a trip had turned up, and they'd driven down to Stranraer in a trail of tourist cars, and she'd played cassettes and talked a little in her soft English voice, while he sat there hardly believing his luck.
It was on the pier at Stranraer that he'd seen the man first, in the shed where they searched the cars.
The man had been writing in a book, he'd taken the number of the car with an official air and Cormack had wondered why for a moment, then forgotten.
Once on the ferry, Amanda and he had gone to the snack-bar and eaten prepacked sausage rolls and washed them down with beer; she seemed to be able to drink quantities without degenerating into giggles like one or two earlier companions.
She'd been one of the few sober people at Dave's, in spite of the home-brewed beer.
As the boat had come round the point they'd gone up on deck.
Amanda had been all enthusiastic even in the rain, saying it was spray in her face and look at the gulls, which were swooping down on the shoal of crisp packets and orange peel trailing in the wake.
He liked seeing her like that, even although he was cowering under his coat collar trying to keep dry, still surprised at how easily it had gone at home.
Margaret had accepted his story of taking urgent samples across to Belfast; it was true, but that hadn't meant she'd believe it.
Last time she'd been downright suspicious.
Her sister was coming to stay the night, they were going to go to a lecture on Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
He'd agreed to ring her and had omitted to leave a phone number.
He didn't want to upset her, he just needed a change occasionally to boost his reserve of fantasies.
As he'd left she'd kissed him briefly and smiled.
‘Have an exciting time!’
It had worried him for a moment, he hadn't been quite sure what she meant, but then he reckoned she was referring to the troubles.
‘Odd place to go,’ Amanda had said, hanging on the rail.
‘Friend of mine wouldn't believe it.’
He'd become self-conscious and had challenged her.
‘Scared?’
He hadn't meant to say it, but it was the effect of the beer and the movement of the ship and her sophistication, all things he couldn't cope with together, so he'd taken her down to the bar and they'd had a couple more drinks to restore his confidence before the boat docked.
Down in the hold he'd cracked his shins on the bumper of a small green car and she'd laughed at his face and kissed him as if he'd been a kid and for a moment he was thirteen and being hugged by Dave's big sister, who was certainly large and confusing to thirteen year olds.
The hotel gave her a shock; he hadn't thought to explain the state of siege, the barbed wire fence all round like Colditz and the lights.
It always surprised him that there weren't any watch towers.
‘It's not a bad place,’ he said, once they were in reception and the smoked glass shut out the small hut where they searched the hand-bags, and she'd laughed and said ‘All right’and they'd signed in.
Then he'd gone into Belfast with the samples and had cracked the car's exhaust on the ramps outside a police station.
Still, the trip might buy him credit with the boss, unless he thought Cormack was a sycophantic idiot offering to take the things in the first place, which was equally likely.
In the room afterwards he'd wondered why Amanda didn't bother about the holes in her tights or the fact that her boots needed mending.
Maybe she'd always had someone to look after her; he'd been living with darned socks and the stitch-in-time philosophy all his life, first his mother and then Margaret, who sorted her stockings out into ones she could wear to the office and ones which were only good for gardening.
If he went to stay somewhere with Margaret she unpacked her suitcase and put everything away, she didn't leave bags lying open all over the floor for someone to trip over.
Then Amanda had lain on the bed and made a few suggestions which insulted his experience; he'd fumbled hurriedly with zips and cuff buttons, his Calvinistic conscience retreating into its corner, and then exultation was running through him like the roar of the crowd the night Jim Watt had won his title.
Things had been near perfect at that stage, and they'd gone for a drink later, with Amanda chatting up the barman who had seemed a nice shy boy, if a bit quiet for the job.
Cormack had been swinging on the bar stool, fingering his wallet because Amanda's appetite for food and drink had made his credit cards nervous, when he'd seen the man in the raincoat in reception and the beer had spilled over his hand and left wet stains on the varnish for the boy to polish away.
‘What is it?’
‘The man on the pier.
He's signing in.’
‘Why not?’
‘But he took the number of the car in Larne.’
‘Perhaps he collects them.’
She crossed one leg over the other, and he'd forgotten the incident again until he'd gone to the car to bring in his brief case and check on the records before they went down to eat and to listen to the Donegal sound of Michael and his boys in the Connemara suite.
In spite of his explanations they'd insisted on signing him out at the little cabin, and he'd  snatched the case out of his car and run back, wondering why it always rained.
As he came through the hut again, the man was there, about to sign out, and their eyes met for a moment, and Cormack felt scared.
He'd gone back into the hotel, trying to act casually, and had hovered in reception looking at the magazines in the hardcovers, watching the man explaining to the people in the hut and coming back inside, which confirmed Cormack's suspicions.
Cormack had run up the stairs, not taking the lift because he knew from films they could tell which floor you got off at by the lights above the door.
Then, out of breath, he'd realised it would only take a quick word with the girl at the desk to find out.
‘What's up?’
‘That man really is following us.’
‘You're not gun-running or anything, are you?’
‘No, I'm not!’
He'd gone to the window and pulled the curtain back, looking at the dampness and the wire and the swimming-pool, the surface ruffled by rain.
It was outside the fence, half-surrounded by columns belonging to the grounds of a former house.
There was cover there, it would make an easy shot.
Perhaps they were IRA, wanting to damage his firm.
Headlines flashed before his eyes, terrorist outrage, Glasgow man hurt.
Then he'd realised he was silhouetted against the light and had leapt away from the glass, his kneecaps tingling.
‘What was it you said you did?’ he'd asked, trying  to think of something else.
‘Suspicious?’
‘No,’ he'd said, blushing.
‘Well, when I'm not dealing in arms, I design knitwear, things like that.
Very expensive, it sells abroad for enormous prices.
They like Scotch wool.’
‘Scottish,’ he corrected automatically, and wondered why English accents made him feel inferior, though it didn't seem to matter so much over here, there were fewer of them.
‘What sort of things?’
She'd drawn them for him with eyebrow pencil on yesterday's newspaper; he'd recalled Margaret's silver propelling pencil and the small notebook she always carried.
He didn't usually think of Margaret so much when he was away, but the  whole thing had him on edge.
He'd looked at the sheet of newspaper with the long-necked figures and the rough lines, and had seen the type underneath and its story about a car bomb in the city centre.
‘Here, lie back.’
Amanda had started massaging his shoulders; he'd closed his eyes and imagined a hot sun and someone rubbing oil on his back, and then she'd slipped off the bed and had gone to have a bath with the other complimentary packet of foam.
Things happen, he thought, and lay on the bed listening, but she had taken a magazine in with her and he fell asleep waiting.
They'd danced to Michael's band and her glossy pink trousers flashed and moved in the dimmed lights, and he had felt elated and mildly drunk, and had lost most of the inhibitions he'd had about dancing, until it became clear to his confused brain that the drummer, who had soft dark hair and was probably a potential Celtic supporter, was getting on so well with Amanda that perhaps they should move on elsewhere, and he swayed out of the room, pushing her in front of him, and bumped into someone at the door, and had realised it was the man in the raincoat, only he was in a dark suit and a tie with geometric designs.
‘Hello stranger,’ Cormack had said aggressively, and Amanda had looked nervously at the two men.
Cormack had allowed her to lead him past, squaring his shoulders and almost believing his own past exaggerations of bar fights.
He didn't remember very much more of the evening, and now it was Sunday and instead of enjoying himself he was worrying about ties with geometric designs.
‘Could you do something for me?’ he asked, stubbing out his cigarette in the proprietary ashtray.
‘Certainly,’ and she rolled over against him, warm under the blankets.
‘It's that man.
If he's still here, would you go and talk to him for me, just casually, find out where he comes from.’
‘You're neurotic about him.’
‘Paranoid,’ he said with satisfaction, sure for once he had the right word.
‘Don't you like being pursued?’
‘Not by men,’ he said, and leaned back.
There was plenty of time.
Later he watched her enter the dining-room and weave her way through the tables.
‘He's Scottish,’ she said, pulling out a chair.
‘Voice is a bit like yours.
I couldn't find out any more, not without making it too obvious.’
The two metal coffee jugs were so hot that Cormack dropped them with a yelp.
Amanda took charge, her hands muffled in napkins.
Outside it was still raining.
‘We'll have to leave in an hour,’ he said.
‘Takes a bit of time from here.’
They were half-way to the car when she found she'd left something behind and went back in a flurry of carrier bags and magazines.
As she came out again Cormack thought he saw the man from the pier at the far side of the car park beside a small green car.
The traffic into Belfast was heavy, and it was a while before they got on to the motorway.
‘He's following.’
‘I don't believe you.’
She looked back.
‘Which car?’
‘The green one, about two behind.’
‘What're you going to do?’
‘I'll get him on the boat.
Find out what he's up to.’
Amanda was worried, she huddled up close to him, her blonde hair against his neck, and he felt protective and capable of dealing with men in raincoats.
The green car was behind them on the pier, in the third line of queuing cars.
Cormack waited until they were all clambering out of the cars inside the boat, dragging jackets and bags.
He went quickly up the metal staircase, leaving Amanda entangled with a group below.
There was a wide area where the passage broadened out and he lingered by the steps until the raincoat came in sight.
‘I want a word with you,’ he said, grabbing an arm and shoving the man back against the wall.
‘You've been following me, right?
Who are you?’
The man fumbled in his pocket and produced a wallet, then an identity card.
Cormack glanced at it briefly.
Star Detective agency, it said, all enquiries undertaken.
‘Why?’
The photograph didn't do much for the man.
‘Well, could I ask who you are,’ the man said apologetically.
He looked scared.
Cormack took a card from his pocket, ready to deny everything, and wondering why the idea of divorce hadn't occurred to him before.
‘I had this anonymous tip-off about a man answering your description, the caller said something about a missing member of the aristocracy, so I've been keeping an eye on things.’
‘Didn't make a very good job of it did you?’
‘Well, I didn't really believe it, but business isn't great at the moment, and if you had been the person concerned…’
He looked wistfully at Cormack.
‘It really was quite circumstantial, so I thought there was some chance.
Said you would probably have someone with you posing as your wife.
And when I found out the lady was English, it did seem as though something might come of it.’
‘Who phoned you?
A man?’
Dave perhaps, his idea of a joke.
‘No, a woman, sir.
Educated sort of person.’
Cormack reeled as the ship began to roll and hit his elbow on the ladder rail.
Through the pain he said ,‘Anything else?’
‘No.
Perhaps it was a hoax or someone with a grudge.
It often is.’
Yes, thought Cormack, it often is, and recalled Margaret's easy acceptance and wondered.
‘I'm sorry if it didn't provide a job for you,’ he said, relieved, and looked round for Amanda, who had used the surface tension of the moment to walk away.
He caught a glimpse of the fair hair and saw that she was talking to someone he recognised as the drummer from the band; the whole group was there, giving an impromptu concert on tin whistles to the tired hikers sleeping on their rucksacks undaunted by the howl and shriek of the space-invader machines on the other side, a cacophony of mechanical rage that deafened him together with the thin notes of a rebel song.
He looked down at the man still standing nervously in front of him, and noticed his jacket was patched and someone had put leather binding round the edges of the sleeves.
‘I don't like your tie,’ he said.
The geometric design was lop-sided.
‘My wife bought it.’
‘Come and have a drink,’ said Cormack, and they moved into the bar and sat at the  fixed tables and watched the glasses slide from rim to rim.
‘This is really very kind of you, I hope I didn't spoil your weekend.’
‘Well, it made it more exciting,’ said Cormack, and felt the warmth of the whisky and relaxed as the boat swung out into the open sea and the weekend disappeared in the mist.
He always thought of them as mirror men, full of quickfire patter and smooth gestures, distracting, creating images.
Illusionists, sawing women in half, placing girls in coffin-like boxes and apparently sticking swords through them.
He had watched them come out smiling (the girls, not the swords) and accept the applause.
Tim was a mirror man too, but not on a stage, unless you call the office where he worked a stage, or any of the places he visited.
When he performed the audience didn't know that he was an illusionist and therefore there wasn't the anticipation or applause; it was also easier.
That was how he had got the job, even though he was another unemployed nineteen year old.
In the office which looked like all the others with its geometric desk and wire baskets and identical questions, he had suddenly created a different version of himself, with words borrowed from newspapers, half-heard conversations, and fitted them into structures of plausibility; he'd discovered that if he spoke fast enough no one noticed the inconsistencies.
Like the professional illusionists, it was a case of hypnosis, part entertainment, part belief, keeping the moment of interruption suspended so that no one asked for fear of not hearing all of the tale.
A little like juggling, with several plates in the air, and men like his new employer Barnett  forgot which one to watch and didn't notice the occasional mis-timing.
Barnett's moustache was lop-sided, a crooked sign above his mouth suggesting suspicion, but a couple of sentences had created the picture for him.
You didn't really need to invent, they did it for you.
Losing his job with the band had not really been to do with his mother being ill, but it had been easy to suggest the idea to Barnett.
So he started work in the office and showroom, a long narrow room on the first floor with windows that looked out onto the street, with shelves filled with lines of business machines, computers, word processors, the screens flickering as Lewis, Barnett's other assistant, experimented with them.
Tim had worked with computers at school, then in the high street shops, writing programs, trying out the games, until he began to act as unpaid demonstrator to the crowds of watching children, and the assistants didn't mind his presence.
His knowledge gave him power over the customers who came in; they shied away from the jargon that Lewis used and Tim felt that he was acting as an interpreter in a foreign country.
He demonstrated programs that drew brilliant-coloured three-dimensional designs, until those watching felt that if they too bought one they would have the same magical powers.
In the brightly-lit room with the soft carpet tiles he walked shirt-sleeved like a master of a small universe, polishing the plastic cases, removing fingerprints, cleaning the VDUs, creating a sterile environment for the machines.
Lewis watched, aware of his superior status, leaving only the less likely customers to Tim.
As well as Lewis and Barnett there was Christine, Barnett's secretary, who had a voice as hard as her nail varnish, and who made Tim run errands for her, fetching bacon rolls from the cafe at the corner, buying stamps or pints of milk.
And when she asked about his family, he told her about his father being a sergeant, and his mother leaving him, hating all the moving.
Then the unit going to Belfast, and the day a sniper killed him in the Crumlin Road.
‘A kid yelling its head off out in the street, a little girl.
The kind of person my dad was, couldn't leave it there.
The sniper got him when he was halfway there.
They knew someone would go to get her and waited.
Think of using a kid like that.’
He wasn't sure if Christine believed him, but that was what made it worth it, gave things an edge, the bluff in a game where the rest were always against you.
‘It's a fantastic job, mum.
I'm good at it too.
They have these computers, you touch the keys, they do everything for you.’
He never lied to her.
The one constant, the fixed point of the circle, north in the compass, everything related to her.
She sat in the living-room, slumped in a chair, her feet on a cardboard box that said ‘Produce of Israel’ on the side.
High blood pressure, the doctor had said, put your feet up more often.
She did literally now, ever since that turn she'd had a few months ago; frightened of the stairs, the climb when the lifts didn't work, she rarely went out, but stayed surrounded and walled-in by  belongings, old letters, cards, souvenirs scattered over the furniture.
Her mouth didn't move so well at one side now, after that last turn.
At first she hadn't had full control over it, occasionally liquids trickled out.
She had developed a habit of raising her hand to her mouth to check because she had no feeling there.
Tim was her contact with outside, apart from the phone and Martha who lived opposite.
But she was always there when he came back from real or imagined expeditions, not like his father who'd walked out after a drunken row one night.
They'd got a postcard once, view of New York, a few months later.
Maybe he'd joined a ship, he'd done his national service in the navy.
The card didn't say much.
Am getting on okay, how about you.
And no address to answer to.
Tim had told the other kids, that it was all planned, his father had left to get another job.
After the postcard came he had told them they'd been informed of his death; the official phrase impressed them.
‘They want me to go on a course, the company runs it, so's I can demonstrate the new machine.
Lewis went last time, but Barnett said it was my turn.’
‘That's good.’
He wanted to amaze her.
‘They can do anything with computers.
Transfer money, print letters in a different country.’
‘Fancy that.’
He went on the course a few weeks later, two days in a hotel conference room which smelt of stale cigar smoke and small successes.
The demonstrator talked in nervous bursts, constantly brushing imaginary dandruff from his shoulders.
Tim found the programs easy to understand, but the small group of self-improvers attending wrote copiously in their note-books while he watched.
On the last day the instructor held a test, and like the others Tim passed, but he felt that they all would have passed anyway, that the man was there to sell the machine and that no one would be allowed to fail in case they didn't recommend it.
He took the piece of paper away with him, the name filled in above the pre-signed certificate, and showed it to Barnett who was pleased and who believed that it was worth having.
Tim knew Barnett thought a lot of him, it annoyed Lewis too.
In his lunch-hour he would go out and meet Dave and Colin in the pub for lunch.
He always paid now, they were on the dole, two reminders of what it had been like for him a few months ago.
Tim noticed  that they looked shabby, their clothes were worn at the edges, the collars dull and frayed.
Dave didn't bother to shave until the evenings, and Colin's shoes had been coming away at the sides for weeks.
They met him, but he began to feel it was because he paid, they had stopped protesting, they let him offer, explaining his luck, apologising for it, for the suit he had bought, for the new shirts.
It set him aside, he began to look at them with Barnett's and Lewis's eyes, thinking of them as unsuccessful because they didn't try.
It was a case of outlook wasn't it, not waiting for someone to do something for you.
But he still needed them because he couldn't believe his luck either, he had the feeling that it might come crashing down round him.
So he didn't listen to odd jibe about our millionaire friend, and he didn't ask them to pay.
He found it difficult to know how to react; when he received a bonus he didn't tell them, it would have seemed unfair.
The only person he could tell was his mother.
He bought a new radio for her though she said she didn't need it, but he wanted some evidence of what he was achieving, something in the flat that proved he was doing all right.
To create illusions you have to be careful about the details.
Tim had an eye for those, he was good at remembering them.
His illusions started with reality too, that made the jumping-off point, in the same way that an illusionist on stage has a real girl; they had to have near possibility, nothing too extreme, not at the beginning anyway.
Like the second course that Barnett entered him for, this time for an accounting system.
It was in an adult education college where the long corridors were lined with notice-boards and lists that fluttered like dead leaves as he walked past.
In the room the other faces stared up at him like a theatre crowd.
They all seemed to be much older and better qualified, clutching briefcases full of papers, their minds crammed with intelligent questions designed to draw attention to themselves.
He couldn't understand what the lecturer was  talking about because he knew nothing about accounts.
Names of imaginary companies called Bloggs & Co, and discussions of VAT returns and ledger cards left him panicking, loosening his tie and fidgeting.
After the first morning he didn't go back, he was afraid of dropping in his own estimation.
He stayed away from the office for the statutory time.
‘I get on better on my own,’ he said to his mother, looking over the leaflets he'd picked up.
At work again he answered Lewis' and Christine's questions with descriptions of the people and the food in the canteen.
‘God it was awful,’ he said, and made them laugh and accept what he said, and Barnett never asked for the certificate this time.
‘Where're you going for your holidays, Tim?’
Christine had been planning hers for weeks.
‘Don't know, not yet.’
Days later he had it all planned after studying the brochures.
‘I've booked it,’ he announced.
‘Spain, self-catering and all that.
Costa del Sol, the flight leaves at three on the Saturday.’
‘Know the brochure by heart?’
‘Someone has to.
Sandra's not good at things like that.’
‘She's going too, is she?’
Lewis was leaning against the door.
‘'Wouldn't go on my own, would I?’
‘Bring in her sometime, why don't you?’
‘Sure, I will.’
Waking in his room at the week-ends, Sandra was there beside him, her head against his shoulder, the sun-bleached hair half-covering her ears; the warm curve of her body shuddered a little when he stroked it, his fingers traced round the freckles on her shoulder, islands on an ocean of tanned skin.
When his mother knocked on the door he pulled up the sheet.
‘I need this prescription, could you get it for me later?’
‘Yes.’
Sandra faded beside him, returned to the pages of the magazine where he had first seen her.
‘I'm going on holiday soon,’ he said.
She came and sat on the bed which  creaked uneasily with the weight.
‘Martha says she will look after you.’
‘Don't worry about me.
You ought to be worrying about girls at your age.’
‘I've got you.’
‘Don't say that.
It'd be good for you.
You can't be on your own all the time, it worries me.’
He'd gone with one once, after a party, back to a flat with a friend of Dave's, who'd laughed at him and had eyes that made him feel he was being drawn into something he couldn't stop, and when she shed her clothes and left them discarded on the floor he'd stared, open-mouthed, aware of the noise inside his head, something to do with what he'd drunk, he could still hear the music, and was aware too of the smell of some cologne that merged with hairspray and covered something that he did not want to know about, the dirt and dust of the room and the female odours that half-attracted and repelled him.
When she began to unbutton his shirt he stood, paralysed, staring at the slack flesh round her stomach, he shivered and she took it for excitement; he had dreamed about this, waiting for the moment when he would instinctively know what to do, would take control, but instead she was rubbing against him with a cool professionalism that unnerved him.
Watching her reflected in the mirror, marred by the black specks on the surface, and feeling the stickiness of the lacquer on her hair, he began to panic, it wasn't how it should have been, he grabbed his shirt and jacket, he was running down the stairs, sickness heaving in his throat, an old fear of something he had never recognised before.
His fantasies had been anaesthetised, all the unpleasant details taken out, there were no odours of cheap cologne in his dreams.
When the girl phoned him later, he felt she was trying to pin him down, breaking his ideas into domestic shards, clinging to conventions he didn't want.
That must have been why his father walked out, the mixture of laughter and humiliation, of not coming up to expectations.
He didn't go to Spain, instead he had booked a ticket to London, that was as far as he wanted to go.
He'd never had a passport anyway.
The bus landed him there at seven o'clock on a hazy morning and by lunchtime he'd found a cheap hotel which was full of Africans in multi-coloured robes which seemed foreign enough.
He acquired a tan sunbathing in the parks, he bought a leather belt that said ‘made in Spain’ on the label, but the postcard defeated him.
He would say he'd sent one off but it probably wouldn't arrive for months, you know what they do with holiday mail, fly it out to sea and drop it in.
Cheaper that way, they sell stamps and save fuel.
His hotel room had three beds, and for a few days he shared it with two German boys, students, who had enormous rucksacks and bulky guidebooks, and who were eager for Tim to go round with them.
He tried it for a day, but grew bored with museums and heavy concentration, and their clumsy attempts to pick up girls; he returned to the room during the day when they were out.
Sitting near the window, with its view of the fire escape, smoking a joint he'd bought in an amusement arcade, he wrote in a notebook about visiting Spanish towns, and the beaches, then about the few days in London because his imagination ran out on Spain with the end of the brochure about flamenco dancing and bullfights, and because what he was doing was more immediate.
The difficulty with writing it down was that it became real to the extent of being in a book, there were two lives, the one in the book and the one which he lived to collect the details for the book one; he could go further in his head than on the page, the words slowed him down.
But the advantage of the book was that things didn't go wrong, he could control his existence, predict, re-write history.
He didn't have to deal with aggro from the desk clerk who had offered to fix him up with anything, and he meant anything, for a large fee.
Tim tried one night of Soho strip clubs, but the smell of smoke and the avid faces of the watchers who all seemed much older than himself depressed him, and he left without trying any of phone numbers which annoyed the clerk.
The man decided Tim was queer and made it clear he didn't tolerate those too easily.
There was no desk clerk in the notebook.
When he returned to the office on Monday Barnett called Tim into the office, an odd note in his voice which Tim didn't recognise at first.
It turned out Lewis had checked with the education college about the course.
‘I can't understand it,’ Barnett began, fidgeting with his telephone.
Two weeks pay and Tim was out.
In the pub at lunchtime he told Colin and Dave about his holiday, paid for their lunches and then broke the news.
‘I'm giving up my job.’
‘What?’
They didn't want to believe him, they were afraid the benefits might stop.
‘Not my kind of place really.
I won't get anywhere, I don't want to stay office boy for ever.’
He used the same line with his mother; for once he didn't give her the real reason.
She didn't seem interested; she had been ill while he was away, and spent most of the day in her chair, listening to the radio, more involved with the programmes than in what he was doing.
‘You should never have gone,’ Martha told him.
‘Can't be at home for ever,’ he had said, feeling it was unfair, and that he had been due something for working.
‘Keep an eye on her though.’
He still left home at eight each morning, but he didn't head for the office, he wandered round town, visiting anywhere that was free such as the library, or even the museums; the guides came to know him, one even greeted him when he entered.
Perhaps they thought he was doing research, he still wore his suits.
He took the notebook with him; sometimes he would sit at a desk or table and write, losing any idea of time or place, roused later by the discovery that his leg had gone numb or he had cramp in his foot.
It was on a Tuesday that it happened.
He came home and unlocked the front door, calling out as he came.
The radio was on in the living-room, he entered and saw her lying on the floor, When he knelt down and touched her face it was warm, and she moved a little.
He stared at her, but there was no sign of recognition.
She died on the way to the hospital, they said.
Another turn, her heart gave-out.
‘You poor thing,’ cried Martha, and cooked meals for him that he  couldn't eat.
During the service he sat in the front pew and listened to the preacher talking about the kind of woman she had been, and he knew it wasn't like that, but the doctor had given some pills and he felt drowsy and numb, and illogically cheerful, as if he was slightly drunk, but at the stage where everything seems enlarged and unfamiliar.
Afterwards Martha provided ham and a salad with hard-boiled eggs like gleaming bald heads sticking out from limp lettuce leaves for the few people who turned up.
His aunt and her daughter stayed to hear if there was anything of interest in the will which she had left in a drawer, but they went disappointed, giving Tim a couple of moist hugs on their way out.
When Martha had gone as well, Tim picked up the whisky he had poured earlier and stood for a long time in the hallway.
As long as he was there, nothing was different, it was all as it had been when he came back on Tuesday, even the baby next door was moaning sleepily, and from the open window in the living-room he could hear a dog helping outside.
He locked the door, put the chain on the hook and went into the living-room.
It felt hollow now, lacking a centre, the fixed point had gone, only the outer shell was reflected in the mirror that hung over the sideboard, while the slices of cold meat curled on the plate that Martha had left for him.
So he turned away from the mirror and walked towards the weak sunlight; she had gone out to the balcony, it was warm in the September sunshine.
The brightness struck at his eyes, he half-closed them, he could smell the acrid scent of burning cooking oil.
‘You knew, didn't you,’ he said, noticing that his hands were shaking when some of the whisky spilt.
‘I was fired.
Barnett found out I wasn't going to the course.
I should have told you, shouldn't I?
I haven't lied before, not often.
It was true about the course, it wasn't worth going to.’
Her back was towards him, he walked forward with the glass cold and wet, fishlike, in his hand.
He wanted to touch her, to feel the rough hand-knitted cardigan, the warmth.
He saw her raise her arm to touch the corner of her  mouth with her handkerchief, and when she turned her head the features were blurred like a lump of clay when the wet cloth is removed.
He stepped back in horror and the glass splintered on the tiles.
When the bundle of clothes hit the ground it was the dog who realised first that there was something inside, also broken and crumpled, and after the dog came the children, who revolved round the heap, fascinated, until one noticed the blood and began to scream, and adults arrived to remove them from whatever it was that lay on the concrete.
‘Grief,’ said the neighbours later, not realising that the ultimate reality had taken over.
Rona was late again, but Stuart didn't mind.
He took off his jacket and slung it over the back of the seat, feeling the sun warm on his neck.
There was a plaque on one of the wooden spars, tarnished metal with engraved letters.
‘In memory of S. G. Sutherland, of Toronto.’
An odd memorial, a seat where people could rest and gaze at the castle; perhaps S. G. Sutherland had spent much of his life in the gardens watching others getting on with theirs.
That was what the men on the next bench were doing; they still wore their overcoats, rough shabby clothes bundled round them, like rolls of carpet stacked and tied with twine.
They basked like reptiles till the sun penetrated the threadbare material and warmed them into movement.
Stuart had been more aware of their existence this year, walking up to lectures at the university, going through the Grassmarket or the gardens, seeing drab figures squatting on the stone steps, or standing outside the hotel in the evening by the vents from the kitchen where the steam formed vapour clouds and it was possible to inhale the smell of food with the intensity of a drug.
Charlie wasn't with them this time.
Stuart had met Charlie during the winter.
The man had approached him on the street while he was walking home, head down against the wind.
There had been something familiar about him, and Stuart had stopped, uncertain.
He had thought at first that the man was lost and required instructions, but realised after the words had blown away that it was a quiet inquiry for cash.
Stuart had fumbled nervously in his pockets, wondering how much he should give, just change, surely.
He passed some coins over without counting, staring stupidly at the eyes that looked hurt with expected rejection, as if the man knew what would be said to put him off.
Stuart had noticed him often after that, sometimes on the corner by the students' union, other times on Princes Street, silhouetted against the store windows, sidling up to the late-night shoppers on Thursdays.
Once he was standing outside a basement restaurant, holding a cup of something hot; it was a freezing day, sleet bouncing off the pavement, and the man was huddled into a wall for shelter, warming his hands on the plastic cup.
Stuart wondered if  they made him stand out there, or if he chose to.
‘It's not just for me, you know,’ Charlie said once, after taking money.
‘It's for all of us, we share it out.’
Jesus in a greatcoat, thought Stuart.
But the man didn't quote Scripture, just drifted away.
And after that he saw him sometimes with a group of others.
Perhaps they had some kind of masonic understanding, they'd all been through the same initiation.
‘Why do you give him anything?’
Rona had asked.
‘He'll get money anyway, and they have the hostels to go to.
He'll just spend it on drink.’
Rona was intensely practical in matters of charity, but then she'd been brought up in a manse and was reading social studies.
She said you needed to be uninvolved.
Stuart had once been coerced by her into delivering food parcels for old people at Christmas because he had a licence and could drive the university van.
Rona and he had taken a few round one afternoon, drinking endless cups of tea and listening to platitudes; a pattern of conversation with all the formality of a dance, first the weather, and then naive politics of the cost of living.
The repetition had disconcerted him.
One old woman had refused to let them in, convinced they were vandals or muggers.
She'd screamed at them through her letter-box, and shoved an old iron poker into the gap, waving it about in an obscene fashion which had made Stuart laugh; when neighbouring tenants began to bang on the walls they left the parcel outside the door, not sure who would find it first.
‘I met an old man today, one of the down-and-outs, on my way back,’ Stuart had said once at home, while his mother was getting ready to go out.
‘Oh?’
‘He was asking for money.’
‘Did you give him any?’
‘Not much.’
He wasn't sure why he did; it was partly curiosity, they were a different species about whose life he knew almost nothing.
The observable characteristics were drabness, colourlessness, all negatives.
He wondered what  reduced someone to that state, the Lowry figures who mingled with the punks and skinheads.
‘I do think they should do something for it.’
His mother was applying blue eyeshadow with a brush, drawing down her eyelids and peering into the mirror.
‘Such as?’
‘Oh, sell something, play a musical instrument, you know.’
There was one by the  newsstand sometimes, scraping at a violin, but he had a tough time competing with the unofficial buskers who had loud guitars and stronger voices.
When she went downstairs he picked up the photo which stood on the dressing-table, one of his parents at someone else's wedding.
There were still odd things round the house that had belonged to his father, but which were now Stuart's.
The model boats in his room, both racing yachts on which his father had crewed, varnished and painted, detailed painstaking work which was accurate down to the nameplates fixed at the stern, Caprimo, Sea Witch.
In the picture Stuart held, his father was grinning self-consciously in his formal dress, at least a head taller than his wife who hung on his arm, looking up and laughing at her husband.
It was a good way to remember him, better than the rows about money and drink, the spending on wild presents for Stuart.
The small fishing rod he had bought, with the reel and the box of flies, was still in Stuart's cupboard.
His mother had been silent when she first saw it, and  his father had been angry at the lack of enthusiasm and had arranged to take Stuart fishing for a day to a small loch where he could borrow a boat.
There had been a low haze hiding most of the surrounding hills, the loch had seemed suspended in some floating mirage, broken only by the oars rattling, and the water that slopped in the bottom of the boat.
At first Stuart had been excited by the sight of an occasional fish rising out of the sluggish water, but later he'd grown bored because he was too small to row successfully, and trailing his hands over the side apparently disturbed the fish; baling out with the old saucepan also made too much noise.
Even the loan of his father's rod  hadn't helped him to catch anything, although his father had caught two trout whose scales came off on Stuart's hands and gleamed silver in the soft light.
When they had walked back to the car, his father had offered him one of the fish.
‘You could say it's yours,’ he suggested.
‘But I didn't catch it,’ said Stuart, puzzled, not realising the adult wish to make everything all right for the child, and to justify buying the rod.
After they got back, he heard his parents quarrelling in the kitchen.
‘Don't be so bloody practical, hers got to have some fun some time.
Might walk under a bus tomorrow.’
It was his father's catchphrase, the rationale for all extravagance; his mother never recognised the longing to be generous with money he didn't have.
And when they'd separated after the cash had run out, his mother had coped; Stuart's father had gone abroad, eventually they'd lost touch.
Stuart had been sent to a private school, his grandparents had paid, so that he was always under an obligation, don't waste the opportunity, don't let people down; not like your father, was the implication.
Going to university had been what they wanted for him, a visible sign of achievement, and he had obliged, not having any strong objections.
A shadow moved across in front of him and he looked up…
Charlie.
The man paused hopefully, then his face changed.
‘Waiting for someone?’
‘Yes.’
‘I won't bother you then.’
‘I didn't mean that.
She'll be here soon.’
‘Your girlfriend?’
‘Yes.’
The man smiled, showing discoloured teeth.
‘Good day for it, anyway.’
And he wandered away down the path, leaving the groups walking together, approaching only the single ones, keeping a wary eye open for the police who occasionally patrolled unexpectedly.
Stuart looked at the text books beside him on the seat.
History didn't seem to accommodate people like Charlie, it dealt with concepts like social mobility, observable through statistics, or political power, not single units of humanity.
He stared at the crowd walking  past, waiting for Rona.
In the distance he caught sight of a smart figure in navy, a red scarf round her neck, walking quickly.
He hadn't realised his mother came in here at lunch-time, though the boutique she worked in was not far away.
She looked out of place amongst the rest who were dressed mostly in jeans and running-shoes, like an  advertisement for clothes for the older woman.
She paused and Stuart saw her turn swiftly, looking around in case people were watching.
He had been going to wave, but she wouldn't see him, not at that distance; she refused to buy contact lenses, and hated wearing her glasses.
Then she was accosted by Charlie and Stuart began to laugh.
He would tease her if she gave him anything, ask what he had done to earn it.
At first she looked embarrassed, then she spoke to him, glancing over her shoulder once or twice like a child afraid of being caught.
While the man stood passively, she opened her handbag, taking out a purse, searching through it.
There was a flutter of paper as she put a note in his hand.
Then she pointed to her watch, making an excuse to get away.
Why didn't she just leave, Charlie was used to it.
Stuart stood up to make himself more visible, and waved his jacket in the air.
She saw him at last, but she didn't signal back, she clutched her bag and froze, staring, and the man beside her turned round.
Then Stuart understood.
The man was not as tall as he had been in the photograph, he stooped too much, but he was still a few inches taller than his wife.
AFTERWARDS
From where I stand I can see through the half-open doors of the ward, the long lines of white beds, the charts, the flowers on the central table, whose scent fails to mask the smell of antiseptics as flowers on the bench must have failed to hide the smell of humanity from the judge in less sterile days.
The sister comes out of her office holding a small night case and a black garbage bag tied with string, bulging and misshapen like an over-stuffed cushion; there is already a split down one side.
Attached to the top is a label saying ‘Mrs H. Nelson’.
‘Would you mind signing this please?’
A list that sets out the items carefully in red ink, a thin trail of watery blood over the paper.
One pair of shoes, one corduroy skirt, one blouse.
And so on.
‘Are you her son?’
‘'Stepson.’
I can sense her relief, she must have been afraid of an emotional scene.
‘And the flowers, there are several bunches.
Would you like them?
Or at least the plant.’
It has pink waxen petals like painted faces.
By the time I reach my car the sack is giving way completely.
I rummage in the boot and find an old sports holdall, transferring what I can.
Everything smells of talcum powder from a tin that has leaked.
There are clothes she must have kept for going home, letters and books that have been collected while she was there.
A roughly made small felt dog which I don't recognise, it looks as though a child has made it.
Perhaps it is from one of mine.
I am about to put it in my pocket for them, but remember that my father or Susan might notice, and return it.
I have to leave the coat on the seat, there is no room for it.
The lettering on the bag looks too garish for the occasion, but at least won't get out of the car and find the remnants of her life spilling out into the gutter.
Yesterday, when I called at the house before the funeral I was afraid  of what I would find.
I didn't recognise my sister at first when she opened the door, she'd cut her hair, but the eyes were the same, there were small creases at the sides, the skin puffy, roughened by crying.
Susan had known Hilda better than I had.
She gripped my arms as she hugged me, as if to reassure herself I wasn't going to disappear.
Her face was warm from the heat of the house.
‘He's in there.’
I didn't want to meet him.
I hesitated, feeling her watching.
They say when you look at someone who is dead the spirit isn't there, it's a shell because whatever made it alive has gone.
Like the animals in a taxidermist's or a museum, with their glass eyes that don't move.
I was afraid that my father would be like that, that when he turned around his eyes would be glass, they wouldn't take in what they saw.
But he had not changed physically, the difference was there in the way he let Susan take the empty cup from his hand without noticing.
‘Nice of you to come.’
It sounded as though he had already said the same thing to a great many others.
‘Good to see you,’ I said, taking his hand and shaking it.
The hand was dry, like papier mâché.
I felt if I gripped it too hard it would break or crumple, and I would see the sinews like wires holding it together.
‘Alison and the children are thinking of you.’
Outside the sun was catching the wet grass, gleaming and brilliant, and sharp pointed yellow crocuses spiked through beside the roots of the tree.
‘The garden looks good.’
Like a man stepping out of a dream he woke for a moment.
‘Thought I'd put something tall in at the back, hollyhocks or foxgloves, they'd hide the fence.
I'll need something to border it too.’
‘We could get going on that next week,’ said Susan.
But it was a mistake to mention actual days, he had escaped from them temporarily, seeing the border as it would be, not the work involved, he was into summer and autumn, not today.
Even tomorrow was too soon to think of, there were other happenings before then, the funeral.
He sat down again in his armchair.
sitting on the bed in my old room last night, I found I couldn't work out how I felt about Hilda dying.
It worried me, I felt there should be more reaction.
I searched the small room for something to focus my attention, but I couldn't concentrate.
Instead I rummaged in my suitcase, pulled out a jogging suit, an old pair of running shoes.
My marathon shoes.
I touched the laces with affection and began to change my clothes.
I'd never known Hilda well, my father had remarried after I had left home, and Susan was already sixteen.
I had been aware on visits of the changes she had brought into the house, in the food which was more elaborate, recipes culled from women's magazines, the odd touches about the place, the fact that the bowl full of bulbs was placed on a mat, there were extra arm covers on the chairs, a lace cloth on the chest of drawers in my room, everything had to be protected.
So did my father, he wasn't to bother himself with the day-to-day things like washing sheets or buying food, that was her job, she made it plain.
A plush insulated world, ignoring reality.
Hilda would have called it not letting him worry, keeping everything smooth and secure.
Before Hilda he'd never been the kind who liked to have certainty, but after she came he settled for her way.
I found it more difficult to talk to him, somewhere he or I had changed.
I blamed Hilda for it, I felt she had taken away the gamble, the risk that made it worth while.
If you can't feel the pain you can't have the elation, they complement each other.
No high for finishing the marathon if you don't run through the nerves at the start, the blisters, the soft grey stage of the race where the roadscape doesn't change, where it feels as though you have done it all and yet there are still a few miles to go.
I've run a couple of times.
If you're the owner of a health club like I am, it's a good advertisement, as long as you finish.
I meet some of my customers at the start, running for charity, who thump me on the back and feel good because there's someone they recognise in the milling crowd of shivering runners.
Outside the smell from the brewery hung over the town, stifling as a warm pillow, making it difficult to breathe.
I like running on damp nights like last  night because the streets are mostly empty, there are only the dogwalkers trailing past trees and lamp-posts, patiently disowning their pets.
Houses have weird silhouettes in the soft rain, noises come through open windows, television voices, familiar sound tracks.
I am conscious of the groups of people inside the flats and rooms, in their own isolations, watching Ethiopia without knowing what is happening next door.
I could say all the right words about Hilda, I'd learned to do that in the past few days, talking to people on the phone, but I couldn't believe in the phrases the way Susan seemed to.
‘At the end she didn't know anything, there was no pain, it was very peaceful.
The nurses said so.’
But they would have said that anyway.
I listened to my feet making a steady rhythm on the paved stones, as regular as a pulse beat.
The running started because of my father, he was the kind who expected results from his children.
I was never much use at school work, but he said that didn't matter, what was important was finding something and doing it so that you became good at it, better than the others, and that made you a person, gave you something they didn't have.
Beat someone in a race, he said, you'll feel fantastic, but don't forget, there has to be losing too.
Only make sure you win some.
And when a race didn't work out for me and I went home despondent, he would be there, not critical, just there.
Were you happy with the way you ran it?
Yes, but they were faster.
But you ran what you could.
He's still alive and yet I keep thinking of him in the past tense.
Why do I feel he is the one who is dead, not Hilda.
It's as if she is away staying somewhere, and we are waiting for her to come back, we cannot do anything until she returns.
But he can't spend the rest of his life waiting, he needs pushing to get him to live again.
I try speaking to Susan in the morning, but she can't see it.
‘Life's not a bloody race.’
‘We have to do something.’
For some reason my voice is lowered, hushed  as if we are in church.
There is cereal in the bowl in front of me; I don't remember pouring it in.
The packet says ‘bran flakes, health and vitality.’
I spoon some health and vitality into my mouth; it tastes of sawdust.
‘He needs time to recover, think of the shock.’
‘But not too long.’
She says he has no concentration now, he finds it difficult to remember simple things.
But she won't let him try, he doesn't have to use his mind, she does it for him.
Susan is like Hilda, she wants to protect.
There's always been that instinct to pick up those who have been hurt; at one time she wanted to be a nurse, but the thought of night shifts put her off.
She became a teacher instead, she is probably good at it, though perhaps officious.
Most of her boyfriends have been collected at a time of crisis in their lives, lame ducks, my father calls them, who tend to move on when they have reorganised their existence, not wanting to be taken over.
Already she opens my father's letters, though so far she has not read them out loud or tied his tie for him.
She would be a good mother but he's not a child.
Fulfilling her needs won't settle his, he shouldn't be kept in a padded cell.
Perhaps I'm too hard on her, but the whole thing has me on edge.
It's the odd details that get to you, the picture of the royal wedding on the mantelpiece; Hilda was a royalty watcher.
My father never bothered with things like that, he looks a page three or the back ones, sport or sex, not politics.
He distrusts them all.
No wars if there weren't politicians, he said once.
And told me of the fraternising between British and German troops on Christmas day in the trenches, and I couldn't understand at first how you could shoot at someone all week, then make friends with them for one day, knowing you would try and kill each other again the next.
But he said he reckoned they probably shot a bit wide, and anyway the officers would see that they tried, and it was better to be shot by the other side rather than your own.
Later I wondered, if it was like a race, how at the time you wanted to win, but afterwards the other competitors were your friends because they and you all know what it's like, and the crowds of hangers-on can't share the experience.
Later Susan takes me on one side.
‘He wants us to pack her things.’
Exorcising ghosts, no memories, it all has to be cleansed of anything that might remind him, no shadows of personality to be left behind like a coat on a hook, no toothbrush in a glass like a withered flower.
We fill grocery cartons with shoes that have the shape of living feet, a bulge on the left where she must have had a swollen joint; I did not notice it while she was alive.
There are hats, and hand-bags as well as clothes, a dress still with the price labels, unworn.
Susan says a friend of hers will take it.
A drawer full of medicines, mostly old with faded and encrusted writing.
I put them all in the dustbin before Susan can decide to keep them.
She has already amassed a small hoard of junk, she is like my children, they cannot bear to throw things out.
We work hurriedly, in silence for the most part, like removal men handling a stranger's existence, packing our unease into the boxes with the bundles of stockings, folding down the cardboard sides.
When I leave them in the hall the lids burst open again.
I take a roll of sellotape and secure them angrily, wanting  to shout, to defy the silence.
In some countries they spend days after a death, have a wake or make some kind of celebration out of it.
I feel we are acting furtively, hurrying it out of sight, we can't talk about it, except for the momentary panic when we think we have included my father's jacket.
It was the same at the funeral, they were all so quiet, the four men who brought in the coffin wore thick soft-soled shoes so as not to make a noise, nothing must interrupt so that it seemed like a silent film unreeling to the sound of psalms.
But outside there was the sound of a bulldozer on a nearby site, the men yelling to each other above the racket.
Afterwards I sit with him in the room at the back, the late afternoon light still coming in through the windows.
He is holding some of the letters he has received.
I pretend to recognise the names because it pleases him, but I feel awkward being in the same room after finding the medicines, going through her belongings.
It makes me feel I have been prying into it all, I am  a voyeur of their joint life.
I want to touch him but can't, yet physical contact is something that we go in for.
Then Susan comes in, and when she has put down the tray she is carrying, she turns the light on beside his chair and draws the curtains so that the room becomes a series of pools of light, isolating each of us.
I get to my feet and go over to the window, easing back the soft material, looking at the houses opposite in the half-light.
‘It's nearly dark,’ she says.
He hasn't heard, he is reading, the lamp beside his chair casting grotesque shadows.
‘Don't shut all the daylight out of his life, for God's sake.’
I open the window a crack and breathe in the coldness, as I do when I am running in the evenings.
She is upset by the anger in my voice, I can tell by the way she rattles my cup.
I shut the window and move back into the room.
‘I'm sorry,’ I say later in the kitchen.
‘It's all right for you to criticise, isn't it.
You're not here.’
‘I know.
I hate his being like that though.’
‘I'll look after him, don't worry.’
I have abdicated in the past without being aware of it; she is self-appointed protector.
I am not sure how to say goodbye.
I feel I should stay, but there is no real place for me.
‘Doing any running these days?’
He smiles briefly, his face opening up.
‘Some.’
I manage to touch him then, to lean over and grasp his shoulders in a clumsy hug.
His hands are tight across my back, then he lets go and as I walk out of the room his face goes back to the letters.
When I turn the car and drive past the house, on my way to the main road, I can see Susan drawing the curtains in the bedroom, shutting out the street.
As I wait at the traffic lights I find myself crying; I realise it is not for Hilda but for him.
DAY TRIP
The goat was hanging from a hook outside the restaurant door, under the awning.
It had been skinned, neatly eviscerated, and would have looked like any carcase in a butcher's shop if it hadn't been for the head.
The horns were still there, curled and chipped, the brown hair was coarse and stiff, and the flyridden eyesockets gave an uneasy impression of movement.
As an advertisement for the quality of the food, it did not appeal to Hilda.
‘Nothing would make me go in there,’ she said, scrambling down the steps.
‘But you wanted a drink.’
‘Look!’
She pointed dramatically, as if at daggers in the air.
‘Oh, that.
Perhaps they eat them here.’
He laughed at his own joke.
He didn't understand.
She walked heavily back to the car, baking in the sun.
Dan hadn't had the sense to leave it in the shade.
Her back, red and peeling under the sundress, stuck briefly to the seat until she sat forward, rigid with disgust.
He had followed her back to the car.
‘It'll be all right.
Everything's bottled, it's all sealed.’
‘I want to go back.’
‘I need a drink.
I'm dying of thirst.
Tell you what, I won't be a minute.
My throat's like sandpaper.’
Her eyes grew warm, and she sniffed fiercely; she usually only cried at the pictures, or on royal occasions.
Outside the sun burned down; there was very little shade apart from the awning and she couldn't go back, not with that thing hanging there.
She looked at the brown baked countryside, the dust and the withered grass near a few huts built with mud bricks, and corrugated iron roofs.
It was all so strange.
Dan didn't seem to notice, he was different here, he enjoyed the unfamiliarity.
She felt a child again, lost in the woods near a country cottage they had once taken, without the usual landmarks of factory chimneys or people to ask, panic reaching out from every rock and tree.
She shuddered as a breath of cool air penetrated the hot metal shell of the car.
It had begun the day before, the suggestion of going off on their own, hiring  a car.
Or perhaps earlier when someone had first suggested Morocco, and she had thought of it as somewhere different but not too far from Spain.
The illustrations in the brochures had looked innocuous enough, brilliant skies and white buildings clustered round the tower of a mosque.
She should have realised, she should have stopped Dan from making the bookings through a friend of his who was a travel agent.
And then that small win on the pools; we needn't go with a group, Dan had said, go on our own, do what we like, stay in a really good hotel, have the holiday of a lifetime, what d'you say.
And she had said yes, of course, being adventurous in front of their friends.
And she had kept up the pretence in the air-conditioned hotel and on the pool terrace, drinking mint tea to get the feel of the place, though she couldn't stand the stuff really, and never knew what to do with the sprigs of mint.
Sprawling in the sun in her  one-piece suit, a little overweight, watching Dan's eyes straying over the two slim French girls in bikinis diving in the pool.
She had not worried, Dan always said he liked something to get hold of.
They had met the other British couple.
Dan had got on well with the husband, but the wife's cool voice and expensive clothes had made her excessively conscious of her shining face and raw skin.
The suggestion of hiring a car had almost come from these two; it had been their talk of the small towns, the cedar woods, the mountains, which had fascinated Dan so much.
Let's go and see it, he had said, and she had recoiled at first.
But we don't know our way around, and the language.
Oh that's not a problem, they said so.
And she was annoyed with them for knowing so much, she had begun to feel safe in the hotel.
Dan had even asked the other couple to join up, but they couldn't, they had their plane to catch.
‘We'll go on our own then.’
‘A marvellous idea,’ said the husband.
‘You'll really enjoy it, won't they, darling?’
‘You'd like to, wouldn't you, love?’
She looked at Dan's face, already dazed by tales of Moorish palaces and Roman ruins, and said yes, hoping that some sudden illness would prevent her going.
‘You're sure?’
‘Yes, of course.’
She was angry with him for questioning her, for recognising her doubts.
‘Right, I'll  arrange it then.’
And he did, with surprising speed.
She didn't often see him like that.
At home she was the one who arranged things, and joined committees.
Now Dan seemed to have taken over.
She did not know how to assert herself here; she felt out of her depth, floating in the warm limbo of the pool while swifts swooped at the water.
Her wet feet burned on the hot stones at the edge and she walked across the grass to the shade where he stood jubilant, beckoning.
‘I've fixed it up.’
‘Wonderful!’
‘A Fiat, first thing tomorrow.’
‘Tomorrow?’
‘Yes, I thought the sooner the better.’
She remembered suddenly the heat and smells of their first swift tour on the second day, protected by numbers and the guide, and felt alarmed by whatever lay beyond the arched doorway of the hotel.
They left early next morning, before it got too hot.
‘We've never done this before have we, love,’ Dan said, remembering after a few yards to change onto the correct side of the road.
‘Damn donkeys.
Told you it would be a different holiday this time.’
She clutched the door handle for support as he  manoeuvred past a bus, and then they began to leave behind the slowly rising concrete buildings and the dust and reached the worn hills beyond.
A warm wind shone through the long stubble which shimmered like silk in the heat; the sun glared off the metal cabs of lorries and buses, the tar melted into mirages of water and cleared again.
She felt sticky and heavy, as if she was trying to pull herself out of the chlorinated pool with the water dragging at her bulk, breaking the surface tension with an effort.
‘Isn't it lovely,’ she said, knowing a response was expected, and lost the vague feelings of unease in the sight of women in red and white striped skirts and straw hats with coloured pompoms.
‘Imagine me in one of those,’ she said, and laughter bubbled out in the way that normally set the whole bus tour laughing with her.
Dan smiled.
They took an hour to reach the first town, and another hour to find the tourist office and fend off boys with motor bikes who rapped on the windows.
The white kaftaned guide soon dealt with the boys, and they relaxed in his protection, although his English wasn't as good as she'd hoped.
They followed him through a narrow passageway into the old town.
‘This is really it,’ said Dan happily, looking around, and she agreed, uncertain what she was agreeing to, apart from the ultimate in her conception of what was foreign.
Then the guide plunged into the seething mass of people and donkeys, occasionally looking over his shoulder.
Everywhere there was noise, hammering, shouting, the soft unshod feet of mules and donkeys padding over the bridge, below which a grey torrent swarmed through a stone-lined passage.
She was aware of faces staring at her as she walked along the paved streets, and she swayed over the uneven surface like a seasick sailor.
Her eyes and nose were assaulted every moment, mule dung mingled with fresh baked bread, incense and cumin, and other spices she couldn't identify, a curious  bitter-sweetness that cloyed her senses.
She saw sacks of meal and gleaming dates, boxes of over-ripe figs with the seeds oozing out, and she stepped carefully over a stream of something unthinkable that ran down the centre of the street.
The smells grew worse, though still fortunately not totally identifiable; they squeezed past donkeys moored to doorways and pushed through the flood of people.
Dan had stopped with the guide outside a doorway.
‘Here they just use chisel, no engrave, very good, you like to see.’
Inside it was cool and there was a seat that took the weight off her swollen feet, and they watched as gleaming brass plates were trailed in front of their eyes with the regularity of a hypnotist's charm, and she looked at Dan and he said no thanks and walked out.
The streets grew narrower, every doorway seemed to offer goods, there were wooden booths in small squares dappled with shade, selling pottery and saddles built on wooden frames, then the cool blue and green tiled courtyard of a mosque, with  voices chanting on a high-pitched note.
She stared, fascinated by the carpets on the floor and the brightly painted candles, and wondered why the Catholics lit candles too if both sides had hated each other as much as they had in her school history books.
‘A bit different from chapel,’ she said, turning, and found that Dan and the guide had disappeared.
If I wait they'll come back, they'll notice, she thought, and clutched her bag closer, remembering the warnings of the other couple in the hotel regarding pickpockets.
‘You look round, you buy,’ said a voice behind her.
She saw the broken teeth, the bullying assurance.
‘No, no.’
‘Yes, good stuff, you English?’
‘No,’ she said desperately, and turned and walked away, mingling with the throng that shuffled through the narrow streets rubbing shoulders with each other.
Where had they gone?
She turned up a thin alley which was covered; it was full of the shrill song of cage birds.
How could they, she thought in sudden sentiment, and the anger carried her on to the next street.
Here they were hammering with a monotonous beat, the voices high but soft, small boys staring at her as she looked at them in panic, realising she did not know the way out of the maze of streets and could not ask.
She did not dare to stop or rest because immediately she was surrounded by offers of unreliable help.
In her fear, donkeys blundered into her, boys brushed past, and the small children followed her, dark-eyed at this curious middle-aged pink stranger, hurrying aimlessly.
Through the kaftan market, bright with colours hanging outside, smelling leather and the not too distant tannery.
She was walking too quickly, stumbling occasionally, past long belts like dressing-gown cords hanging from poles, which plucked at her face as she pushed through, straying over a pile of new dyed  wool , brilliant and damp, into a glare of sunlight, stepping back from a mule loaded with carpets, bumping into a wall where blue thread ran along from a spinning wheel, guarded from tangling by small boys who pushed at her and muttered and laughed; she would have grasped at the thin thread to lead her out.
Several times she thought she saw the tall figure  of the guide, only to be disappointed.
Streets looked familiar, then grew strange again as she walked down them.
There were some steps she did remember having seen before, perhaps she would find them down there.
It turned out to be the food market, where they sold swollen watermelons and aubergines and strange shaped fruits.
There were fish lying damply in old wooden crates, their scales gleaming with the sickly colours of an oil stain, then rows of chickens with their throats cut, feathers clinging to the legs, and the sawdust was stained with blood and flies, and she began to run, frantic to reach the air outside and breathe.
‘Where on earth did you get to?’
‘I couldn't find you, oh Dan,’ she said.
‘On your own is bad.’
The guide, suspecting he would be blamed, became truculent.
‘It was his fault, he went too fast,’ she said.
Dan became apologetic, taking the guide's side, saying how much they had looked for her, instead of being protective and angry as he should have been.
In disgust the guide led them back to the car park, where they overtipped to avoid a scene and got away without trouble.
‘You should have stayed with us, love.’
‘When I looked round you'd gone.’
‘You're all right anyway, that's what matters.’
‘Anything might have happened,’ she said, putting her hands over her eyes to shut out the horrors of the market, remembering with longing the cellophane-wrapped, refrigerated coolness of the shops at home.
The car took them away from the town, out through the flat fields and the irrigation pipes that ran along beside the road.
She looked at the arid ground and thought of the green of their garden and the neatness of the flowers in their window-boxes.
‘I need some lunch,’ said Dan later.
She eased her sticking back from the car seat up to a cafe where a boy with slanting eyes and a towel tied round his waist wiped a table clean for them, then shook a filthy cloth over it with a flourish.
Mesmerised by the heat rising from the hard earth and stones of the road, she looked numbly at the blue and white chipped plates.
Dan began to crumble some bread.
‘Cool here, isn't it,’ he said, his face gleaming, his eyes missing nothing.
Hilda felt he was a stranger, someone she had only just met, a feeling she sometimes had when he met up with friends he'd known before they got married.
She stared at the shifting colours and shapes, remote and isolated, hearing the voices and noise of music playing inside.
After Dan had drunk the hot sweet coffee that kept her awake at nights, they moved off, sitting in the small car for a while to look at the map.
‘I thought we'd go this way, up here through the mountains.
You like hills, don't you.
Might as well get our money's worth out of the car too.’
He pointed at the red lines on the map, which meant little to her.
She felt as if her mind was detached from her body, she was light-headed, incapable of decisions.
She wanted to go back, or to find somewhere that was cool and full of shade.
The thought of the hotel seemed like the mirage of an oasis, something always just out of reach.
Why did he always want to go the long way round.
‘All right,’ she said nervously, and watched, hands tightly clasped as he set off.
Small boys marked their route like milestones, bursting out of the undergrowth with baskets of fruit to sell.
‘It wouldn't be clean,’ she said as Dan slowed hopefully.
Pink flowers like willow herb clustered along a dried-up river bank, circling birds reminded her of the vultures in westerns.
‘Where are we?’
Rocks had fallen on to the road, cutting off the way forward.
The car jolted over the rubble past a machine, and the panic ceased.
Half an hour later they had seen the cafe.
Dan had suggested a drink, and she'd agreed, happier now that they were on their way back.
They had walked across the dust to the steps expectantly, thinking of the cool sweat on a cold drink.
Then the goat had made itself evident in the warm air.
She had almost touched it as she had turned, and had seen again the blood on the sawdust and the fear and the faces staring.
When Dan had returned after his drink, wiping his mouth and looking cooler, she had been silent.
He made an attempt to be kind, pointing out places of interest  on the way back, but she sat stiff with protest in the small front seat.
She limped into the air-conditioned hall of the hotel like an awkward seal plunging into a pool, and sank on to a leather sofa.
‘Did you enjoy your day?’ asked a familiar voice.
She saw the woman standing by the reception desk, elegant and cool, her suitcase beside her.
‘Our plane was delayed.
A strike at Gatwick or something.’
‘It was a bit hot,’ she said, reacting slowly, then recovering as she sipped the mint tea Dan had ordered.
It seemed refreshing now.
‘Go far?’
‘It seems a long time since this morning.’
She put the sprigs of mint from the glass on to the table where they left a damp stain on the surface; she no longer cared what the hotel staff would think.
‘Told you it would be worth it,’ said Dan.
‘It'll be something to tell them when we get back won't it.
Imagine their faces!’
In the distance she heard the faint sounds of voices from the pool, and her dazed eyes rested on the green palm trees out on the terrace, while the dim light of the courtyard shut out the horrors of the morning, and she saw the gleaming white tower of a mosque against the deep sky and the far-off mountains, just as they had looked in the travel brochures.
‘I thought it would give you something to do, now that you've had to give up that idea of working full-time, and with Hugh away in, well, wherever it is, it'll be company for you.’
‘He's in Bahrain,’ said Gina.
Hugh's mother was looking expectantly at her.
React, quick, she thought.
‘It's fantastic!
Wonderful, I've always wanted one.’
She hoped it didn't sound too false; what on earth was she going to do with a puppy.
It was on the floor squeaking gently.
Gina picked up the warm handful gingerly in case of accidents.
‘All the instructions about what to do are on this sheet of paper, here.’
Like a washing-machine, thought Gina, and noticed that Hugh's mother had her head on one side and appeared to be trying to observe possible maternal tendencies.
‘It'll be good for both of you to get out.’
She leaned heavily on the word ‘both’ and Gina knew it wasn't the puppy she meant.
‘I suppose one's meant to take lots of exercise.’
‘Oh yes, as long as you're careful.
I did, I always thought that was why my two were such healthy children.
What will you call it?’
‘I don't know.
What's  its father called?
Oh, you mean the baby.
Well, it's so early yet, isn't it?’
‘One thing about a puppy, you'll find you meet all kinds of people.’
Gina wasn't sure that she wanted to meet people, but she found when Magnus had progressed from the kitchen to the gardens he attracted endless attention.
She supposed it would be good practice for later; Margaret said it took her twice as long to shop with her three month-old child, Tom, because everyone looked into the pram and talked to him.
Gina fell into a routine of taking Magnus to the gardens early, before she went to help Margaret at the gallery; she had to get up anyway because Magnus woke and whined after the milkman had been round, and in the small flat the whimpering seemed to penetrate everywhere.
Most of the other dog-owners at that time were in a hurry, presumably with jobs to go to; the joggers in brilliant track-suits with self-absorbed faces grew fewer as the frost rimed the tennis court.
She began to exchange odd words with the others, the Afghan's owner, tall and bearded in home-knitted sweaters full of mistakes, the woman who ran a boutique a street away and her argumentative pekinese, and an Alsatian with a middle-aged man in dark suits and expensive shoes who looked like an advertisement for men's tailoring, the kind who would be bound to have the right clothes for any occasion.
Some marched around the perimeter path like prisoners, finding the area too small; others loitered, choosing casual acquaintance like Gina.
She became bored with the paths and sat on a bench with a book, but Magnus came and sat underneath, waiting for her to move on.
The only person who wouldn't speak was the woman in a green loden cloak who scattered bread for the birds from a Harrods bag; Magnus grew fat on brown wholemeal scraps and Gina gave up trying to keep him away.
It was Magnus who discovered the girl first; he yelped unsteadily, his voice rising with excitement, and Gina went to see what he had found.
On the damp path was a pair of high-heeled black patent sandals, placed neatly together, and on the bench a glossy black synthetic fur coat lay covering something.
Oh God, not a body, please not, she thought.
She looked round for support.
Magnus' inadequate barking had attracted the alsatian; where was the owner?
‘Having trouble?’
‘I don't know,’ she said, relieved.
The pinstripe trousers were tucked into green shooting boots with buckles at the sides, giving him a competent air.
He hesitated.
‘Shall I take a look?’
‘Perhaps you ought to,’ she said.
He braced himself and walked forward, but as he did so, the fur coat moved a little, and the girl underneath sat up and stretched, her mascara in streaks on her face, leaning over for her shoes, fumbling briefly with the straps.
‘Must have climbed over,’ he said, and turned to walk beside Gina.
‘Yes.’
She still felt shaky.
‘You didn't think she was ill?’
‘Well, it's an odd place to sleep.’
He smiled a little, and with the ice broken they discussed dogs until he looked at his watch and said he would have to go.
After that he greeted her like an old friend each morning; she didn't mind, it was dull talking to Magnus who seldom listened, and he gave her protection from the intense political views of the Afghan's owner.
He seemed eager to talk, as if he had been searching for a listener for some time.
She wondered what his wife was like.
‘She's an actress, you know.’
Gina stopped watching Magnus, feeling surprise was required.
‘She's very good, though I perhaps I shouldn't say so.’
He sounded a little wistful.
‘Does she act a lot?’
She felt some obligation to keep the conversation going; it was impossible to walk round in silence the way she could have done with Hugh.
‘Oh yes.
Television work mostly.
At the moment she's involved in a new series, one of the costume kind.
Just a small part, but important.’
She found herself talking too, drawn by some required exchange of confidences and a dislike of being on her own, discussing the gardens, the weather, other people's dogs, safe everyday subjects, in the way she made conversation at parties to people she hadn't met before.
‘What do you do?’ he asked one day when she wasn't expecting it.
‘Oh, not much.’
‘But you can't just sit at home all day.’
‘I work part-time in a gallery, helping out a friend.’
Margaret had to cope with Tom in the mornings, and Gina sat in the long silent room and watched the visitors who came round, talking in hushed voices as if the pictures would be offended, or the artist was hiding somewhere.
‘But that can't be all?’
‘I write,’ she said suddenly.
‘I thought it must be something like that.’
She felt flattered by the suggestion, not that any of it was true of course, but she didn't want to have to explain the time she spent on her own in the flat, inventing things to do.
And there had been  the journalism course at secretarial college, taken by a reporter from the evening paper.
He'd wept at the lack of talent, enjoying the attention of fifteen girls, and had played the hard-bitten foreign correspondent to their naivety.
It wasn't until after she'd left that she'd noticed his name on the football reports.
‘What do you write?’
‘Oh, poetry mostly.’
It seemed the most obscure, the most likely to stifle questions.
‘In the here-today, gone-tomorrow kind of magazine usually.
Nothing else.’
‘Makes what I do seem dull,’ he said.
She tried to remember what he had told her, some kind of business, something unmemorable, like selling software.
‘Oh, no, not really, it must be interesting.’
And wondered why she made such fatuous comments and why he didn't appear to notice.
He was telling her about a holiday in Greece instead.
She didn't see him for a few days after that, and had time to wonder why she had made it all up.
Perhaps because it was difficult to suggest the grey areas of waiting until Hugh came back.
Then he was there again, by the seat, looking white and worried.
‘My wife's been ill,’ he said after a few minutes.
‘Not seriously?’
‘Well, everything seems to be better now.’
The silence became almost unbreakable.
Then he began again with an effort.
‘And the writing?’
‘Oh, I'm working on it.
I think I've got a chance with one I sent off the other day.’
Perhaps she would announce it next week, she could choose the day.
She walked slowly round with him, talking about Magnus because he seemed to be mentally elsewhere.
Letting herself out of the gate, she noticed a familiar figure on the steps outside her door.
‘You seemed to be having quite a chat,’ said Hugh's mother, waiting on the steps.
‘I rang the bell, but there was no answer.’
‘He seems to need someone to talk to.’
‘Be careful, he looked quite lost when you left him.’
‘Oh I will,’ said Gina.
‘But Magnus and his dog will play, it's difficult to avoid him.
I don't want to be downright rude.’
‘Why not?’
‘Well,’ said Gina.
‘You said it was a way of meeting people.’
‘There are people and people,’ said Hugh's mother.
I could stop it any day, thought Gina.
Take Magnus out at a different time, or take him somewhere else.
But it's better than walking endlessly round on one's own.
She found out the man's name later on that week.
Arthur Ledington.
He'd prepared the occasion, introduced himself as they parted.
‘We've been talking so much, it's foolish that we don't even know each other 's names.’
‘I'm Gina Richardson,’ she said.
‘Is that the name you write under?’
‘Yes, well, usually,’ she answered.
‘I'd be interested in reading something of yours, that is, if you didn't mind.’
He was so tentative that she wondered if she could avoid the question, but then he persisted.
‘What magazine did you say?’
I didn't, she thought, panicking.
‘Well, it's not very well known, something called Chance.’
Borrowed from her school magazine which still appeared annually, full of names she had forgotten and appeals for new buildings.
It's your own fault for complicating things, she thought later, sitting on the bench in one of Hugh's jackets, huddled like a Michelin man, hoping the long jersey hid the fact that her jeans wouldn't really do up any more.
You'll have to get some different clothes now, Margaret had said with a critical look.
Different clothes would be the end of things as they were, the baby would become more of a reality.
‘We never had any children, it wasn't possible,’ he said a couple of weeks later.
It must be getting very obvious, Gina thought, frightened by his frankness and aware that she couldn't easily have told someone that.
‘Did you ever think of adopting?’
‘Well, there was the acting,’ he said.
She felt sorry for him again, and worried because it must hurt him to see her like that.
‘I hope you didn't mind my telling you.’
‘Oh no.’
There wasn't anyone else in sight, she would have felt safer if there was.
In the pause that followed, she noticed that someone had hung peanuts on a thread for the birds; the empty shells looked like shrivelled skulls hung to frighten evil spirits.
She shivered.
‘Cold, isn't it?’
‘Yes,’ she said, relieved that the conversation had taken a less intimate turn.
‘I've got to go now anyway.
Magnus!’
Magnus disappeared into the laurels.
After that, she went out later for a few mornings, not admitting to herself whether or not she was avoiding him.
She was surprised how much the gardens were used; they'd always seemed just a square on a city map before, not a three-dimensional patch of wildness surrounded by traffic.
Perhaps she should take Magnus to the heath, or the canal, then she abandoned the idea, it would be too much effort.
‘I found this the other day, I really couldn't resist it.’
Hugh's mother emptied her shopping-bag onto the carpet and Gina had the feeling of terror that wedding-presents had sometimes brought; she wondered what on earth would happen if something went wrong.
‘Oh, it's lovely, I'm sure it will be needed.’
She pulled the string of the small musical box and the tune tinkled out in the silence as the box swallowed the cord slowly and jerkily.
‘Now, how are you feeling?
I told Helen you wouldn't be able to do the collection this year.’
‘Oh I can.
I'd like to, it's something to do.’
Instead of just waiting for Hugh to come back, for the baby, for the rain to stop.
‘Rattling a can in your condition?’
‘They tell you to keep on doing things.’
All those stairs?
Well, if you really don't mind, we are rather short of volunteers.’
It took her longer than usual, but apart from that she didn't mind.
And being pregnant seemed to shock some of them into giving.
They all tried so hard not to  look too closely at her.
Eyes averted, coins clanked into the tin, there was no need to flash the identity card.
Perhaps they thought it was for unwanted babies; she did start to explain about the new home for blind children, but never had to finish.
It was on the third evening that she went round Ashden Place.
On the ground floor she noticed the name on the bell, Ledington, and wished she hadn't rung it.
Oh well, at least he should give her something.
The boy who opened the door had dyed black hair, which heightened the pallor of his face, and his jeans were heavy with zips.
He leaned against the doorframe, a lean athletic figure, arms folded.
‘Yeah,’ he said.
‘I'm looking for Arthur Ledington.’
‘Not in.’
‘His wife then?’
The boy laughed as if he knew something Gina did not, and his teeth gleamed white in the dark hallway.
‘He's not married, hasn't been for a long time.
Why don't you come back, he said he'd be in later.’
Gina went down the stairs feeling as if she had been reading someone's letters, or had been forced to eavesdrop on a conversation she didn't want to hear.
Why had he thought it necessary, she wouldn't have minded, surely he didn't think she was that sort of person.
Gina didn't take Magnus out in the gardens for a while after that, she couldn't face meeting him again.
Instead she drove to the canal and walked along the narrow path where small boys threw car tyres into the dark half-frozen water.
Then came a day of snow showers, and she did not want to drive and waited until the late afternoon while Magnus sat and whined by the door.
He was there; she saw the Alsatian first, it came flying over and knocked Magnus sideways.
Then he appeared from the gate at the far side, and she could see him smiling even at that distance.
They fell into step on the slush-covered path.
The streetlights were still orange, daylight remained somewhere above the houses.
‘Haven't seen you for a while.’
‘No.
I went to your flat the other day, I was collecting for the blind.
I thought your wife might be there.’
His face became wary but he didn't say anything, just walked, looking at the ground.
I wonder if he does sell software, she thought.
His boots scuffed the gravel briefly and she wanted to apologise, then he swung round.
‘I never saw any of your poems.
They didn't have them at the bookshop I went to, they'd never heard of the magazine, and a friend of mine who writes poetry said he was certain it didn't exist.’
Magnus and the Alsatian were chasing pigeons; the overfed birds swung heavily into the air.
‘I had to say something.’
Then Gina began to laugh, looking at the absurdity of it all, and he was startled for a moment, then allowed himself a cautious smile which spread until they were both shaking with relief, an incongruous couple with Gina bulky in Hugh's shabby old jacket, and Arthur in a brand-new sheepskin coat over his suit.
Magnus and the Alsatian, attracted by the noise, came running over and began leaping up at them and barking in wild excitement, their panting mouths leaving clouds in the chill air.
Hugh's mother, climbing out of her taxi with a zip bag full of baby clothes, heard the laughter and wondered if she should contact Hugh in wherever it was and suggest that he came home.
SEEING ROBBIE
CAST
CATHERINE GRAY ex-schoolteacher who has given up because of blindness, age about forty-five.
ROBBIE CULLEN One of her former pupils, aged about twenty.
CATHERINE AT HOME IN HER KITCHEN, COOKING, LISTENING TO BRAIN OF BRITAIN ON THE RADIO
CATHERINE Now, where have I put it?
Sugar, sugar, where are you.
SOMETHING MADE OF CHINA FALLS AND BREAKS Oh hell.
Ah, is that it.
Tastes right, yes.
I wonder what I broke.
BEGINS MIXING, THEN SWITCHES MACHINE OFF Is anyone there?
PAUSE, THEN SWITCHES ON AGAIN.
STOPS Who is it?
I can't see, you know.
FOOTSTEPS IN THE SAME ROOM, THEN THE RADIO IS TURNED UP VERY LOUD FOR A FEW SECONDS AND THEN RIGHT DOWN
CATHERINE (VERY NERVOUS) Who is it?
I can tell there's someone there.
(VOICE RISING) Please, will you tell me who it is.
FAINT MOVEMENT
CATHERINE I can hear you.
How did you get in?
Who are you?
PAUSE, MORE MOVEMENT Why are you in my house?
I'm Catherine Gray, I have nothing worth taking, there's only a couple of pounds in my purse if that's what you're after.
Stay away from me!
CHAIR FALLS OVER No, don't touch me (ALMOST SCREAMING) Get your hands away from my face!
Leave me alone!
ROBBIE Guess who.
CATHERINE (NEAR TEARS) Who are you?
Please, go away.
ROBBIE D'you not know my voice?
CATHERINE Please, keep away.
How can I guess, why should I know you?
ROBBIE You should remember, your favourite pupil, wasn't I.
CATHERINE (SHAKILY) There were lots of those.
(RECOVERING A LITTLE) At least , I didn't have favourites.
ROBBIE Go on, you must remember.
CATHERINE A while back I think, but I can't put a face to you.
ROBBIE
‘He cut a sappy sucker from the muckle rodden-tree,
He trimmed it, an' he wet it, an' he thumped it on his knee;
He never heard the teuchat when the harrow broke her eggs,
He missed the craggit heron nabbin' puddocks in the seggs,
He forgot to hound the collie…’
I can't remember the rest of it.
CATHERINE Robbie.
Robbie Cullen.
ROBBIE Aye, that's right.
CATHERINE And what on earth are you doing here?
ROBBIE Came back to see my favourite teacher.
CATHERINE That's a lie if ever there was one.
ROBBIE Are you no pleased to see me?
CATHERINE I'd be more pleased if I knew how you got in the door.
ROBBIE Ah well, that's something I've learned since I left school.
CATHERINE Why did you have to go frightening me like that?
Robbie, it was horrible.
Didn't you know I'm blind now?
ROBBIE Aye, so they said.
I asked about you down at the corner, the shop there.
The paki knew you, said Oh the blind lady.
He said lady, not woman, too.
You always were a lady, weren't you.
CATHERINE It wasn't a very nice thing to do.
ROBBIE I'm not a very nice person.
CATHERINE Don't be daft.
You were no worse than the rest of them.
ROBBIE Thanks for the compliment.
CATHERINE Well, you used to be conceited enough without me having to add to it.
With your clothes and your smart home and everything.
And being good at work too, it didn't seem fair on some of the others who hadn't got the half of what you had, and couldn't even spell or add.
ROBBIE Inequality's a dreadful thing, isn't it.
Was that why you were so hard on me?
CATHERINE I wasn't hard on you, was I?
ROBBIE Just the once, really.
CATHERINE Well, that was your own fault, Robbie, you know it was.
ROBBIE Do I?
CATHERINE Robbie, if you've just come back here to give me a fright because of something that happened ages ago, you're mad.
ROBBIE Perhaps I am.
CATHERINE Why did you do it, coming in like that.
ROBBIE I wondered if I could scare you, make you afraid.
CATHERINE Why would you want to do a thing like that?
ROBBIE I don't know.
Perhaps because you used to scare me.
CATHERINE If I did, it was probably only to keep you in order.
ROBBIE Maybe.
CATHERINE What's bothering you?
ROBBIE You used to say you could always tell what was bothering me, you said my face gave me away.
CATHERINE I can't see your face now, Robbie.
But I'll tell you one thing, I can still see that something is worrying you, you sound as though…
ROBBIE As though what?
CATHERINE As though someone's hurt you.
What's happened, Robbie?
ROBBIE D'you think I've come to confess again?
I'd never do that to you, never again.
CATHERINE I had to do something that time, don't you see?
I couldn't just leave it.
ROBBIE So you told the head, all about the drugs, the stealing.
Why did you have to go and see him?
I came to tell you because I didn't know what to do, and you said you'd try to help, then what happens?
He throws me out anyway, a bad influence, a bad example, coming from the kind of home I did, I should know better, I'd been given every chance.
Every bloody chance.
I can still see him sitting there at his desk, me standing in front, yelling at me how lucky I was, how I'd been given everything, was this all I could do with it.
Telling me all I'd done, everything I'd told you.
Making out it was all so serious, instead of a few smokes with other kids and a little shop-lifting to pay for it.
CATHERINE I didn't know he was going to do that.
He didn't tell me, I asked him to help.
ROBBIE Well, you made a mistake, didn't you.
D'you know what happened after that, at my splendid home as you called it?
CATHERINE No, Robbie, I don't.
ROBBIE My father, well, my so-called father, wanted to throw me out too.
It was as if I owed him financially for everything he'd given me, he'd drawn up a sort of balance sheet, setting adoption against the chances he'd given me; because he'd taken me on I owed him.
CATHERINE Didn't you?
ROBBIE Did I ever ask him to?
D'you know what it was like, really like?
Oh, they were very kind, they bought me all the right things, nice toys, I agree, but always there was this feeling, well, obligation, they gave me things but something was always expected in return.
Before they gave me a bike I had to earn it, I had to work in the garden.
Everything had a value, I had to do these jobs round the house, bring in the logs, clean the car.
They had people to do that for them half the time, there was no need for it, but it was as if I had to earn my keep, I had to repay what they'd done for me, with the people that worked there laughing at me behind my back, wondering where I'd come from, thinking maybe I was no better than them.
I heard them in the kitchen once, Mrs Donaldson and old Todd, going on about the sort of kid I was.
CATHERINE Didn't they tell you where you came from?
ROBBIE Not much.
They said they'd lost touch.
CATHERINE It often happens.
People change their names.
ROBBIE What got me was when I went to other folks' houses.
Oh I know some of them didn't have as much as I did.
But their kids weren't expected to work for their love, it wasn't seen as a return for services rendered.
CATHERINE I never knew.
ROBBIE Sometimes when I was washing the car, he had a great big Ford estate, I'd pick up a piece of gravel and just scratch the paint a wee bit.
If you put the gravel under the cloth and wipe the car you get a great mark.
I did that once, quite bad it was, my father was furious, but my mother said I'd been trying and he wasn't to do anything.
CATHERINE I suppose things changed a lot when she died.
You were very quiet that term, different.
I couldn't tell how exactly, except that I found I couldn't teach you so well.
It can make it all worthwhile having someone like you to teach, one of the bright ones.
It's the response that matters, you can show them things the others can't follow.
ROBBIE Expectations.
You always expected results too.
CATHERINE Not more than you were capable of.
ROBBIE They all said that.
CATHERINE It was true.
At least I think it was.
You can't always blame other people for what happens.
I didn't know about your father, about making you work.
ROBBIE I felt like a servant sometimes.
CATHERINE I don't suppose he meant it that way.
ROBBIE When it all happened, when I got thrown out of the school, he said he'd never wanted to adopt anyway, it was my mother's idea, not his, it was to make her happy.
And look what she got, he said.
CATHERINE What good does it do, going over it all.
ROBBIE It's still there, don't you see.
The past doesn't just go away, it's with you, it's part of you.
CATHERINE ‘The past is a foreign country, they do things differently there.’
ROBBIE Oh don't quote at me.
CATHERINE You used to like quoting once.
ROBBIE Aye, I thought I was bloody brilliant.
CATHERINE You still haven't answered my question.
ROBBIE Which one?
CATHERINE Why you tried to frighten me.
ROBBIE Power perhaps.
You used to talk about that, the power that corrupts.
CATHERINE Was that the real reason, just a display of power?
A silly adolescent trick?
ROBBIE I'm not an adolescent for God's sake.
CATHERINE Well don't act like one then.
PAUSE
ROBBIE You haven't changed.
CATHERINE Oh, I have.
When you're blind you can't help it.
You have to rely on other things, other people.
And frightening me isn't as important as you think.
I spend half my day being frightened.
ROBBIE Of what?
CATHERINE Crossing the road, tripping over something, burning myself on the stove, people who take advantage of you, though sometimes being blind protects me too.
Though not from the ones like you.
And where did you learn to open doors like that.
ROBBIE A different kind of school.
CATHERINE Have you been in trouble?
ROBBIE Not a lot.
CATHERINE What was it?
ROBBIE It was after I'd had the row with my father.
The one about not having wanted to adopt me.
CATHERINE They said you'd gone off, but no one knew where.
ROBBIE I went south, like all the others.
Down the golden road, London and the world, life, whatever you like.
Sleeping rough with the crowd.
It was good in a way, no one asked questions, wanted to know who you were.
as if we were all adopted, no one belonged anywhere.
But when the winter came I couldn't take it, I came back.
I didn't go home, I stayed in Glasgow.
CATHERINE You could have come here if you needed help.
ROBBIE I wanted to stay away.
Keep up the break.
CATHERINE So what happened?
ROBBIE I got conned.
Someone starting a business up, selling double glazing.
A great guy he was, O'Connell, said I was to get the deposits, the orders, and pass them on to him.
He was, what did he call it, the distribution manager, he contacted the factory.
CATHERINE And?
ROBBIE There wasn't any factory.
He cleared out with the deposits after a few weeks.
I wasn't the only one, but most of the others got out faster.
And one of the people I'd taken an order from, they started pushing.
It was fraud, they said.
But my father heard about it, he bailed me out, got a lawyer, and they dismissed the case in the end because I'd never been paid.
I asked him why he bothered to help.
He said he didn't want the family name in disrepute, it wasn't good for business.
I said I didn't want his name any more, I'd use my own one.
He said it was about time.
PAUSE D'you not want to know what it is?
Or do you know already?
CATHERINE How could I?
What is it then, if you're so keen to tell me?
ROBBIE Gray.
CATHERINE It's a very common name.
ROBBIE Aye, it is, isn't it.
CATHERINE Is that why you came?
ROBBIE There was something else he said, about not having to look far to find out about my mother and everything.
And that started me thinking.
I've had plenty of time to work it all out, there's not much else for me to do.
I thought of all the people called Gray that I knew, not many really for such a common name.
I thought of all the possibilities, and it seemed to me it was there all the time, but I hadn't seen it.
CATHERINE I can see why you wanted to hurt.
ROBBIE You can't, you know.
Oh you can say you understand, you feel sympathetic, make all the right sounds, but you can't know, there's no way, not the sense of not belonging, of being in a group but always outside it, always different.
You can't know that any more than I can ever know what it's like giving birth to a child.
It's something you have inside you, something you breathe in and out, a different skin maybe.
I used to go to these houses with all the other kids, and you could hear the parents, someone would say, but he's not very like his father, and then they'd all explain in voices you could hear a mile away, and I would get funny looks  from all the rest.
CATHERINE I'm not your mother, you know.
ROBBIE It's not you?
CATHERINE No, I would like to have been, I always wanted to have a child but I never did.
ROBBIE I was so sure.
I don't see who else it could be.
You took an interest, I felt that, that's why it would all have made sense.
I could talk to you the way I couldn't talk to anyone else.
The things I wrote were for you.
Though I couldn't understand you not having said anything, knowing who I was.
That did seem impossible.
CATHERINE If you wanted to, you could find out, I'm sure.
They're supposed to keep records.
ROBBIE I tried, but I didn't get far.
They said there'd been a fire, some of the files had gone missing years back.
CATHERINE There are places that would find out for you.
ROBBIE I stopped trying, I was afraid they wouldn't want to know.
Did you never have someone you might have married?
CATHERINE I was engaged once, a long time ago.
ROBBIE What happened?
CATHERINE He broke it off.
Or at least I did, he became more interested in someone else.
ROBBIE Was that the only time?
CATHERINE It seemed like it.
It was my sister he went off with.
ROBBIE They got married?
CATHERINE No, they didn't.
Oh it was a fair scandal in our village, I can tell you.
A lot of people were quite happy about it, they reckoned we thought too much of ourselves, all that education they said, and look what comes of it.
The two of them spent a while together, in a flat in Glasgow, but they didn't marry.
She said she wanted to be free, to finish her training, she was afraid of being tied down.
ROBBIE Your own sister.
CATHERINE I sometimes wonder if that's why it happened.
We never were that close anyway, I suppose I was the favourite too.
I'd got to college, done well.
She wanted to paint, my father didn't like the idea.
He made things difficult for her in a way he hadn't done with me.
ROBBIE So she took him from you.
CATHERINE Yes.
ROBBIE And you just went on teaching.
CATHERINE What else could I do?
ROBBIE I had it all worked out, didn't I. Wrong again.
CATHERINE Not entirely.
You're not my child, Robbie, you're Janet's.
ROBBIE Your sister's?
CATHERINE That's right.
ROBBIE But why did you never say?
CATHERINE I wasn't sure at first.
I knew that she'd decided to have the child adopted, but then I wasn't involved.
My father didn't want anything to do with her.
I didn't know the surname of the people who'd taken you, only your first name, Robbie, and so when you turned up in school I thought nothing of it.
It was only as you grew older I began to wonder.
ROBBIE Why?
CATHERINE The likeness to my sister.
You can't mistake it, it's there in the eyes, the way one is lower than the other, just a little.
I noticed it first in a school photo, when I looked along the rows, she was there, only it wasn't, it was a boy called Robbie Cullen.
A photo showed the resemblance more clearly.
I wasn't sure, but it made me think.
And when I saw her again I asked her about what had happened, the name of the family, just offhand.
She talked about it a little, wondering what had happened to you, feeling it was better not to interfere, so I didn't tell her I'd found you.
ROBBIE Is she still alive?
CATHERINE No, she died a few years ago.
In Canada.
She married someone else, went to live out there.
ROBBIE I could maybe have seen her if you'd said.
CATHERINE I wasn't certain for a while.
And she had another family by then.
ROBBIE You still could have said something.
CATHERINE What good would it have done?
She was living miles away, there wasn't much she could do.
I don't think she'd ever told Gordon about you either.
ROBBIE Gordon?
CATHERINE Her husband.
Not your father.
ROBBIE What happened to my father?
CATHERINE I don't suppose he ever knew.
They broke up before she knew she was pregnant.
I never heard any more about him.
ROBBIE So you're my aunt then.
CATHERINE Yes.
Robbie, if you go over to the drawer, look, the top one on the left, there are some photos, there should be one of Janet.
ROBBIE D'you remember which?
CATHERINE I think there's one with a girl standing in front of a gate, with a collie beside her.
PAUSE Have you got it.
ROBBIE Yes.
CATHERINE It was because of her I went to the head that time at the school.
I was afraid.
ROBBIE Of what?
CATHERINE That you would be like my sister, not caring any more.
I thought if someone brought you to your senses, before it was too late, you'd have a chance, instead of throwing yourself into any trouble that came along.
I didn't mean it to go the way it did.
ROBBIE You gave me away.
CATHERINE Robbie, don't you realise how much I loved you?
Oh, I built whole  fantasies round you, I imagined what it would be like to have a child, to have had you as my son.
I felt I could pretend that you were, it was a secret I had, I almost told you once or twice, but I thought that it might spoil things, that…
ROBBIE That what?
CATHERINE That you might want to see Janet.
I couldn't understand how she could give you up, don't you see?
I wouldn't have done, I couldn't.
ROBBIE Just my luck it was her, and not you.
There was another reason I came today.
Oh I wanted to find out, but that wasn't all.
I went to see my father last night.
My adopted father.
I was going to ask him for money, there's a business I could buy my way into, an honest one this time, I've checked it out.
A magazine, a sort of diary of what's happening locally, it makes its money by advertising.
But he wouldn't believe I really wanted to do it, called me a drop-out.
Said he'd bailed me out once and he wouldn't do so again, I could make my own way.
CATHERINE I could try talking to him, if you like.
ROBBIE It wouldn't do any good.
I don't understand though.
I mean, my mother left money for me, it's in a trust, it gives me something, but he won't let me touch the rest of it or set up in anything, he's a trustee.
It's, well, enough to get by on, but not much more, not enough to start something.
CATHERINE Did you come for money then?
ROBBIE I thought you owed me something.
CATHERINE You set a valuation on things too, do you?
ROBBIE It's the way I was brought up.
PAUSE I thought I knew at last who you were, why you liked me at school, why you took the trouble to read those poems I'd written.
CATHERINE I remember those.
ROBBIE I've still got some of them.
But I could set up this magazine, I was good at that sort of thing.
CATHERINE D'you really need your father to help you?
ROBBIE I'll need some cash, a year's rent for the office, things like that.
I was going to…
CATHERINE What?
ROBBIE To see if you had anything, if you could have lent me something.
But hearing that you were blind, I couldn't ask, it seemed all wrong.
I was angry with, well, with what I thought about you keeping it all secret from me, I was maybe going to take something, I thought of threatening you.
CATHERINE You know what I thought when you first came in?
That someone was going to kill me.
I've never felt hostility like that before, there was violence everywhere, I could smell it like something crawling out of the ground, it was like having second sight, the sense that something terrible was going to happen and there was nothing you could do to stop it.
If you wanted to frighten me, Jamie, you succeeded.
You're like your mother in some ways, she didn't care who she hurt, just as long as she got what she wanted.
ROBBIE Did you hate her that much?
CATHERINE What do you think?
She took the man I loved, the child I might have had, and didn't even keep it.
D'you think you're the only one in the world with an excuse for hatred?
Oh God, Robbie, you've got it wrong.
There are so many others who have good reasons but who don't hate like you do, who don't keep it up, who can forget, do something else, or even use it to achieve something.
Why can't you do that, instead of being so…so destructive.
ROBBIE Is that what you think of me?
CATHERINE D'you remember what you said once.
That you were going to write, that you would be good at it, you'd not be one of the ones who never made it, oh you had all the fine phrases, all the dreams.
And what happened, they didn't add up?
D'you blame your father for making you soft by giving you an allowance?
Is that why you hate him, because you're  still dependent on him.
If that's the way of it, why don't you leave the money, do something else, live like the rest and find out what it's off really like.
D'you think I'm well off, is that why I live in this flat, on this estate where no one talks to you because they're afraid and people like you can come bursting in any hour of the day or night because the place is so badly built the locks don't fit the doors anyway.
You don't know what life really is, do you?
You think you've been hurt, and yes, you have, but you're still better off than the ones who had to spend their time in institutions, you still had somewhere to go, didn't you.
What do you want, the love that should have come with it?
Maybe it wasn't easy for them to love you Robbie, knowing that you weren't their own.
Your father did the right thing by you didn't he, he helped you over the court case.
What  happened to all the dreams?
I had hopes of you one time, I wouldn't mind if you hadn't made a success of it, but for God's sake at least try…
PAUSE What are you doing?
Are you laughing?
ROBBIE Aye, at you.
You let off like that once before, d'you remember.
All about how terrible we'd been to one of the new teachers, how you could understand some of the other classes doing that, but not us, and you banged the desk so hard all the books fell off and we fell about laughing, and you had to laugh too, you couldn't keep a straight face.
CATHERINE You haven't changed.
ROBBIE Neither have you.
CATHERINE For heaven's sake go and make some tea or something, I can't bear people standing about doing nothing.
ROBBIE You were right, you know, about the hostility.
CATHERINE And now?
ROBBIE It's gone.
After that row with my father, I felt I'd been turned down by them all.
CATHERINE Self-pity'll get you nowhere.
ROBBIE Don't go on.
CATHERINE And threatening me wouldn't have helped.
ROBBIE I know that.
That's why I stopped.
Once I realised you really were blind.
Oh, they'd told me, but until I saw you I couldn't believe it.
CATHERINE Was that what made the difference?
It seems an odd thing to be grateful for.
ROBBIE I couldn't have done anything anyway.
CATHERINE Blood is thicker than water?
ROBBIE Maybe it is.
How did you get like that?
CATHERINE Oh it was daft really.
I was out at a friend's house, we were opening a bottle of beer, the top had jammed, and I stuck it in the heel of the door to get the top off, and it exploded, I suppose it was too shaken up with everyone handling it.
And the glass went in my eyes.
ROBBIE I didn't hear for a while.
CATHERINE I was in hospital for a bit.
And then there were endless visits.
They thought one eye might be all right.
I still get a slight sense of light and darkness, but that's all.
ROBBIE Take off your glasses.
CATHERINE Why?
ROBBIE Just do it.
There, that's better.
You look like the person you were.
CATHERINE I'm still that.
Are you?
ROBBIE That's a bad question.
CATHERINE What are you going to do about the money?
ROBBIE See the bank probably.
After that, I don't know.
CATHERINE Couldn't you raise it somewhere else?
ROBBIE Maybe.
If I used my father's name.
CATHERINE You'll have to make up your mind, Robbie, whether you're Robbie Gray or Robbie Cullen.
ROBBIE I'm both, don't you see.
Or neither.
CATHERINE If you give up that easy you're not a Gray anyway.
ROBBIE Thanks.
CATHERINE (ELABORATELY CASUAL) You could stay here if you like, if you don't want to go home.
ROBBIE After what's happened?
CATHERINE It doesn't alter facts.
You're my nephew, aren't you.
There's no one else, except Janet's family and they're all in Canada.
Why don't you come here for a while.
ROBBIE It wouldn't work.
CATHERINE I don't see why not.
I have a little money saved, perhaps it would help you get started.
It wouldn't be enough, mind.
ROBBIE I couldn't take it.
CATHERINE Why not?
ROBBIE It would be a change of ownership.
CATHERINE What do you mean?
ROBBIE After what you said, about not being dependent on my father.
If I came here, took your money, I would be dependent on you.
CATHERINE That's not true.
It would just be a business arrangement.
ROBBIE It is true, thought, isn't it?
I don't want that.
I need to get away.
Like you said, I need to know if I'm Robbie Gray or Robbie Cullen.
CATHERINE You're a Gray, I'm sure of it.
ROBBIE Perhaps.
PAUSE Look, I'll have to be going now anyway.
CATHERINE Where to?
And won't you wait, have that cup of tea or something?
ROBBIE I can stay where I am now, with a friend in Glasgow, he won't mind.
Don't worry, I'll be all right.
And I'll be back too, now I know who you are.
CATHERINE You will come?
ROBBIE Of course.
CATHERINE Don't go yet, there's all kinds of things we have to talk about, there's lots of time.
ROBBIE I couldn't cope with it all in one day.
I'll be back, I promise.
Now, goodbye.
CATHERINE Mind and ring the bell next time!
ROBBIE (FROM THE DOOR) I'll do that.
(DOOR CLOSES)
CATHERINE Oh, why do you have to go, just when I've found you again.
SHE MOVES ROUND THE ROOM What's this then?
All smooth and shiny, oh, the photos.
Janet, where are you, Janet.
SOUNDS OF TEARING PAPER That's done with you Janet Gray.
You never deserved him anyway.
If it was your picture I've torn up.
Maybe he took it with him, maybe you're still there.
Oh Robbie, she did nothing for you, nothing at all.
I could share things with you, I could, you know, the dreams, the ideas, you were one of the people who understood what I was talking about.
We could do it again, I could be someone else with you there, it would be like seeing inside my head, a way out of the dark.
Robbie, don't be long, will you