

Markets
Introduction
Rosalind Levačić
The crucial feature of the market as a coordination device is that it involves voluntary exchange of goods and services between two parties at a known price.
Through a complex set of such exchanges the economic activities of people who are widely dispersed and who are entirely unaware of each other 's existence can be coordinated.
Price serves as the key signal in this coordination.
A high price relative to the costs of production of a good means large profits, which entice producers to raise output and so satisfy consumers' wants.
Similarly, a fall in demand by consumers is signalled by price falling relative to production costs and gives rise to losses for producers which may well lead to factory closures and job losses.
The evolution of increasingly complex forms of market coordination has been fundamental to the economic development of capitalist economies and, through international trade, to sufficient economic integration to create the notion of a world economy.
Conceptualizing the nature and significance of markets has been a key element in economic and political thought since Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations, published in 1776.
By the end of the nineteenth century, neo-classical theory of how price is determined through the interaction of demand and supply was formulated by Alfred Marshall in his Principles of Economics.
The section on markets opens with extracts from this classic work (Chapter 1).
The characteristic feature of neo-classical theory is its analytical device of equilibrium — a state of affairs in which all participants in the market cannot make themselves better off by changing the quantities of goods and services they wish to trade at the prevailing prices.
The equilibrium price is the price at which demand and supply are the same and so there is perfect coordination of the wishes of purchasers and sellers.
Neo-classical economists have been much preoccupied with exploring the conditions under which market coordination leads to the ‘best’ or ‘socially optimal’allocation of resources.
By the allocation of resources is meant the kinds  and quantities of goods produced, the production methods used and the distribution of income to individuals to enable them to consume output.
Perfect competition, a market structure in which there are so many buyers and sellers that no one of them individually can affect price, provides the theoretical conditions under which the market will allocate resources optimally.
Since perfect competition does not exist in practice — at best it is approximated in some markets — the stringent conditions for efficient resource allocation by the market are not met.
In this event there is said to be market failure.
Markets fail to allocate or coordinate efficiently when competition is not perfect because there are few enough sellers or buyers, or both, to affect price by the amount they trade.
An additional source of market failure is externalities.
These are costs or benefits which are not reflected in market prices, such as pollution costs.
Keynes' work was directed at yet another source of market failure — inadequate information available to market traders, in particular firms and workers, so that the market cannot achieve the equilibrium wage rate at which there would be full employment.
Quite apart from market failure, another reason for rejecting unregulated market coordination is the inequality of social outcomes it produces.
Levačić (Chapter 2) provides an overview and summary of the market failure and equity issues in the evaluation of market coordination.
While Levačić deals with criticisms of market coordination mainly from a neo-classical perspective, Breitenbach et al.
(Chapter 3) provide a succinct radical critique of markets together with advocating socialist planning as an alternative.
The neo-classical view of how markets work has been increasingly challenged by the Austrian school, whose approach is explained by Krizner (Chapter 4).
Austrians are highly critical of neo-classical theory for its static treatment of markets and its assumption of perfect information; these assume away the very factors that explain how markets work and why market coordination is more efficient than the alternative of regulation and planning.
Austrians emphasize that market coordination is a dynamic process in which entrepreneurship, or the ability to seek out and act upon opportunities for beneficial exchange, plays a crucial role.
Because they reject static analysis and consider the market structure of perfect competition irrelevant, Austrians strongly favour market coordination and are highly critical of government regulation of markets.
Austrians view markets as a spontaneous social order that arises naturally to provide for beneficial exchanges.
A key issue is what factors determine which mode of coordination is the most appropriate for particular economic arrangements.
The question of why markets are used to coordinate some activities while others are coordinated within firms, often hierarchically, has now become of central interest in much of the work on the economics of firms and public sector agencies.
A survey of this important development in our understanding  of the interrelationships of market and hierarchical coordination is provided in Chapter 5 by McGuinness.
As a broad generalization, the half-century since the end of the Second World War, has witnessed the gradual retreat of state hierarchical coordination in favour of greater elements of market coordination.
The closer integration of countries' economies through increasing trade, fostered by the gradual removal of trade barriers, has been one of the most significant developments of the postwar period.
The creation and expansion of the European Community is a major element of this economic integration.
The EC is currently attempting to achieve greater economic integration with the creation of the Single European market.
This development is discussed by Swann in Chapter 6.
Another area where there has been an advance of market coordination in the 1980s is the public sector.
Again these changes have been in response to legislation and have taken a number of forms.
One is contracting out to private sector firms the production of goods and services which the state provides free or at subsidized prices to consumers.
Another development is the creation of what is known as an internal market for the production and delivery of certain collectively provided services such as health, education and community care.
An internal market is created by splitting up the service agency into buyers and sellers, who then trade on a highly regulated market.
Provision to the ultimate client remains largely free.
In the late 1980s the Conservative government legislated for the introduction of internal markets in the public sector, notably in community care, health and education.
Mullen (Chapter 7) analyses the concept of the internal market and its application to the NHS.
The internal market is also used in the private sector as an alternative to hierarchy as a mode of internal coordination within the firm.
It is suited to large multi-divisional firms producing a wide range of products and/or operating across several countries.
Taken together, the chapters in this section show how different explanations of how markets work lead to different evaluations of the relative advantages and disadvantages of markets.
But whichever approach one adopts, market coordination has characteristics which differentiate it from hierarchies and networks.
It is a decentralized coordinating device, in contrast to hierarchy.
Its defining relationship is exchange motivated by individual self-interest, with prices crucial in signalling information, to which participants respond.
However, it is important to appreciate that market coordination could not function in the absence of the other modes of coordination.
It requires collective agreement in the form of government to define the property rights that are the objects of exchange and to enforce contract through the legal system.
But trust is also an important ingredient of market relationships.
If exchange relationships were based totally on unscrupulous self-interested behaviour, the resulting distrust and the cost of legal action to enforce contracts would render market coordination much less efficient than it is in the presence of trust built up through networks and embedded social expectations that contracts will be honoured.
On markets
Alfred Marshall
[…]
When demand and supply are spoken of in relation to one another, it is of course necessary that the markets to which they refer should be the same.
As Cournot says, ‘Economists understand by the term Market, not any particular market place in which things are bought and sold, but the whole of any region in which buyers and sellers are in such free intercourse with one another that the prices of the same goods tend to equality easily and quickly.’
Or again as Jevons says ‘Originally a market was a public place in a town where provisions and other objects were exposed for sale; but the word has been generalized, so as to mean any body of persons who are in intimate business relations and carry on extensive transactions in any commodity.
A great city may contain as many markets as there are important branches of trade, and these markets may or may not be localized.
The central point of a market is the public exchange, mart or auction rooms, where the traders agree to meet and transact business.
In London the Stock Market, the Corn Market, the Coal Market, the Sugar Market, and many others are distinctly localized; in Manchester the Cotton Market, the Cotton Waste Market, and others.
But this distinction of locality is not necessary.
The traders may be spread over a whole town, or region of country, and yet make a market, if they are, by means of fairs, meetings, published price lists, the post-office or otherwise, in close communication with each other.’
Thus the more nearly perfect a market is, the stronger is the tendency for the same price to be paid for the same thing at the same time in all parts of the market: but of course if the market is large, allowance must be made for the expense of delivering the goods to different purchasers; each of whom must be supposed to pay in addition to the market price a special charge on account of delivery.
Temporary equilibrium of demand and supply
Let us then turn to the ordinary dealings of modern life; and take an illustration from a corn-market in a country town, and let us assume for  the sake of simplicity that all the corn in the market is of the same quality.
The amount which each farmer or other seller offers for sale at any price is governed by his own need for money in hand, and by his calculation of the present and future conditions of the market with which he is connected.
There are some prices which no seller would accept, some which no one would refuse.
There are other intermediate prices which would be accepted for larger or smaller amounts by many or all of the sellers.
Everyone will try to guess the state of the market and to govern his actions accordingly.
Let us suppose that in fact there are not more than 600 quarters, the holders of which are willing to accept as low a price as 35s.; but that holders of another hundred would be tempted by 36s.; and holders of yet another three hundred by 37s.
Let us suppose also that a price of 37s. would tempt buyers for only 600 quarters; while another hundred could be sold at 36s., and yet another two hundred at 35s.
These facts may be put out in a table thus:
Of course some of those who are really willing to take 36s. rather than leave the market without selling, will not show at once that they are ready to accept that price.
And in like manner buyers will fence, and pretend to be less eager than they really are.
So the price may be tossed hither and thither like a shuttlecock, as one side or the other gets the better in the ‘higgling and bargaining’ of the market.
But unless they are unequally matched; unless, for instance, one side is very simple or unfortunate in failing to gauge the strength of the other side, the price is likely to be never very far from 36s.; and it is nearly sure to be pretty close to 36s. at the end of market.
For if a holder thinks that the buyers will really be able to get at 36s. all that they care to take at that price, he will be unwilling to let slip past him any offer that is well above that price.
Buyers on their part will make similar calculations; and if at any time the price should rise considerably above 36s. they will argue that the supply will be much greater than the demand at that price: therefore even those of them who would rather pay that price than go unserved, wait; and by waiting they help to bring the price down.
On the other hand, when the price is much below 36s., even those sellers who would rather take the price than leave the market with their corn unsold, will argue that at that price the demand will be in excess of the supply: so they will wait, and by waiting help to bring the price up.
The price of 36s. has thus some claim to be called the true equilibrium price: because if it were fixed on at the beginning, and adhered to throughout, it would exactly equate demand and supply (i.e. the amount which buyers were willing to purchase at that price would be just equal  to that for which sellers were willing to take that price); and because every dealer who has a perfect knowledge of the circumstances of the market expects that price to be established.
If he sees the price differing much from 36s. he expects that a change will come before long, and by anticipating it he helps it to come quickly.[…]
Equilibrium of normal demand and supply
We have next to inquire what causes govern supply prices, that is prices which dealers are willing to accept for different amounts.
Above we looked at the affairs of only a single day; and supposed the stocks offered for sale to be already in existence.
But of course these stocks are dependent on the amount of wheat sown in the preceding year; and that, in its turn was largely influenced by the farmers' guesses as to the price which they would get for it in this year.
This is the point at which we have to work [here].
Even in the corn-exchange of a country town on a market-day the equilibrium price is affected by calculations of the future relations of production and consumption; while in the leading corn-markets of America and Europe dealings for future delivery already predominate and are rapidly weaving into one web all the leading threads of trade in corn throughout the whole world.
Some of these dealings in ‘futures’ are but incidents in speculative manoeuvres; but in the main they are governed by calculations of the world's consumption on the one hand, and of the existing stocks and coming harvests in the Northern and Southern hemispheres on the other.
Dealers take account of the areas sown with each kind of grain, of the forwardness and weight of the crops, of the supply of things which can be used as substitutes for grain, and of the things for which grain can be used as a substitute.
Thus, when buying or selling barley, they take account of the supplies of such things as sugar, which can be used as substitutes for it in brewing, and again of all the various feeding stuffs, a scarcity of which might raise the value of barley for consumption on the farm.
If it is thought that the growers of any kind of grain in any part of the world have been losing money, and are likely to sow a smaller area for a future  harvest;it is argued that prices are likely to rise as soon as that harvest comes into sight, and its shortness is manifest to all.
Anticipations of that rise exercise an influence on present sales for future delivery, and that in its turn influences cash prices; so that these prices are indirectly affected by estimates of the expense of producing further supplies.
But in this…chapter we are specially concerned with movements of prices ranging over still longer periods than those for which the most farsighted dealers in futures generally make their reckoning: we have to consider the volume of production adjusting itself to the conditions of the market, and the normal price being thus determined at the position of stable equilibrium of normal demand and normal supply.
In this discussion we shall have to make frequent use of the terms cost and expenses of production; and some provisional account of them must be given before proceeding further.
We may revert to the analogy between the supply price and the demand price of a commodity.
Assuming for the moment that the efficiency of production depends solely upon the exertions of the workers, we saw that ‘the price required to call forth the exertion necessary for producing any given amount of a commodity may be called the supply price for that amount, with reference of course to a given unit of time’.
But now we have to take account of the fact that the production of a commodity generally requires many different kinds of labour and the use of capital in many forms.
The exertions of all the different kinds of labour that are directly or indirectly involved in making it; together with the abstinences or rather the waitings required for saving the capital used in making it: all these efforts and sacrifices together will be called the real cost of production of the commodity.
The sums of money that have to be paid for these efforts and sacrifices will be called either its money cost of production, or, for shortness, its expenses of production; they are the prices which have to be paid in order to call forth an adequate supply of the efforts and waitings that are required for making it; or, in other words, they are its supply price.
The analysis of the expenses of production of a commodity might be carried backward to any length; but it is seldom worth while to go back very far.
It is for instance often sufficient to take the supply price of the different kinds of raw materials used in any manufacture as ultimate facts, without analysing these supply prices into the several elements of which they are composed; otherwise indeed the analysis would never end.
We may then arrange the things that are required for making a commodity into whatever groups are convenient, and call them its factors of production.
Its expenses of production when any given amount of it is produced are thus the supply prices of the corresponding quantities of its factors of production.
And the sum of these is the supply price of that amount of the commodity.[…]
In calculating the expenses of production of a commodity we must take account of the fact that changes in the amounts produced are likely, even when there is no new invention, to be accompanied by changes in the relative quantities of its several factors of production.
For instance, when the scale of production increases, horse or steam power is likely to be substituted for manual labour; materials are likely to be brought from a greater distance and in greater quantities, thus increasing those expenses of production which correspond to the work of carriers, middlemen and traders of all kinds.
As far as the knowledge and business enterprise of the producers reach, they in each case choose those factors of production which are best for their purpose, the sum of the supply prices of those factors which are used is, as a rule, less than the sum of the supply prices of any other set of  factors which could be substituted for them; and whenever it appears to the producers that this is not the case, they will, as a rule, set to work to substitute the less expensive method.
And further on we shall see how in a somewhat similar way society substitutes one undertaker for another who is less efficient in proportion to his charges.
We may call this, for convenience of reference, the principle of substitution.
The applications of this principle extend over almost every field of economic inquiry.
The position then is this: we are investigating the equilibrium of normal demand and normal supply in their most general form; we are neglecting those features which are special to particular parts of economic science, and are confining our attention to those broad relations which are common to nearly the whole of it.
Thus we assume that the forces of demand and supply have free play; that there is no close combination among dealers on either side, but each acts for himself, and there is much free competition; that is, buyers generally compete freely with buyers, and sellers compete freely with sellers.
But though everyone acts for himself, his knowledge of what others are doing is supposed to be generally sufficient to prevent him from taking a lower or paying a higher price than others are doing.
This is assumed provisionally to be true both of finished goods and of their factors of production, of the hire of labour and of the borrowing of capital.
We have already inquired to some extent, and we shall have to inquire further, how far these assumptions are in accordance with the actual facts of life.
But meanwhile this is the supposition on which we proceed; we assume that there is only one price in the market at one and the same time; it being understood that separate allowance is made, when necessary, for differences in the expense of delivering goods to dealers in different parts of the market; including allowance for the special expenses of retailing, if it is a retail market.
In such a market there is a demand price for each amount of the commodity, that is, a price at which each particular amount of the commodity can find purchasers in a day or week or year.
The circumstances which govern this price for any given amount of the commodity vary in character from one problem to another; but in every case the more of a thing is offered for sale in a market the lower is the price at which it will find purchasers; or in other words, the demand price for each bushel or yard diminishes with every increase in the amount offered.
The unit of time may be chosen according to the circumstances of each particular problem: it may be a day, a month, a year, or even a generation: but in every case it must be short relative to the period of the market under discussion.
It is to be assumed that the general circumstances of the market remain unchanged throughout this period; that there is, for instance, no change in fashion or taste, no new substitute which might affect the demand, no new invention to disturb the supply.
The conditions of normal supply are less definite.
[…]They will be found to vary in detail with the length of the period of time to which the  investigation refers; chiefly because both the material capital of machinery and other business plant, and the immaterial capital of business skill and ability and organization, are of slow growth and slow decay .
Let us call to mind the ‘representative firm’, whose economies of production, internal and external, are dependent on the aggregate volume of production of the commodity that it makes; and, postponing all further study of the nature of this dependence, let us assume that the normal supply price of any amount of that commodity may be taken to be its normal expenses of production (including gross earnings of managements) by that firm.
That is, let us assume that this is the price the expectation of which will just suffice to maintain the existing aggregate amount of production; some firms meanwhile rising and increasing their output and others falling and diminishing theirs; but the aggregate production remaining unchanged.
A price higher than this would increase the growth of the rising firms; and slacken, though it might not arrest, the decay of the falling firms; with the net result of an increase in the aggregate production.
On the other hand, a price lower than this would hasten the decay of the falling firms, and slacken the growth of the rising firms; and on the whole diminish production: and a rise or fall of price would affect in like manner though perhaps not in an equal degree those great joint-stock companies which often stagnate, but seldom die.
To give definiteness to our ideas let us take an illustration from the woollen trade.
Let us suppose that a person well acquainted with the woollen trade sets himself to inquire what would be the normal supply price of a certain number of millions of yards annually of a particular kind of cloth.
He would have to reckon
(i)
the price of the wool, coal, and other materials which would be used up in making it,
(ii)
wear-and-tear and depreciation of the buildings, machinery and other fixed capital,
(iii)
interest and insurance on all the capital
(iv)
the wages of those who work in the factories, and
(v)
the gross earnings of management (including insurance against loss), of those who undertake the risks, who engineer and superintend the working
.
He would of course estimate the supply prices of all these different factors of production of the cloth with reference to the amounts of each of them that would be wanted, and on the supposition that the conditions of supply would be normal; and he would add them all together to find the supply price of the cloth.
Let us suppose a list of supply prices (or a supply schedule) made on a similar plan to that of our list of demand prices: the supply price of each amount of the commodity in a year, or any other unit of time, being written against that amount.
As the flow, or (annual) amount of the commodity increases, the supply price may either increase or diminish; or it may even alternately increase and diminish.
For if nature is offering a sturdy resistance to man's efforts to wring from her a larger supply of raw material, while at that particular stage there is no great room for introducing important new economies into the manufacture, the supply  price will rise; but if the volume of production were greater, it would perhaps be profitable to substitute largely machine work for hand work and steam power for muscular force; and the increase in the volume of production would have diminished the expenses of production of the commodity of our representative firm.[…]
When therefore the amount produced (in a unit of time) is such that the demand price is greater than the supply price, then sellers receive more than is sufficient to make it worth their while to bring goods to market to that amount; and there is at work an active force tending to increase the amount brought forward for sale.
On the other hand, when the amount produced is such that the demand price is less than the supply price, sellers receive less than is sufficient to make it worth their while to bring goods to market on that scale; so that those who were just on the margin of doubt as to whether to go on producing are decided not to do so, and there is an active force at work tending to diminish the amount brought forward for sale.
When the demand price is equal to the supply price, the amount produced has no tendency either to be increased or to be diminished; it is in equilibrium.
When demand and supply are in equilibrium, the amount of the commodity which is being produced in a unit of time may be called the equilibrium-amount, and the price at which it is being sold may be called the equilibrium-price.
Such an equilibrium is stable; that is, the price, if displaced a little from it, will tend to return, as a pendulum oscillates about its lowest point; and it will be found to be a characteristic of stable equilibria that in them the demand price is greater than the supply price for amounts just less than the equilibrium amount, and vice versa .
For when the demand price is greater than the supply price, the amount produced tends to increase.
Therefore, if the demand price is greater than the supply price for amounts just less than an equilibrium amount; then, if the scale of production is temporarily diminished somewhat below that equilibrium amount, it will tend to return; thus the equilibrium is stable for displacements in that direction.
If the demand price is greater than the supply price for amounts just less than the equilibrium amount, it is sure to be less than the supply price for amounts just greater: and therefore, if the scale of production is somewhat increased beyond the equilibrium position, it will tend to return; and the equilibrium will be stable for displacements in that direction also.
When demand and supply are in stable equilibrium, if any accident should move the scale of production from its equilibrium position, there will be instantly brought into play forces tending to push it back to that position; just as, if a stone hanging by a string is displaced from its equilibrium position, the force of gravity will at once tend to bring it back to its equilibrium position.
The movements of the scale of production about its position of equilibrium will be of a somewhat similar kind.[…]
But in real life such oscillations are seldom as rhythmical as those of  a stone hanging freely from a string; the comparison would be more exact if the string were supposed to hang in the troubled waters of a mill-race, whose stream was at one time allowed to flow freely, and at another partially cut off.
Nor are these complexities sufficient to illustrate all the disturbances with which the economist and the merchant alike are forced to concern themselves.
If the person holding the string swings his hand with movements partly rhythmical and partly arbitrary, the illustration will not outrun the difficulties of some very real and practical problems of value.
For indeed the demand and supply schedules do not in practice remain unchanged for a long time together, but are constantly being changed; and every change in them alters the equilibrium amount and the equilibrium price, and thus gives new positions to the centres about which the amount and the price tend to oscillate.[…]
Equilibrium of normal supply and demand […]
[…]
The element of time is a chief cause of those difficulties in economic investigations which make it necessary for man with his limited powers to go step by step; breaking up a complex question, studying one bit at a time, and at last combining his partial solutions into a more or less complete solution of the whole riddle.
In breaking it up, he segregates those disturbing causes, whose wanderings happen to be inconvenient, for the time in a pound called Ceteris Paribus.
The study of some group of tendencies is isolated by the assumption other things being equal: the existence of other tendencies is not denied, but their disturbing effect is neglected for a time.
The more the issue is thus narrowed, the more exactly can it be handled: but also the less closely does it correspond to real life.
Each exact and firm handling of a narrow issue, however, helps towards treating broader issues, in which that narrow issue is contained, more exactly than would otherwise have been possible.
With each step more things can be let out of the pound; exact discussions can be made less abstract, realistic discussions can be made less inexact than was possible at an earlier stage.
Our step towards studying the influences exerted by the element of time on the relations between cost of production and value may well be to consider the famous fiction of the ‘Stationary state’ in which those influences would be but little felt; and to contrast the results which would be found there with those in the modern world.
This state obtains its name from the fact that in it the general conditions of production and consumption, of distribution and exchange remain motionless; but yet it is full of movement; for it is a mode of life.
The average age of the population may be stationary; though each individual is growing up from youth towards his prime, or downwards to old age.
And the same amount of things per head of the population will have been produced in the same ways by the same classes of people for  many generations together; and therefore this supply of the appliances for production will have had full time to be adjusted to the steady demand.
Of course we might assume that in our stationary state every business remained always of the same size, and with the same trade connection.
But we need not go so far as that; it will suffice to suppose that firms rise and fall, but that the ‘representative’ firm remains always of about the same size, as does the representative tree of a virgin forest.[…]
But nothing of this is true in the world in which we live.
Here every economic force is constantly changing its action, under the influence of other forces which are acting around it.
Here changes in the volume of production, in its methods, and in its cost are ever mutually modifying one another; they are always affecting and being affected by the character and the extent of demand.[…]
The stationary state has just been taken to be one in which population is stationary.
But nearly all its distinctive features may be exhibited in a place where population and wealth are both growing, provided they are growing at about the same rate, and there is no scarcity of land: and provided also the methods of production and the conditions of trade change but little; and above all, where the character of man himself is a constant quantity.
For in such a state by far the most important conditions of production and consumption, of exchange and distribution will remain of the same quality, and in the same general relations to one another, though they are all increasing in volume.
This relaxation of the rigid bonds of a purely stationary state brings us one step nearer to the actual conditions of life: and by relaxing them still further we get nearer still.
We thus approach by gradual steps towards the difficult problem of the interaction of countless economic causes.
In the stationary state all the conditions of production and consumption are reduced to rest: but less violent assumptions are made by what is, not quite accurately, called the statical method.
By that method we fix our minds on some central point: we suppose it for the time to be reduced to a stationary state; and we then study in relation to it the forces that affect the things by which it is surrounded, and any tendency there may be to equilibrium of these forces.
A number of these partial studies may lead the way towards a solution of problems too difficult to be grasped at one effort.
We may roughly classify problems connected with fishing industries as those which are affected by very quick changes, such as uncertainties of the weather; or by changes of moderate length, such as the increased demand for fish caused by the scarcity of meat during the year or two following a cattle plague.[…]
Let us then […]suppose a great increase in the general demand for fish, such for instance as might arise from a disease affecting farm stock, by which meat was made a dear and dangerous food for several years together.
We now impound fluctuations due to the weather in ceteris  ceteris paribus, and neglect them provisionally: they are so quick that they speedily obliterate one another , and are therefore not important for problems of this class.
And for the opposite reason we neglect variations in the numbers of those who are brought up as seafaring men for these variations are too slow to produce much effect in the year or two during which the scarcity of meat lasts.
Having impounded these two sets for the time, we give our full attention to such influences as the inducements which good fishing wages will offer to sailors to stay in their fishing homes for a year or two, instead of applying for work on a ship.
We consider what old fishing boats, and even vessels that were not specially made for fishing, can be adapted and sent to fish for a year or two.
The normal price for any given daily supply of fish, which we are now seeking, is the price which will quickly call into the fishing trade capital and labour enough to obtain that supply in a day's fishing of average good fortune; the influence which the price of fish will have upon capital and labour available in the fishing trade being governed by rather narrow causes such as these.
This new level about which the price oscillates during these years of exceptionally great demand, will obviously be higher than before.
Here we see an illustration of the almost universal law that the term Normal being taken to refer to a short period of time an increase in the amount demanded raises the normal supply price.[…]
But if we turn to consider the […]supply price with reference to a long period of time, we shall find that it is governed by a different set of causes, and with different results.
For suppose that the disuse of meat causes a permanent distaste for it, and that an increased demand for fish continues long enough to enable the forces by which its supply is governed to work out their action fully (of course oscillation from day to day and from year to year would continue: but we may leave them on the side).
The source of supply in the sea might perhaps shown signs of exhaustion, and the fishermen might have to resort to more distant coasts and to deeper waters, Nature giving a diminishing return to the increased application of capital and labour of a given order of efficiency.
On the other hand, those might turn out to be right who think that man is responsible for but a very small part of the destruction of fish that is constantly going on; and in that case a boat starting with equally good appliances and an equally efficient crew would be likely to get nearly as good a haul after the increase in the total volume of the fishing trade as before.
In any case the normal cost of equipping a good boat with an efficient crew would certainly not be higher, and probably be a little lower after the trade had settled down to its now increased dimensions than before.
For since fishermen require only trained aptitudes, and not any exceptional natural qualities, their number could be increased in less than a generation to almost any extent that was necessary to meet the demand; while the industries connected with building boats, making nets, etc. being now on a larger scale would be organized more thoroughly and economically.
If therefore the waters of the sea showed no signs of depletion of fish, an  increased supply could be produced at a lower price after a time sufficiently long to enable the normal action of economic causes to work itself out.[…]
Whether the new production for which there appears to be a market be large or small, the general rule will be that unless the price is expected to be very low that portion of the supply which can be most easily produced, with but small prime costs, will be produced: that portion is not likely to be on the margin of production.
As the expectations of price improve, an increased part of the production will yield a considerable surplus above prime costs, and the margin of production will be pushed outwards.
Every increase in the price expected will, as a rule, induce some people who would not otherwise have produced anything, to produce a-little; and those, who have produced something for the lower price, will produce more for the higher price.
2
Markets and government: an overview
Rosalind Levačić
[…]
Markets and government provide different ways in which voluntary exchange takes place.
In the market individuals exchange goods and services at a mutually agreed price, normally using the medium of money.
The political basis of society is also held to rest on voluntary agreement, in the sense that citizens are conceived of entering into an implicit social contract whereby each surrenders the liberty to do whatever he wants and agrees to pay taxes and abide by laws in exchange for the advantages of living in a governed society, which provides him with law and order and, nowadays, a whole range of goods and services.
In a liberal democracy government is held accountable to citizens by means of regular free elections, in which citizens choose between competing parties of politicians.
As a government has to win majority support, the electorate have recurrent opportunities to change the nature of the contract between themselves and the state.
Markets are the arena where the choices of individual economic agents determine allocation and distribution; government is the prime embodiment of collective choice.
How the market allocates
The market serves to bring together buyers and sellers to enable them to engage in mutually advantageous exchanges.
Given that individuals undertake exchange voluntarily, it is presumed that they must thereby be no worse off and that at least one party to the exchange is better off as a result.
This, of course, assumes that individuals have enough information to assess accurately the net advantages of the exchange, and this would include an assessment of the risks associated with the contract.
It is also based on the value judgement that individuals are the best judge of their own welfare.
The efficiency of market allocation is in question if either of these assumptions is judged not to hold.[…].
The competitive market is advocated because it is held to promote efficiency in resource allocation and the liberty of the individual citizen.
Certain individuals also do well out of market distribution.[…]
Efficiency provides one important criterion against which to assess how well markets or government perform their allocative function with respect to different types of goods and services.
If the market does not achieve an efficient allocation of resources there is said to be market failure.
Three main sources of market failure are generally distinguished.
These are externalities, imperfect competition and inadequate information.
Market failure due to externalities
[…
]An externality occurs when the actions of one economic agent affect the welfare of others in a way that is not reflected in market prices.
An external cost arises from coal burning for example because the emission of sulphur dioxide causes air pollution, for which the sufferers receive no compensation.
Coal mining imposes costs on others because of subsidence, but this is not an external cost as British Coal is liable to pay compensation.
The subsidence costs are incurred by British Coal and so are said to be internalized.
Example of external benefits attributed to keeping open existing pits are the preservation of mining communities and the benefits to future generations of having cheaply worked coal seams left to them.
(The problem with the concept of external costs and benefits is that while they undoubtedly exist, almost anything can, with a bit of imagination, be classified as a cost or benefit.)
The social costs of an activity are its private costs — those costs incurred directly by the agent undertaking the activity — plus any external costs associated with it.
Similarly the social benefits of an activity are the private benefits accruing to the agent engaged in the activity plus any external benefits.
Private benefits and costs are reflected in market prices.
For instance, the private costs of providing air travel are indicated by the price of air tickets.
Consumers indicate the extent to which they value air travel by the price they are willing to pay.
But the external costs of air traffic noise to those living and working around airports are not included in the price of air tickets.
If social costs and benefits differ from private costs and benefits, then the market will fail to transmit the correct information about the costs and values attached to goods and services.
The market will undervalue goods that yield social benefits in excess of private benefits and will consequently produce too few of these goods.
Similarly the market overvalues goods which have social costs in excess of private costs.
The price of such goods is less than it would be if producers had to take account of the external costs associated with the production of the good.
Consequently, consumers demand more of the good than if its price reflected all social costs and so too much of the good is produced.
Thus discrepancies between social costs and benefits and private costs and  benefits mean that market allocation is socially inefficient.
The existence of externalities gives government a role in trying to correct for market failure.
There are three main sets of instruments government can use: taxes and subsidies to private firms, regulation and public sector production.
Goods with external costs, such as cigarettes, can be taxed in order to induce consumers to buy less.
Additional output of goods which yield external benefits can be obtained by giving subsidies to private sector firms for producing them.
Or those suffering external costs can be compensated: grants towards double glazing near airports is an example.
Alternatively the government can try to produce the goods in the public sector in socially efficient quantities.
[…]Legal prohibition is an important way of either preventing individuals and firms from creating external costs, or forcing the perpetrators to internalize the cost and so reflect them in market prices.
Planning regulations, pollution controls, speed and weight restrictions on roads, are all methods of reducing external costs.
For example, the proposed EC limits on car exhaust emissions will require more expensive car engines or catalytic converters, so internalizing the cost of air pollution by making motorists pay for preventive action.
But government intervention is not the only way to cope with the problem of socially inefficient resource allocation due to externalities.
Private collective action is possible and does occur.
For instance volunteer groups create external benefits by improving the appearance of the environment, through best-kept village competitions or reclaiming old canals.
Local residents could band together and pay a local firm to reduce air or water pollution.
The justification for government action on efficiency grounds is that the costs of organizing private sector collective action are too great for this to occur in many cases.
Collective goods
A further dimension to the externality problem concerns goods which yield external benefits from which people enjoying them cannot be excluded.
Common examples are national defence, and law and order.
Everybody living in a country obtains the benefits (or disbenefits in the case of pacifists) of national defence and cannot be excluded from them.
Street lighting and roads are another example, for although it is physically possible to exclude users unless they pay a charge, it is prohibitively expensive to do so, except for roads in great demand like motorways and major bridges.
There are other goods which are held in common ownership, such as the air, the sea and common land, which it is difficult to prevent people from using because property rights in them are not assigned to individual owners.
However the benefits of these goods held in common ownership are largely private, like using air to discharge smoke, taking fish from the sea, or grazing animals on common land.
Goods that yield benefits, either external or private, from which it is  difficult or costly to exclude consumers are termed non-excludable, in contrast to goods like food, clothing or housing from which people can be easily excluded unless they pay for them.
So goods which yield either private or external benefits, or some combination of both, are further characterized by whether they are excludable or non-excludable.
Some goods with external benefits, from which it is difficult to exclude people, possess a further characteristic: the consumption of their benefits by one person does not reduce the amount available for others.
This characteristic is known as non-rivalry in consumption.
Defence again has this characteristic since the consumption of the benefits of a national deterrent by one individual does not in general reduce the amount available for others.
The same is true of TV and radio channels.
One person's reception of them does not reduce the ability of others to receive them.
There are many goods which are partly non-rivalrous in consumption.
Roads are one example.
An additional vehicle on a quiet road does not reduce the amount of road space available for others.
On a busy road, though, an extra car adds to congestion and so reduces the benefits other motorists are enjoying.
Parks, golf courses, and concerts can all, up to a point, be consumed by additional users without detracting from the enjoyment of other users.
In contrast, other goods, like food, electricity, the use of a personal computer, are rivalrous in consumption.
Their consumption by one individual reduces the amount available for others.
Goods which are completely rivalrous, by definition, cannot yield external benefits.
Some goods can give private and external benefits.
Education, for example, benefits those who receive it because it enhances their employment prospects or because they enjoy studying, but it is also held to yield external benefits in producing a socialized, literate and informed citizenry.
These external benefits are enjoyed by all and so are non-rivalrous.
So there are two characteristics, excludability and rivalry in consumption, that we can use to classify goods.
This gives the fourfold classification set out in Table 1.
Goods which are rivalrous in consumption and excludable, are called private goods.
Goods which are non-excludable and rivalrous in consumption are termed common goods.
Those which are non-rivalrous in consumption — at least until congestion occurs — and excludable, such as road tunnels, motorways or parks, are called toll goods in Table 1, since it is feasible to charge for them.
Finally, goods which are both non-excludable and non-rivalrous are known as public goods.
It is important to appreciate that goods do not fall neatly into one of the four cells in Table 1.
Rather, excludability/non-excludability and rivalry/non-rivalry in consumption vary along a spectrum.
In fact there are very few goods that are pure public goods; that is, goods that yield benefits from which nobody can be excluded and for which the amount the individual can consume does not diminish as the number of consumers increases.
Take defence, for example: the dispatch of the Task Force to the Falkland Islands in 1982 diminished the Navy's capacity to defend mainland Britain.
Given the few nuclear shelters that   exist in the UK, most people would be excluded from them.
So this aspect of defence is quite close to being a private good as it is excludable and rivalrous, hence some households build their own shelters.
While pure public goods are hard to find, there are many goods with a considerable public goods element: they yield external benefits from which it is costly to exclude people and are, to a degree, non-rivalrous in consumption.
The importance of this taxonomy of goods as private, or having a collective element (this embraces common, public and toll goods) is to determine whether markets will provide an allocatively efficient quantity of each type of good.
In the case of private goods there are no significant external costs or benefits associated with their production and use and hence the market system can be efficient.
In a competitive market the good's price will reflect both the cost of producing it, in terms of foregone alternatives, and its value to consumers.
Hence a competitive market will produce a socially efficient quantity of private goods.
However the market will not provide a sufficient quantity of public goods.
This is because people can obtain the non-excludable benefits of public goods without paying for them.[…]
Because its benefits are non-excludable, anybody providing a public good will find it difficult to get the other beneficiaries to pay for it.
This is known as the free-rider problem.
The social benefits of a public good are the sum total of the benefits enjoyed by all individuals, but because there are many beneficiaries, the benefit to each individual will be quite small.
An individual cannot enlarge his benefit by producing the good and charging others for using it, because of the free-rider problem.
So a private sector agent will only provide a public good if his private benefits exceed the costs of producing the good.
Consequently too little of a public good will be produced by the market.
Collective provision by government can solve the problem as the government has the power to tax everybody in order to finance the provision of public goods.
The nature of public goods explains why defence and law and order were the first areas where government provision became dominant.
It also explains why the bulk of basic research, which provides technical knowledge that is non-rivalrous in use and largely non-excludable, is funded by governments.
However, because of the problems of discovering how much people value public  goods, it is virtually impossible for government to determine the most socially efficient quantity of public goods.
Because toll goods can be made excludable, they may be provided by a variety of private sector organizations, such as profit-maximizing firms or clubs and associations.
Toll bridges, roads and canals were privately provided in the eighteenth century.
Collective provision of services can be organized privately as in the case of golf clubs and motoring associations.
However, collective provision is also provided by government which may charge a zero toll and finance the good out of tax revenues.
This is how roads are funded and charged for in Britain, while in France and in parts of the USA tolls are charged for motorways.
State provision of toll goods is justified on efficiency grounds if exclusion is relatively costly to enforce or too little of the good is consumed because people are excluded from using a good which is non-rivalrous in consumption.
The opposite problem arises with common goods: too much is consumed if there is no collective agreement to desist.
Seas are overfished, pastures overgrazed, wild animals hunted to near extinction, or  smoke released into the atmosphere, because it is not in the interests of one individual to reduce his consumption if others do not.
The benefits of a single individual's restraint are experienced by all users and become negligible private benefits.
The allocative outcome is inefficient because the social costs of depletion and usage exceed the social benefits from the extra consumption.
One solution is to allocate property rights over the resources, so that the cost of the individual's use of them falls only on the individual.
This is possible with land, but not feasible for seas and even less so for the atmosphere.
Users can reach their own collective agreements on usage, but these may be costly to organize and enforce.
Hence there is a role for government collective action to improve the efficiency of resource allocation by negotiating and enforcing regulations regarding the use of common goods.
Examples are controls over the release of pollutants into rivers, seas and the atmosphere and international agreements between governments, as in the case of fishing limits and quotas or nuclear test ban treaties.
Providing collective goods
Government allocation with respect to public and toll goods need not involve public sector production of the goods in question.
There is a considerable variety of ways in which such goods are financed and provided by a combination of private and public sector activity and different practices can be observed around the world.
Government can perform any one of three functions with respect to public and toll goods: arranging for their provision, financing their provision, and undertaking the actual production.
Take broadcasting for example.
Radio and TV waves are public goods in that the reception of signals is non-rivalrous and it is difficult to  exclude consumers once they have reception equipment.
However the use of radio and TV wave frequencies for transmitting programmes from the earth is rivalrous.
So at a minimum government needs to arrange for broadcasting to be undertaken by allocating and enforcing private sector property rights in these frequencies.
In Britain these are allocated administratively to the BBC while independent broadcasters compete for franchises to operate programme channels and pay a levy for their use.
The state also produces broadcasting services via the BBC but does not finance them.
The private sector finances broadcasting either through the BBC TV licence or via advertising on independent TV and radio.
The government tackles the free-rider problem with respect to the financing of BBC services by legal means.
The alternative would be for the government to finance the state provision of broadcasting through general taxation.
Another alternative would be for the state to pay private sector firms to produce TV and radio programmes.
The point is that various combinations of government and private sector organization, finance and production are possible.
From a social efficiency point of view, the methods chosen in any specific instance should be determined by efficiency considerations.
This would mean a bias to methods which give consumers a way of registering their preferences and those which encourage competition amongst suppliers.
Privatization need not mean that the government no longer affects how a good is produced and distributed.
Government can hand over the production of a good to the private sector while still financing it, as with refuse collection or cleaning and maintaining public sector buildings.
Market failure due to imperfect competition
[…
]Markets need to be competitive if they are to allocate resources efficiently.
The degree of competition in a market is an imprecise concept, as it depends on those factors which force firms to take account of the possibility that their business will be lost to rivals if they do not satisfy their customers.
The larger the number of firms already supplying a market and the more difficult it is for them to collude, the more competition there is likely to be.
Competition is also related to the likelihood that new suppliers will enter the market if they perceive profit opportunities because the existing suppliers charge high prices or are x-inefficient and have high costs.
In order for markets to be allocatively efficient, prices must correctly reflect the opportunity costs of goods.
This will not occur if lack of competition enables firms to keep their prices above the lowest attainable costs of production.
There are two ways in which this can occur.
[…]One is that firms with market power will maximize their profits by charging prices in excess of marginal costs.
As a consequence not enough of the good is produced.
As price is in excess of marginal cost, consumers would  value additional units of the product more highly than goods being currently produced with the resources that could be reallocated to the monopolized product.
But rather than extract monopoly profits, firms can enjoy their market power by operating with higher costs so being x -inefficient.
This also leads to higher prices for consumers.
Firms producing and selling output are not the only sources of market or monopoly power.
It can be possessed by other types of seller, or by buyers if a few of them dominate the market.
Trade unions exist in order to increase the market power of labour as otherwise most workers would face competition from other workers offering to work for lower wages or worse conditions.
Many labour markets are now characterized by countervailing market power; there is bilateral bargaining between unions and large firms or employers' organizations.
Nationalization and regulation of natural monopolies
The kinds of measure governments can adopt to combat the problem of allocative inefficiency due to imperfect competition depend for their efficacy on the reasons for the lack of competition.
Some markets are inherently monopolistic because of the nature of the production process.
Industries like gas, electricity, telephone and water supplies are regarded as natural monopolies because duplicating their supply networks is extremely costly.
One solution to the allocative efficiency problem posed by natural monopolies is public ownership, as in Britain in the postwar period.
The main problem with this solution is that a public sector monopoly can be as x-inefficient as a private sector one, and may be more so, as the market sanction of bankruptcy has been removed.
An alternative solution, practised in the USA, is to keep the industries in the private sector but to regulate their performance in terms of such variables as profits, prices and quality of service, via special agencies.
For instance, when the government sold British Telecom to private shareholders in 1984, it set up the Office of Telecommunications as the regulatory agency and limited the permitted rise in telephone charges to 3 per cent below the rate of inflation.
There is another regulatory agency […]for British Gas.
[…]However the problem with regulation, as US experience testifies, is that the regulatory agency can become captured by the political interests of the industry it is regulating and fail to act as the guardian of consumers' interests.
Furthermore, limits on profit rates dull the firm's incentive to reduce costs, as it gets no advantage in the form of higher profits, and so does little to combat x-inefficiency.
Competition policy
If the industry is not a natural monopoly then in order to promote allocative efficiency the appropriate policy for government is to remove barriers to competition in the marketplace.
Left to their own devices, sellers have an  incentive to reduce competition in order to increase prices and profits and diminish uncertainty about the actions of rivals.
Firms can collude to fix prices, to restrict sales outlets, to enforce tie-in sales or refrain from advertising, to mention just some of the restrictive practices by which firms and labour organizations reduce competition between existing sellers and erect barriers to entry from new competition.
Buyers can also collude to strengthen their position vis-a-vis sellers.
Under British and EC law various types of restrictive practice are illegal and firms are kept under surveillance by the Office of Fair Trading and the Competition Directorate of the European Commission.
The Office of Fair Trading can investigate uncompetitive practices, both by individual firms and associations of firms, and put pressure on them to desist, or recommend government to outlaw specific practices.
The […]abandonment of the opticians' monopoly of spectacles is one such instance.
Another form of competition policy is to remove obstacles to competition from foreign firms, by reducing or eliminating import tariffs and quotas, or technical standards and government purchasing contracts which favour domestic firms.
Competition policy is generally restricted to measures applying to firms and the professions, such as solicitors, architects and doctors, and not to measures directed at trade unions.
However legislation regarding the rights and duties of employers and the powers, responsibilities and liabilities of trade unions, greatly affects the degree of competition in labour markets.
For instance[…]minimum wages laws prevent wages from falling due to competition from unemployed workers.
The Thatcher government […]reduced trade union power by limiting closed-shop agreements and making unions liable to civil court actions in specified circumstances, such as secondary picketing.
Widely interpreted, competition policy embraces a great variety of methods by which governments influence the operations of buyers and sellers on all forms of markets.
Nor is government policy in general biased towards increasing competition: it often has the reverse effect because policies are brought in for other reasons than promoting allocative efficiency, as discussed later in the chapter.
Market failure due to inadequate information
The final type of market failure to be considered is that due to the market producing and transmitting insufficient information.
The market participants are unable to undertake all the mutually advantageous exchanges that would be entered into if buyers and sellers possessed the requisite information.
The market therefore does not produce a socially efficient allocation of resources.
Many types of informational failure have been suggested, as this form of market failure has proved a fruitful source for critics of market allocation.
If market allocation is to be efficient, then the buyers and sellers must  have enough information to be able to undertake voluntary exchanges that improve their welfare.
Given that the outcome of market transactions is inevitably uncertain, though some transactions are more uncertain than others, the amount of information required for exchange to be efficient cannot be precisely established, leaving plenty of scope for argument.
Consumer protection laws are justified on efficiency grounds, in order to prevent consumers making unwise decisions because of insufficient knowledge of firms' products.
Products are obliged to meet specified safety standards and firms are required to inform consumers of the conditions attached to the sale of goods.
Similarly, health and safety legislation can be designed to protect workers from agreeing to work in conditions which they do not realize are unsafe.
Some of these regulations may not promote efficiency but be justified on paternalistic grounds: workers are held not to be the best judges of their own interests and so are prevented by law from taking risks they would voluntarily undertake for money.
Market failure due to informational inadequacies provides the underlying theoretical rationale for Keynesian macroeconomic policy as a cure for unemployment.
In Keynesian analysis the labour market fails to clear: the supply of labour remains in excess of the demand for labour because market forces cannot bring about equilibrium.
Because workers are unemployed, their incomes are low and so aggregate demand for goods is depressed.
The market mechanism fails to provide a means whereby workers can signal to firms that they would demand more goods and services if only they could get jobs and so have more money to spend.
Firms decline to take on more labour because the effective demand for their goods is deficient.
So the government can correct for this type of market failure by increasing aggregate demand, either by spending more itself or by getting the private sector to increase its spending, through tax cuts or an expansion in the money supply and lower interest rates.
However critics of Keynesian economics consider that labour markets would clear if government and institutional impediments to greater flexibility were removed.
Another source of informational inadequacy concerns uncertainty about the future.
It is argued that private sector firms are too risk-averse and too concerned with short-term profits.
Consequently they underinvest in long-term projects which take many years before they yield a positive return.
It is further argued that financial markets fail to reflect the collective rate at which society wants to save and invest.
Thus interest rates may be too high and so discourage investment, while what finance there is for investment is channelled into socially inefficient uses.
According to these critics the government should put into effect society's desire to invest more so as to promote growth.
Because of the scale of its command over resources, the government can spread its risks over many projects and so is justified in undertaking more investment in research and development than would occur if left to the private sector.
These arguments have been used to buttress a wide range of government investments, such as Concorde, nuclear reactors, BL vehicles, microelectronics and computers.
This rationalization for state intervention on efficiency grounds presupposes that government can determine the socially desirable rate of investment and innovation, and that it can take a dispassionate, long-term view of these investment possibilities, rather than make short-run responses to the demands of political interests.[…]
Government failure
Although markets fail to achieve the most socially efficient allocation of resources or to distribute welfare according to subjective principles of social justice, there is no automatic guarantee that government action will improve matters, especially when the net effect of uncoordinated policies is taken into account.
Much of this lack of coordination is inevitable, given the problems of acquiring information on the effects of policy measures and the impossibility, in a pluralist democracy, of taking highly centralized decisions over the whole range of state responsibilities.
The concept of government failure mirrors that of market failure and encompasses a number of reasons why government is also unlikely to allocate resources with maximum social efficiency or sometimes to achieve the objective of equitable distribution sought from specific policies.
Information problems
If markets fail to allocate resources efficiently because of the existence of externalities, then the first prerequisite for efficient government intervention is making good the market's informational failures.
To apply the social efficiency criterion the government needs information on social costs and benefits.
Given that the market has failed to produce the information, government decision-makers are faced with the problem of valuing social costs and benefits from evidence other than direct market prices.
[…]The social efficiency decision rule, that the optimal quantity of a good is produced when the amount it adds to social benefits (its marginal social benefit) equals the amount it adds to social costs (its marginal social cost) is difficult to apply.
The best that can be hoped for is that government intervention improves the social efficiency of resource allocation, rather than achieving optimality.
Imperfect competition
It is in the interests of particular groups of buyers and sellers to restrict competition between themselves.
Their ability to do this is highly dependent on specific regulations affecting their markets and on the attitude of government to their uncompetitive practices.
These interests try to persuade government and the general public that the restrictions on  competition in their markets is in the public interest and is worthy of state support.
Many professional associations, for example, ban advertising by their members and impose other restrictions on competition, arguing that this is in the interests of their customers.
Some of these practices are protected by legal sanctions, as was, until recently, the reservation of house conveyancing for solicitors.[…]
There is no general consensus on the beneficial effects of competition on resource allocation in all circumstances.
The legal limitations placed on trade unions and the extent to which particular markets should be protected from foreign competition are two particularly contentious areas.
[…]Government-sanctioned restrictions on competition permeate the economy.
The extent to which they actually promote social efficiency (because of externalities or informational failures of markets) or other social goals is hotly contested.
Certainly for advocates of market allocation, government is a major source of imperfect competition which unjustifiably impedes voluntary exchanges between individuals and contributes to social inefficiency.
Bureaucratic self-interest
How well public sector employees perform in providing the goods and services their customers and clients want depends on the system of incentives and sanctions within which they operate.
An important factor that affects this is the degree of competition from rival suppliers.
As already noted, the absence of strong market pressures on public corporations with monopoly power weakens the incentives to keep costs at their feasible minimum.
X-inefficiency can be even more of a problem in organizations producing non-marketed goods, like health and education, where it is extremely difficult to measure efficiency and where alternative sources of supply are not readily available, except to the affluent.
X-inefficiency can result if bureaucrats pursue their own self-interest, rather than the objectives of the electorate or the politicians, or of the clients being directly served by the organization.
In the absence of markets, the problem is to devise a means whereby state bureaucrats will respond to the preferences of those they are supposed to serve.
A whole range of behaviour is subsumed under the umbrella of bureaucratic self-interest.
Laziness, self-aggrandizement or status-seeking will all lead to the inefficient production of public sector output.
Even more laudable behaviour, such as the pursuit of specific professional goals, can operate against the interests of the clients for whom the service is provided and the taxpayers who finance it.
Doctors' desires to advance specialisms that they find intellectually exciting, university lecturers pursuing research at the expense of their teaching commitments, engineers wishing to develop technologically advanced products such as Concorde, are just a few examples of the kind of professional aspirations that lead to the misallocation of resources from the clients' or taxpayers' point of view.
As public sector managers often benefit in terms of status, pay and conditions from the size of their bureaucracy, they will attempt to produce more of a non-marketed good than its customers would buy if they had to pay a price which reflected the cost of the good.
The pursuit of self-interest by government employees results in allocative inefficiency and the subversion of the social goals that are sought via state collective action.[…]
However, human motivation is complex: people are not entirely driven by the desire for money or to do as little in the job as they can get away with.
Many are attracted to public sector work by the desire to help others.
The adherence to professional standards and the desire to do a job well are motives that induce workers to serve their employers and customers well.
The problem of devising systems of incentives and sanctions that promote good performance from workers and managers is by no means unique to the public sector.
Competitive markets provide one such system and their absence necessitates other institutional devices.
Political interests
Yet another problem in securing efficient resource allocation by means of government, is the influence of political interests on allocative decisions.
[…]
In a pluralist system […]a wide range of political interests influence decision-making.
Political decisions emerge from the interaction of groups who have conflicting objectives as well as mutually advantageous bargains to make with each other.
[…]The decision-makers have no agreed set of objectives or common definition of social welfare.
Pluralist political decision-making also contrasts with decisions taken by non-political units, such as households or firms, where the decision-makers are much more likely to have a common set of objectives and so are able to follow rational decision-making procedures.
Because decision-makers in the political arena have conflicting objectives, policy measures are not chosen with a view to maximizing some conception of social welfare, but emerge as the result of implicit and explicit bargaining between the political interests.
The resulting allocative decisions depend on the relative strengths of the political interests involved, the tactics they employ and on the chance influence of time and place.
So although the pluralist decision-making system is widely supported as a process in which diverse political interests can wield influence, the outcomes of the political bargaining process are frequently allocatively inefficient or fail to promote social justice.[…]
3
Socialism, planning, and the market
Hans Breitenbach, Tom Burden and David Coates
In attempting to specify the features of a viable socialist economy we are not embarking on entirely uncharted water, though there are surprisingly few texts on which to draw, given the size and long history of the Western socialist movements.
[…]The Revolutionary Left since Marx's time has normally been reluctant to specify in any great detail the nature of the society it seeks to create.
It has preferred instead to concentrate the bulk of its intellectual energies on developing a critique of capitalism and the bulk of its political energies on the devising of strategies for its removal.
With these preoccupations, the Left's vision of socialism has often been negative in form: socialism is a society without the private ownership of the means of production because private ownership is a key feature of capitalism; socialism is a society free of private profit, because of the centrality of private profit to a capitalist way of motivating economic life; socialism is a society free of inequalities of class, because capitalism systematically produces just those inequalities; socialism is a society without politics of a class kind because this is the normal form taken by politics under capitalism.
Put this way, the socialist alternative is to be understood as the antithesis of capitalism, but such an understanding is hardly prescriptive of a specific form of social and economic organization.
Socialism in its Eastern European sense has come to be understood as a society whose economy is centrally planned, whose major industrial plant and equipment is state-owned, and where state power is monopolized by a single party.
On that model, the use of the market for the allocation of investment goods, the toleration of any private ownership of the means of production, and the persistence of liberal democratic political institutions and conventions are all seen as features of capitalist societies, not of socialist ones.
Yet it is precisely those features of the capitalist West which social-democratic forms of socialism have been determined to retain as central to their specification of an ideal socialist society.
For socialists of this persuasion, their model society has required little more than the superimposition of a substantial state sector on to societies characterized by markets, private ownership and liberal   democracy.
That state sector has been made up of nationalized industries, and of extensive welfare services provided on the basis of need, and not on the basis of the ability to pay.
This model of socialism has involved some limited changes in economic ownership, but in practice has invariably amounted to little more than state direction of predominantly privately owned economic activity, and the maintenance of some minimum standards of social provision for all.
As both those particular models of socialism have lost credibility, a debate has opened on the possibility of an alternative definition of the socialist goal — one that occupies a space somewhere between regulated capitalism and centrally planned state socialism, and one that finds a new balance of the strengths and weaknesses of planning and the market.
That debate has already generated a number of very sophisticated position-statements, each of which contains a different interplay of the plan and the market.
[…]What we have chosen to do here is to use a report on the general character of the current debate to clarify certain of the key issues that have to be resolved in the design of a socialist economy.
Socialism and markets
The case against markets
The standard Marxist critique of market relationships under capitalism has long been that what Marx called ‘the noisy sphere of exchange’ constitutes an illusory area of equality and freedom, one that helps to stabilize capitalism by obscuring the uneven distribution of power between social classes in the more basic sphere of social production.
Under capitalism the market serves to ‘fetishize commodities’.
When in market exchange under capitalism something is treated as a commodity, whether it is labour or goods, the fact that it appears simply as ‘a thing with a price’ obscures the exploitative social relationships within which it has been produced.
From a Marxist viewpoint, market exchange under capitalism may appear as an area of individual freedom and choice; but in reality the commodities exchanged there constitute an alienated and uncontrolled social force whose existence dominates rather than liberates the lives of those who produce them.
To this rather philosophical critique have then been added arguments about the economic inadequacies of markets.
The use of markets for economic allocation in a capitalist system has been seen to possess the following drawbacks:
1.
Markets only work at the cost of perennial insecurity for producers.
They allow the economically strong to drive out the economically weak, and so generate monopoly power which robs workers and consumers of any effective economic control.
2.
Markets intensify economic inequality and add to the numbers of the poor.
3.
Markets produce unavoidable economic cycles of expansion and contraction.
4.
Markets do not ensure that producers respond to human needs, only to the needs of those who have the necessary purchasing power.
It is argued that markets necessarily coordinate demand and supply ex post rather than ex ante.
In an economic system coordinated solely by markets there is no guarantee that what is produced can be sold.
Individuals act within markets unaware of the cumulative consequences of their individually rational responses to the information at their disposal; and neither historical experience nor theoretical modelling has yet found a way of integrating those individually rational decisions through markets without creating cycles of boom and slump, unemployment and inflation.
Markets are also insensitive to what economists call ‘externalities’.
The only costs that figure automatically in capitalist market exchanges are those private costs of the immediate producers, their costs of raw material, labour and capital.
The real costs of production (which include such things as the environmental damage characteristically associated with the desperate pursuit of profit, the stress to workers of their immersion in the capitalist labour process, and the social deprivation associated with poverty) do not figure in the cost systems to which market exchanges are responsive.
Finally, the case against markets often goes even further, to assert the basic incompatibility of markets and socialism.
The claim here is not just that market coordination is necessarily anarchic.
It is also that, even were it not, the reliance on competition between economic units inevitably generates individual/sectional self-interest, and so reproduces in a socialist economy the individualist attitudes and self-seeking practices characteristic of capitalism.
In this argument, the use of competition to stimulate efficiency, innovation and consumer sensitivity in a socialist economy runs the risk of the effective reappearance of the private ownership of property, and the consequent draining of the socialist content from a market socialist system.
The case for markets
However, not all socialists take a negative view of the market.
The idea of market socialism has appealed to economic reformers in Eastern Europe as a possible way of overcoming glaring problems of bureaucratic inefficiency and worker alienation evident in centrally planned economies.
Many reformers in these states have become concerned with the role of plans and markets in socialist economies, with the way the state and political life should be organized, and with the kinds of property relationships compatible with socialism.
Market socialism has also looked attractive to some socialists in the West, as a possible respecification of  socialism worth struggling for in capitalist countries whose proletariats are now long used to high living standards and extensive consumer choice.
In recent years Western socialists have formulated wide-ranging proposals for socialist economic organization in which markets play a key role.
The general case for markets is a long-established one, built around the following propositions:
1.
Markets necessarily act as a powerful incentive to producers to operate as efficiently as possible in order to survive.
2.
Markets force firms perpetually to develop new products and production processes.
3.
Markets coordinate, without conscious human intervention, the literally millions of individual decisions made in a complex economy by a multiplicity of producers and consumers.
4.
Markets allow individuals greater freedom of choice as producers and consumers than they can experience in any system of central planning.
Many non-socialist supporters of markets argue too that the pursuit of ex ante planning as a substitute for the ex post coordination of economic activity through the market cannot be achieved in a complex society and that its pursuit is actually destructive of very basic individual freedoms.
They insist that planners do not and cannot have the scale and quality of knowledge and foresight to regulate prices and output effectively.
They also argue that the waste of resources associated with the ex post coordination of supply and demand through markets is as nothing when set against the loss of production associated with the weak incentives of a planned economy and when compared to the inefficiency, bungling and corruption of every economic planning bureaucracy yet devised.
Socialist proponents of the use of markets do not suggest that markets can simply be retained, so long as private ownership of the means of production is abolished.
Instead, they generally suggest some restrictions on their scope and some modifications of their operation.
Pro-marketeers of a social democratic type have been prepared to manage markets: restricting the area of their use (keeping them out of such things as health care); moderating their tendency to generate inequality,(by policies of income redistribution); and preserving some of the market's industrial casualties by nationalizing bankrupt firms and industries.
More radical socialists have been prepared to go even further: either insisting that markets operate within a framework of planning, or even proposing that markets themselves be ‘socialized’, by inserting into them new institutions and procedures which will rob them of their tendencies to inequality and producer dominance.
Planning
Very few people on the Left these days advocate centralized and bureaucratized models of economic allocation.
It is generally recognized now  that a totally planned economy is no longer a desirable or viable option for socialists, in either the East or the West.
A centralized planning system in which the centre communicates its requirements directly to the producing units can operate effectively only in brief moments of national emergency (with its associated national consensus on priorities).
When centralized planning is used as the normal mode of economic control, a number of deficiencies loom into view:
1.
It cannot cope with the vast complexity of modern economic systems without seriously blunting industrial efficiency and individual freedom of choice.
2.
It creates a concentration of power in the hands of central state agencies, which jeopardizes individual freedom.
3.
It is inherently vulnerable to bureaucratic stagnation and corruption.
4.
It leads to the stimulation of a privately run black economy as its crucial lubricant.
5.
It is prone to generate new social divisions of a hierarchical kind based on political or bureaucratic position.
These difficulties reinforce the view of many non-socialists that there is no alternative to purely market forms of economic allocation in a complex society.
But many socialists, though increasingly aware of the difficulties associated with highly centralized and bureaucratized modes of planning, have tended to interpret these difficulties differently.
They have seen them as evidence of the need for different kinds and structures of planning, rather than as evidence of the impossibility or undesirability of planning as such.
Decentralization and democracy, local participation and negotiation, are all very much in vogue in models of contemporary socialist planning…and they remain in vogue because of a continuing recognition of the strengths, as well as the weaknesses of economic planning.
There are a number of reasons why many socialists have argued strongly for the replacement of market mechanisms by state planning.
1.
Planning can include social and environmental costs.
2.
Planning can ensure high levels of income equality.
3.
Planning can balance demand and supply ex ante rather than ex post, so avoiding substantial waste of resources.
4.
Planning can remove the economic insecurity to which capitalism is prone.
These are the reasons why many socialists continue to insist that planning is still superior to the market.
They remain certain that planning, when in the proper hands and organized in a proper way, can bring a degree of social responsibility, security of conditions, and avoidance of waste and duplication, that no market system of atomized competitive production units can ever hope to achieve.
4
Market process versus market equilibrium
Israel M. Krizner
[…]
The focus of attention, in neo-classical price theory, is […]on the values of the price and quantity variables, and in particular on the set of values consistent with equilibrium conditions.
In investigating the consequences of a particular market structure, this approach examines the associated pattern of equilibrium prices, costs and outputs.
In investigating the consequences of a particular change in taste, or technology and the like, it examines the equilibrium conditions after the change, comparing them with those before the change.
The very efficiency of the market system as an allocator of society's resources is appraised by examining the allocation of resources at equilibrium.
In investigating the desirability of particular government policies, this approach appraises the effects of the changes these policies will bring about in the equilibrium situation.
In all this the emphasis is on the prices and quantities and, in particular, on these prices and quantities as they would emerge under equilibrium conditions.
By contrast, the Austrian approach to the theory of price […]perceives its task in a significantly different way.
The market is still, of course, seen as made up of the activities of the market participants — the consumers, producers, and factor owners.
Their activities result from decisions to produce, to buy, and to sell commodities and resources.
And once again there exists a pattern of decisions which are mutually consistent, so that all planned activities can be carried out without disappointment.
Furthermore, this pattern of decisions is recognized as of very special interest because it makes up the state of equilibrium.
But it is not this equilibrium situation which is the focus of attention.
The task of price theory is not seen as primarily concerned with the configuration of prices and quantities that satisfies the conditions for equilibrium.[…]
Rather, in the Austrian approach […]we look to price theory to help us understand how the decisions of individual participants in the market interact to generate the market forces which compel changes in prices, in outputs, and in methods of production and the allocation of resources.
We look to price theory to elucidate the nature of the mutual influence exercised by decisions so that we may understand how changes in these decisions, or in the data which underlie them, systematically set in motion further alterations elsewhere in the market.
The object of our scientific interest is these alterations themselves, not (except as a matter of subsidiary, intermediate or even incidental interest) the relationships governing prices and quantities in the equilibrium situation.
From the normative point of view, too, the approach to price theory adopted here sees its function in a way that is not related in any essential manner to the state of affairs at equilibrium.
The efficiency of the price system, in this approach, does not depend upon the optimality (or absence of it) of the resource allocation pattern at equilibrium; rather, it depends on the degree of success with which market forces can be relied upon to generate spontaneous corrections in the allocation patterns prevailing at times of disequilibrium.
As we will discover, this difference in the conceptions of the task and purpose of price theory has far-reaching implications for the methods and the substantive content of the alternative approaches.
[…]The many important differences in analysis that separate the dominant approach from that of the Austrians are most neatly summed up as reflecting disagreement (possibly only implicit disagreement) concerning the aim of price theory in general.
[…]With these basic considerations concerning the purpose of price theory in mind, let us survey the major theoretical issues.
[…]Thereafter, we will return to further development of the contrast between a theory of equilibrium prices and a theory of the market process.
Competition and entrepreneurship
Much of our discussion will revolve around two notions crucial to an understanding of the market and central to its theory — competition and entrepreneurship.
Both terms are widely used in the everyday speech of laymen concerning economic and business affairs.[…]
Competition, as many writers have told us, is a term that has been used in innumerable senses.
Economists have worked with many different models, each marked with one form or another of the competitive label.
Still central to much of contemporary price theory is the model of perfect competition.
Despite all the criticisms showered on this model during the past forty years, it still occupies the center of the stage, both in positive and in normative discussions.
The dissatisfaction with perfectly competitive theory produced new models dealing with various imperfectly competitive market structures, but these have not succeeded in dislodging the perfectly competitive model from its preeminent position.
Much of the discussion here will have to do with all of these models.
My position will be not only that the model of perfect competition fails to help us  understand the market process, but that the models of imperfect competition developed to replace it are little more helpful.
I will maintain that the theorists who developed these models of imperfectly competitive markets failed to recognize the really important shortcomings of the perfect competition theory.
As a result they were unable to perceive the direction in which a genuine rehabilitation of price theory must be developed and proceeded instead to construct models which suffer from the very defects that invalidate the perfectly competitive model.
[…]
A feature common to all these competitive models to which I am taking exception is their exclusion of the entrepreneurial element from the analysis.
We will find that a useful understanding of the market process requires a notion of competition that is analytically inseparable from the exercise of entrepreneurship.
[…]Our notions of competition and entrepreneurship will lead us to a quite unorthodox view of the nature of monopoly in a market.
The fact that entrepreneurship may be a step toward monopoly power will call for a new evaluation of both the allegedly harmful effects of monopoly and the reputedly beneficial effects of entrepreneurship.
It will be useful at this point to outline the picture of the market process which incorporates our views on competition and entrepreneurship, contrasting it briefly with the dominant concept of the market.[…]
The market process
We see the market as made up, during any period of time, of the interacting decisions of consumers, entrepreneur-producers, and resource owners.
Not all the decisions in a given period can be carried out, since many of them may erroneously anticipate and depend upon other decisions which are in fact not being made.
Again, many decisions which are successfully carried out in a given period may not turn out to have been the best possible courses of action.
Had the decision-makers been aware of the choices others were making during the same period, they would have perceived opportunities for more attractive courses of market action than those actually adopted.
In short, ignorance of the decisions which others are in fact about to make may cause decision-makers to make unfortunate plans — either plans that are doomed to disappointment or plans which fail to exploit existing market opportunities.
During the given period of time, exposure to the decisions of others communicates some of the information these decision-makers originally lacked.
If they find that their plans cannot be carried out, this teaches them that their anticipations concerning the decisions of others were overly optimistic.
Or they may learn that their undue pessimism has caused them to pass up attractive market opportunities.
This newly acquired information concerning the plans of others can be expected to generate, for the succeeding period of time, a revised set of decisions.
The  overambitious plans of one period will be replaced by more realistic ones; market opportunities overlooked in one period will be exploited in the next.
In other words, even without changes in the basic data of the market (that is, in consumer tastes, technological possibilities and resource availabilities), the decisions made in one period of time generate systematic alterations in the corresponding decisions for the succeeding period.
Taken over time, this series of systematic changes in the interconnected network of market decisions constitutes the market process.
The market process, then, is set in motion by the results of the initial market-ignorance of the participants.
The process itself consists of the systematic plan changes generated by the flow of market information released by market participation — that is, by the testing of plans in the market.
As a matter of considerable theoretical interest we may investigate the possibility of a state of affairs in which no market ignorance is present.
We would then have a pattern of perfectly dovetailing decisions.
No decision made will fail to be carried out, and no opportunity will fail to be exploited.
Each market participant will have correctly forecast all the relevant decisions of others.
[…]Clearly, with such a state of affairs the market process must immediately cease.
Without autonomous change in tastes, or in technological possibilities, or in the availability of resources, no one can have any interest in altering his plans for the succeeding period.
The market is in equilibrium; the pattern of market activity will continue without change period after period.[…]
Competition in the market process
We have seen the market during any period of time as made up of decisions of market participants.
These decisions, I said, presupposed corresponding decisions on the part of others.
Consumers' decisions to buy depend on the decisions of entrepreneur-producers to sell.
Decisions by resource owners to sell depend on the decisions of entrepreneur-producers to buy — and vice versa.
Each pair of dovetailing decisions (each market transaction completed) constitutes a case in which each party is being offered an opportunity which, to the best of his knowledge, is the best being offered to him in the market.
Each market participant is therefore aware at all times that he can expect to carry out his plans only if these plans do in fact offer others the best opportunity available, as far as they know.
This is simply saying that each market participant, in laying his buying or selling plans, must pay careful heed not only to the prospective decisions of those to whom he hopes to sell or from whom he hopes to buy — as an implication of the latter — also to the prospective decisions of others whose decisions to sell or to buy may compete with his own.
And as the market process unfolds, with one period of market ignorance followed by another in which ignorance has been somewhat reduced, each buyer or seller revises his bids and offers in the light of his  newly acquired knowledge of the alternative opportunities which those to whom he may wish to sell, or from whom he may wish to buy, can expect to find available elsewhere in the market.
In this sense the market process is inherently competitive.
The systematic alteration in decisions between each period and the succeeding one renders each opportunity offered to the market more competitive than that offered in the preceding period that is, it is offered with fuller awareness of the other opportunities being made available, against which it is necessary to compete.
[…
]In the course of the market process the participants are continually testing their competitors.
Each inches ahead by offering opportunities a little more attractive than theirs.
His competitors, in turn, once they become aware of what they are competing against, are forced to sweeten still further the opportunities they make available to the market; and so on.
In this struggle to keep ahead of one's competitors (but at the same time to avoid creating opportunities more attractive than necessary), market participants are thus forced by the competitive market process to gravitate closer and closer to the limits of their ability to participate gainfully in the market.
Competition between consumers for a given commodity may, for example, tend to force its price upward; each consumer is careful not to consume beyond the point where the marginal purchase is just worthwhile; during the process, those who are less eager consumers of marginal units drop out of the race earlier.
Competition among the owners of a particular resource may tend to force its price downwards; those owners for whom its sale involves the greater sacrifices will tend to drop out of the race as the falling price makes it worthwhile for them to sell only fewer and fewer units of the resource.
Were this competitive process to run its course to completion — in other words, were all decisions to become fully dovetailed — each participant would no longer be under pressure to improve the opportunities he is currently offering to the market, since no one else is offering more attractive opportunities […
]It is unnecessary, under these circumstances, for any participant to inch ahead of his competitors (in the attractiveness of opportunities offered), since all current plans can be carried out in the market without disappointment.
This situation of market, equilibrium is surely one in which competition is no longer an active force.
The cessation of the market process which we have already seen as characteristic of the equilibrium state is the cessation of a competitive process.[…]
Entrepreneurship in the market process
Essential to the notion of the market process as I have described it is the acquisition of market information through the experience of market participation.
The systematic pattern of adjustments in market plans which makes up the market process arises, as we have seen, from the market participants' discovery that their anticipations were overly  optimistic or unduly pessimistic.
It can be shown that our confidence in the market's ability to learn and to harness the continuous flow of market information to generate the market process depends crucially on our belief in the benign presence of the entrepreneurial element.
To see this, let us imagine a market in which all those currently participating are in fact unable to learn from their market experience.
Would-be buyers who have been returning home empty-handed (because they have not been offering sufficiently high prices) have not learned that it is necessary to outbid other buyers; would-be sellers who return home with unsold goods or resources (because they have been asking prices that are too high) have not learned that they must, if they wish to sell, be satisfied with lower prices.
Buyers who have paid high prices do not discover that they could have obtained the same goods at lower prices; sellers who have sold for low prices do not discover that they could have obtained higher prices.
Into this imaginary world of people unable to learn from their market experience let us now introduce a group of outsiders who are themselves neither would-by sellers nor would-be buyers, but who are able to perceive opportunities for entrepreneurial profits; that is, they are able to see where a good can be sold at a price higher than that for which it can be bought.
This group of entrepreneurs would, in our imaginary world, immediately notice profit opportunities that exist because of the initial ignorance of the original market participants and that have persisted because of their inability to learn from experience.
They would move to buy at low prices from those sellers who have not discovered that some buyers are paying high prices.
And they would then sell these goods at high prices to those buyers who have not discovered that some sellers have been selling for low prices.
It is easy to perceive that so long as this group of entrepreneurs is active in the market, and so long as they are alert to the changing prices their own activity brings about, the market process can proceed in an entirely normal fashion.
These entrepreneurs will communicate to the other market participants the market information which these other participants are themselves unable to obtain.
The competition between the various entrepreneurs will move them to offer to buy from the low-price sellers, at prices higher than these sellers had thought possible; entrepreneurs in competition with one another will also sell to high-price buyers at prices lower than these buyers had thought possible.
Gradually, competition between the entrepreneurs as buyers, and again as sellers, will succeed in communicating to market participants a correct estimate of the other market participants' eagerness to buy and to sell.
Prices will move in exactly the same way as they would move in a world in which buyers and sellers were able to learn from their market experience.
Clearly then, it is not necessary for us, in constructing the analytical model of a market in process, to postulate such a rigid compartmentalization of roles.
Instead of one group of market participants who do not learn from experience and another (entrepreneurial) group who do, we  can work with market participants who are alert to changing buying and selling possibilities.
The process will still remain an essentially entrepreneurial one, but instead of working with a group of ‘pure’ entrepreneurs, we could simply recognize an entrepreneurial aspect to the activities of each market participant.
The outcome is always the same: the competitive market process is essentially entrepreneurial.
The pattern of decisions in any period differs from the pattern in the preceding period as market participants become aware of new opportunities.
As they exploit these opportunities, their competition pushes prices in directions which gradually squeeze out opportunities for further profit-making.
The entrepreneurial element in the economic behavior of market participants consists […]in their alertness to previously unnoticed changes in circumstances which may make it possible to get far more in exchange for whatever they have to offer than was hitherto possible.
Our insights into the competitive nature of the market process and its entrepreneurial character teach us that the two notions of competition and entrepreneurship are, at least in the sense used here, analytically inseparable.
[= =]The key point is that pure entrepreneurship is exercised only in the absence of an initially owned asset.
Other market roles invariably involve a search for the best exchange opportunities for translating an initially owned asset into something more eagerly desired.
The ‘pure’ entrepreneur observes the opportunity to sell something at a price higher than that at which he can buy it.
It follows that anyone is a potential entrepreneur, since the purely entrepreneurial role presupposes no special initial good fortune in the form of valuable assets.
Therefore, whereas the market participation of asset owners is always to some extent protected (by the peculiar qualities of the assets possessed), the market activity of the entrepreneur is never protected in any way.
The opportunity offered in the market by an asset owner cannot be freely duplicated or surpassed by just anyone; it can be duplicated only by another owner of a similar asset.
In a world in which no two assets are exactly the same, no opportunity offered by an asset owner can be exactly duplicated.
But if an entrepreneur perceives the possibility of gaining profit by offering to buy at a price attractive to sellers and by offering to sell at a price attractive to buyers, the opportunities he thus offers to the market can in principle be made available by anyone.
The entrepreneur's activity is essentially competitive.
And thus competition is inherent in the nature of the entrepreneurial market process.
Or, to put it the other way around, entrepreneurship is inherent in the competitive market process.
The producer and the market process
The considerations outlined above are rather general.
They would apply to a world in which no production is possible at all— a pure exchange  economy — and they apply with equal validity to a world in which nature-given raw materials and labor are converted through production into consumer goods.
[…]But it will be useful, especially in respect to future discussions on monopoly and on selling costs, to explain a little more specifically how the market process operates in a world of production.
Production involves converting resources into commodities.
Therefore the market in a world of production is most simply seen as a network of decisions in which resource owners make plans to sell resources to producers, producers make plans to buy resources from resource owners in order to sell them (in the form of produced commodities) to consumers, and consumers make plans to buy commodities from producers.
The producer, it turns out, need not initially be an asset owner.
He may simply be an entrepreneur who perceives the opportunity to buy resources at a total cost lower than the revenue he can obtain from the sale of output.
Even if the producer happens to be a resource owner, he is to be considered an entrepreneur with respect to the other resources he needs for production.
And it is convenient to consider him as an entrepreneur even with respect to the resource he owns (in the sense that, in using it for his own production process, rather than selling it at its market price to other producers, he is ‘buying’ it at an implicit cost).
An interesting observation is relevant to this way of seeing the market in a world of production.
I said in the preceding section that the market process is essentially entrepreneurial.
[…]It turns out now that in the world of production we find ourselves endowed, as it were, with a built-in group of entrepreneurs — the producers.
We have just seen that production involves a necessarily entrepreneurial type of market activity.
It thus becomes highly convenient to view the market, in a world of production, as if all entrepreneurial activity were in fact carried on by producers; in other words, it now becomes convenient to think of resource owners and consumers as passive price-takers, exercising no entrepreneurial judgement of their own and simply reacting passively to the opportunities to sell and buy which the producer-entrepreneurs hold out to them directly.
Of course this is only an analytical convenience, but it will simplify much of the discussion and will help lay bare the inner workings of the market in the complex world of production.
We see the producer, then, as one who perceives profit opportunities in the market, consisting in the availability of sellers who ask less than what buyers are willing to pay somewhere else in the market.
In the production context, of course, what can be bought are resources, and what can be sold are products.[…]
In searching out these opportunities and exploiting them the producer is thus performing the entrepreneurial role in the market process.
In this process the plans of consumers and of resource owners are gradually brought into greater and greater consistency with one another.
Consumers' initial ignorance of the kinds of commodities technologically possible with currently available resources and of the relative prices at  which these commodities can in principle be produced gradually diminishes.
Resource owners' initial ignorance of the kinds of commodities consumers will buy and of the relative prices which can in principle be obtained for these commodities gradually diminishes.
The new knowledge is acquired through changes in the prices of resources and of products, brought about by the bids and offers of the entrepreneur-producers who are eagerly competing for the profits to be won by discovering where resource owners and consumers have (in effect) underestimated each other 's eagerness to buy or to sell.
This process of bringing the plans of market participants into dovetailing patterns is, as we have seen, competitive.
No one producer — in his role of entrepreneur — can ignore the possibility that a profit opportunity may be grabbed by another entrepreneur.
After all, an entrepreneur needs no assets to engage in profitable market participation.
A producer need not own any resources in order to engage in production; he merely has to know where to buy resources at a price that will make it worthwhile to produce and sell the product at its attainable price.
Since, then, anyone can, at least in principle, be a producer (since no special natural or other endowment is necessary), the market process, which is  channelled through the activities of the producers, is competitive.
The question then arises, What are economists referring to when they talk of ‘monopolistic markets’?
And, in particular, What is to be understood by the term ‘monopolistic producer’?
Have we not seen that producers are entrepreneurs who can neverbe immune from the forces of competition?
Monopoly and the market process
[…]
A competitive process, I have said, proceeds because participants are engaged in an incessant race to get or to keep ahead of one another(where, as always, ‘to be ahead’ means ‘to be offering the most attractive opportunities to other market participants’.
Clearly, then, any circumstances which render a market participant immune from the necessity to keep ahead would not merely hamper competition, but also impede the course of the market process.
But (and here was the apparent cause of difficulty) we have seen that entrepreneurship can neverbe immune from the competitive pressure.
It thus seemsthat competition can never be absent from the market, and so the market process can never be impeded by its absence.
Is there no possibility of an absence of competition?
Is there no possibility of monopoly?
The answer must be that, in the sense in which we have used the term ‘competition’(a sense which, although sharply divergent from the terminology of the dominant theory of price, is entirely consistent with everyday business usage), the market process is indeed always competitive, so long as there is freedom to buy and sell in the market.
Nonetheless, there remains a definite place for monopoly within the framework of analysis we have developed.
Entrepreneurship is necessarily open to all who wish to deal in the market; hence production, involving the purchase of resources and the sale of products, is necessarily competitive.
But resource ownershipmay well be monopolistic in character, and where a resource is owned by a monopolist, this may have important implications for the course of production.
It is as a result of resource monopoly that those important cases arise which in the language of the layman, the economist and the antitrust lawyer are called monopolistic production.
Our own position will be to insist on the crucial distinction between the possibility of a monopolist producer qua producer (which, in our terminology, is ruled out almost by definition) and the possibility of a monopolist producer qua resource owner (which is very real and significant).
If nature has endowed a particular market participant with all the current endowment of a certain resource, he is in the fortunate position of being a monopolist resource owner.
This may sharply affect the price of this resource and, as a further result, may affect the prices of other resources and products, as well as the entire pattern of production.
But it is important to observe that the competitive character of the market process has not been affected in the slightest.
The final equilibrium position toward which the market is tending may be drastically affected by monopoly resource ownership, but the process of bringing the decisions of market participants into more closely dovetailing patterns remains unchanged.
All this does not at all mean that monopoly, within our framework of discussion has become less potentially dangerous or less important.
But it does mean that in analysing the effects of what appear to be clear cases of monopoly, we know where to look for the source of the problem.
Most important, this way of looking at things teaches us that if a producer controls the production of a given commodity he is a monopolist — if he is such — not by virtue of any entrepreneurial role, but as a result of a resource monopoly.
As an immediate implication of this we distinguish very sharply between a producer who is the sole source of supply for a particular commodity because he has unique access to a necessary resource and one who is the sole source of supply as a result of his entrepreneurial activities (which can easily be duplicated by his competitors, if they choose).
During the course of the market process the competitive efforts of a particular producer-entrepreneur may lead him to offer something to the market which no one else is currently producing.
In our theory this is simply an example of the competitive process at work.
It has nothing in common with cases in which a particular producer, by acquiring monopoly control over a resource, is able to maintain his position as sole source of supply indefinitely.
The one case is an example of competitive entrepreneurship; the other is one of monopolistic resource ownership.
Nonetheless, a very important possibility must be considered in which a monopolist producer has acquired monopoly  control over one of his factors of production by means of his entrepreneurial activities.
The entrepreneur as monopolist
This possibility may arise very simply.
A market participant with no initial assets perceives the possibility of making large profits by buying up all the available supply of a given resource, and then establishing himself as the monopolist producer of a particular commodity.
His role, taking the long-range perspective, is clearly entrepreneurial (he had no initial assets), and thus competitive.
(Since he had no initial asset endowment, anyone else could have done what he did; again, he was able to do what he did only because in so doing he was offering both to those from whom he bought and to those to whom he sells opportunities more attractive than those offered by others.)
And yet, once his entrepreneurial resource purchase has been made, he is in the position of a producer who is a monopolist by virtue of being a resource owner.
It seems, then, that not only may an entrepreneur-producer be a monopolist because he happens at the same time to be a monopolist resource owner, he may be a monopolist because he has made himself a monopolist resource owner in the course of his entrepreneurial activities.
If we recognize this possibility we may gain much valuable insight into the complex forces acting in the real world.
Many real-world cases of what appears to be monopoly in production can be disentangled and understood in the light of the theoretical possibilities being examined here.
[…]When one looks merely at the situation after the resource has been monopolized by the entrepreneurial skill of the producer, one sees only a monopolist producer — exempt from competition to the extent his resource monopoly permits.
When one takes a longer-run view of the monopoly situation, one sees that it was won by competition, and that it represents, as such (and as far as it goes) a step forward in the entrepreneurial process of the market.
This entrepreneur's capture of his monopoly position was a step toward eliminating the inconsistencies between the decisions of consumers and those of the earlier resource owners.
The profits won by the producer, which in the short-run view seem clearly a monopoly rent attributable to the monopolized resource, turn out to be, in the long-run view, the profits of competitive entrepreneurship.
This insight will be of great value in the normative analysis of monopoly situations.
[…]
Our discussion has shown that so long as the resources used by producers are accessible to all, all their activities are entrepreneurial-competitive.
That one producer has expended resources in order to educate or manipulate consumer tastes may perhaps offend the ethical values of some observers of the market, and it is not a simple matter, on strictly scientific terms, to evaluate the effect of this kind of activity.
But  so long as no resources used in ‘selling’ or in producing are owned monopolistically, we are forced to conclude that this activity is essentially competitive and cannot result in any kind of monopolistic control over production or any impairment of the competitive process.
The fact that at any given moment only one producer is making a particular product is not by itself an impairment of the competitive process.
It may simply mean that at this moment only one entrepreneur has taken the step of presenting this particular opportunity to the market.
If the step is a wise one, it will tend to attract others to do even better in this regard.
If it proves to have been a mistake this entrepreneur himself will be under market pressure to abandon this line of production.
Insofar as our interest is in the market process and its competitive character, we should no more be surprised that only one producer is making a product at a particular time than that of many producers of a particular product one is charging a price which no other producer is asking.
Both possibilities may simply be evidence that the market process has not yet run its course.[…]
Equilibrium economics, entrepreneurship and competition
We have already noticed earlier in this chapter that our disagreement with the neo-classical theory of price centers in particular on its unsatisfactory treatment of entrepreneurship and competition.[…]
In equilibrium there is no room for the entrepreneur.
When the decisions of all market participants dovetail completely, so that each plan correctly assumes the corresponding plans of the other participants and no possibility exists for any altered plans that would be simultaneously preferred by the relevant participants, there is nothing left for the entrepreneur to do.
He will be unable to discover possibilities of buying from those who underestimated the eagerness of potential buyers and of then selling to these eager buyers (who might in turn have underestimated the eagerness of the sellers).
Thus he cannot contribute to a reallocation of resources or products that will overcome inefficiencies and lack of coordination generated by market ignorance, since no such ignorance and lack of coordination exist in equilibrium.[…]
Instead of the entrepreneur, the dominant theory of price has dealt with the firm, placing the emphasis heavily on its profit-maximizing aspects.
In fact, this emphasis has misled many students of price theory to understand the notion of the entrepreneur as nothing more than the locus of profit-maximizing decision-making within the firm.
They have completely overlooked the role of the entrepreneur in exploiting superior awareness of price discrepancies within the economic system.
Emphasis on the firm (which in our view is to be seen as a combination of entrepreneur and resource owner) also led to a failure to recognize the  significance of pure resource ownership in securing monopoly positions in production.
Monopoly came to be associated with the firm and thus, most unfortunately, with the entrepreneur.
At the same, the emphasis on equilibrium hampered any possible appreciation of the notion of competition which we have seen to be the outstanding characteristic of the market process.
By definition, a state of equilibrium does not permit activity designed to outstrip the efforts of others in catering to the wishes of the market.
Thus, whatever the layman might mean by the term ‘competition’, the equilibrium theorist came to use it to connote a market in which each participant is too weak to effect any change in price.
This is entirely understandable.
If the attention of the theorist is focused upon a particular state of affairs — equilibrium — rather than upon the market process, the adjective ‘competitive’ cannot be used in the sense of the characteristic of a process.
[…]Competition, to the equilibrium price theorist, turned out to refer to a state of affairs into which so many competing participants have already entered that no room remains for additional entry (or other modification of existing market conditions).
The most unfortunate aspect of this use of the term ‘competition’ is of course that, by referring to the situation in which no room remains for further steps in the competitive market process, the word has come to be understood as the very opposite of the kind of activity of which that process consists.
Thus [= =]any real-world departure from equilibrium conditions came to be stamped as the opposite of ‘competitive’ and hence, by simple extension, as actually ‘monopolistic.’
[…
]Neo-classical theories failed to perceive that the characteristic features of the real world (to which nothing in the perfectly competitive model corresponds) are simply the manifestations of entrepreneurial competition, a process in which would-be buyers and sellers gropingly seek to discover each other 's supply and demand curves.
[…]In the course of attempting to account for such market phenomena as quality differentiation, advertising, or markets in which few producers are to be found […]neo-classical theories were led to conclusions which grossly misinterpret the significance of these phenomena.
5
Markets and managerial hierarchies
Tony McGuinness
The aim of this chapter is to present and evaluate Oliver Williamson's theory of the firm.
Before launching into the details of his explanation, however, it will be useful to state clearly what it is that is to be explained.
This will help also to put Williamson's work in perspective in relation to past and contemporary ideas about the firm.
[…
]Though firms in the real world, like markets involve a subtle mixture of control mechanisms, this chapter assumes that the essence of firm-type organization is the use made of authority to direct and coordinate resources.
The object of the analysis is then to identify and explain in what circumstances the authoritarian direction of resources has advantage over market-type alternatives.
This definition of the essential nature of firm-type organization must not be confused with the idea that only authority is used to direct resources within firms that exist in the real world.
The internal operations of real-world firms are controlled by a blend of authority and market-like mechanisms.
This fact of life is reflected in recent economic analysis of the firm, which addresses the limits of authority and the options available within firms when direct supervision of a subordinate by a superior is difficult, perhaps because of information asymmetry.
[…]In passing, it should be noted that the conceptual framework developed by Williamson claims to provide an explanation of organizational forms in general, in that it seeks to explain the circumstances in which a variety of institutional forms — including classical market contracts, non-standard market contracts, government regulatory agencies, and trades unions — have, in turn, a comparative advantage in the organization of resources.
Despite recognizing the need for theory to explain market-type control mechanisms within real-world firms, this chapter accepts that some use of direct, non-delegated authority is the necessary, defining feature of a firm, and turns to Williamson's work for an explanation of the circumstances in which it has a comparative advantage over other control mechanisms.
Section I presents the general concepts used by him.
Section 2 uses these concepts to explain when and why a market is replaced by an authority-based form of organization; why authority might be   distributed and used in a hierarchical way; and when the authority to make certain kinds of decisions might be delegated within a hierarchy.
[…]
Before proceeding with the details, it is worth pointing out that at least one influential modern article on the theory of the firm denies that authority is the essence of the firm.
Alchian and Demsetz (1972: 777) state unequivocally: ‘It is common to see the firm characterized by fiat, by authority, or by disciplinary action superior to that available in the conventional market.
This is a delusion.’
From what has been said, this is not the view of this chapter.
Nor is it consistent with Coase's (1937) attempt to define the abstract nature of the firm (author's emphasis):
owing to the difficulty of forecasting […]the less possible, and indeed, the less desirable it is for the person purchasing to specify what the other contracting party is expected to do […
]Therefore, the service which is being provided is expressed in general terms, the exact details being left until a later date […
]The details of what the supplier is expected to do is not stated in the contract but is decided later by the purchaser.
When the direction of resources (within the limits of the contract) becomes dependent on the buyer in this way, the relationship which I term a ‘firm’ may be obtained.
The interpretation of this statement here is that the contractual arrangements that define the firm are left open-minded, with the details of resource direction to be decided later by a member (or members) of the firm in whom authority is voluntarily vested.
[…]It is perhaps no coincidence that only when one is prepared to recognize that the firm is based on authority do issues of power come to the fore in the theory of the firm.
1 Concepts
This section discusses the concepts used by Williamson in his analysis of the firm.
The problems and costs of organizing transactions depend on both their nature and the assumed characteristics of decision-makers in the model.
In addition, the way in which they are organized is determined, at least in a competitive environment, by the principle of economizing on transaction costs.
The aim of the analysis is to explain, and possibly to predict, the institutional arrangements by which transactions are negotiated, enforced and adjusted.
To serve this purpose, Williamson uses a model of human nature based on three behavioural attributes: bounded rationality, opportunism and dignity.
(See, for example, Williamson, 1984: 196–202).
Bounded rationality is a weak form of rationality.
People are assumed to try to make rational decisions but their ability to do so is constrained by limits on their capacity to receive, process, store and retrieve information.
The importance of bounded rationality is stressed in the work of Herbert Simon (1957, 1978).
One implication is that people are unable to  take full account of, or possibly even imagine, all future situations that might require changes in the terms of a transaction.
Transactions that are more than just once-only exchanges cannot be organized, therefore, by a long-term market contract, agreed at the outset, specifying terms appropriate to any future state of the world.
Complete, contingent-claims contracts of the type discussed by Radner (1968) are just not feasible, and some other institutional arrangement must be used.
Opportunism is a devious kind of self-interested behaviour.
Williamson assumes that at least some people might behave in strategic, guileful ways, if they can do so undetected and thereby promote their own interest.
This might involve representing their position (abilities, preferences, intentions) in a way that is less than completely honest, or even, perhaps, downright dishonest.
An example inspired by Akerlof (1970) is the seller of a secondhand car who is much more knowledgeable about its true quality than any potential buyer.
It is in the seller's interest to be selective in the information he gives the buyer, emphasizing the car's good points and downplaying its defects, since this would raise the price he will receive.
The opportunistic seller will selectively reveal and distort information, even provide false information, if he can do so without later penalty.
The implication is that, even though gains from trade are potentially available, the transaction might not take place unless some means can be found to protect one party from the opportunistic representations of the other.
The kind of institution that can best provide the protection depends on the nature of the transaction, an issue discussed later.
If the assumption of opportunism is something you regard as an unnecessarily cynical view of human nature, note that its importance requires only that some, not all, people behave in this way and that it is difficult to tell who is opportunistic and who is not.
The third human attribute in Williamson's model is dignity, though it is one of the least-developed concepts.
It captures the idea that humanity should be respected for its own sake, so that people should not be treated in organizations solely as the means in an economizing process.
However, taking account of dignity requires the acceptance of any necessary  trade-offs between it and other valued objectives.
For example, if society believes workers should be democratically represented on firms' boards of directors, it also should be recognized that additional costs of democracy are to be borne by someone: shareholders who get lower profits, workers who get lower wages, customers who pay higher prices, or taxpayers.
The need for  trade-offs should be recognized clearly, so as to avoid the implicit assumption that dignity is to be pursued at all costs.[…]
Nature of transactions
Transactions differ in the strains they place on decision-making ability, the scope they give for opportunism, and the degree to which they involve human dignity.
Consequently, the best institutional arrangement to use  depends on the nature of the transaction.
There are three relevant dimensions along which transactions can differ: asset specificity; uncertainty and frequency (Williamson, 1984: 202–7).
Asset specificity refers to the extent to which the resources used in a transaction have a value therein that is higher than in any other use or to any other user.
Highly specific assets are ones whose values elsewhere are comparatively low and, consequently, whose owners have a strong interest in continuing the transaction because of the high quasi-rents they receive.
One expects durability to be a hallmark of highly specific assets.
[…]However, this does not imply that transaction specificity is confined to physical durable assets: human investment in individual or team knowledge that is not fully  transferable is also transaction specific.
Physical examples include equipment designed to make components that will fit into the product of only one buyer (for example, exhausts for Rolls-Royce cars) or dispensing machines that can handle packsizes peculiar to one supplier.
Human capital examples include a manager's knowledge of the idiosyncrasies of his firm's administrative system, or a team's knowledge of the comparative advantages of its members and thus of how tasks can be allocated most efficiently within the team.
Site specificity occurs where, for example, separable stages of production are placed in close proximity to economize on transport costs, and their relocation costs are high.
Finally, ‘dedicated’ asset specificity refers to resources which, in principle, are usable elsewhere but for which no effective demand exists outside the present transaction; their installation was conditional on continuing demand from a particular buyer (see Williamson, 1983: 526).
[…]
Asset specificity has implications for organization because of the reluctance of parties to terminate transactions to which they have committed specific assets.
Owners are aware of the capital losses they must incur if they redeploy their assets, and people with whom they are transacting know that nowhere else can they find assets as suitable to their needs as those already committed.
In other words, both parties are to some extent ‘locked into’ a transaction to which highly specific assets have been assigned.
Such a situation offers great scope for opportunism when occasion arises for changing the original terms of the contract.
Bargaining is then confined within a small group, and there are no pressures from a large number of competing sources or bidders to oblige people to present their positions in a fully honest way.
Some institutional arrangement other than large-numbers competition needs to be found to safeguard the transaction from excessive opportunistic wrangling, which could siphon off the available gains from trade.
The importance of these considerations is underlined by what Williamson (1984: 207–8) calls the ‘fundamental transformation’, by which a transaction whose original terms were negotiated in an environment of large-numbers competition is transformed during its implementation to one where small-numbers bargaining  is inevitable at the stage of contract renewal.
This would occur if the winner of the initial contract benefited from learning-by-doing during its execution and was able to appropriate those benefits, enabling him to compete advantageously when terms are renegotiated.
The second relevant attribute of a transaction is uncertainty about the environment in which it is to be executed.
Where there are very many known alternatives, or there are known to be currently unimaginable possibilities, the ability of people to make detailed plans for the future is limited, given bounded rationality.
Under these circumstances the future details of a transaction can be settled only when uncertainty is resolved by the passage of time.
If time also gives advantages to the initial winners of a contract, arrangements for the final settlement of terms must not only be flexible, but also able to deal with opportunistic behaviour at the final settlement date.
Here, coping with greater uncertainty requires a form of organization that is both adaptive and able to control opportunism in small groups.
Frequency is the third relevant attribute.
If the original parties to a transaction effectively have no other outlet or source once the original contract has been awarded, and they are highly uncertain about the contemporary environment at the time when terms must be renegotiated, an organizational form (for example a monitoring and control system) that is tailor-made for that transaction might substantially reduce bargaining costs on each occasion when renegotiation takes place.
However, governance structures differ in terms of their set-up and running costs.
Whether or not it is sensible to invest in a tailor-made structure depends on the capitalized value of the savings derived from it in relation to the present value of its costs.
The greater the frequency of a transaction, the more justifiable is a (relatively) expensive governance structure that brings about (relatively) large savings in transaction costs.
Economizing
The hallmark of economic analysis is how to make best (‘efficient’) use of resources that are in scarce supply.
In situations that involve uncertainty, bounded rationality and opportunism it is important to economize on resources used in negotiating, implementing and adapting contracts as well as on those used for more narrowly defined productive tasks.
The efficient objective is to minimize the sum of production and transaction costs for the tasks required.
Williamson's advice to the organizational designer is to operate in a discriminating way, that is only after making a comparative assessment of the costs of using one organizational form rather than another.
This advice is offered to designers in any field where resources are scarce: government departments, non-profit bureaucracies and families, in addition to profit-oriented businesses.
But beyond this normative use of the analysis, Williamson claims that the economizing principle actually  operates in the commercial world; that here, transactions do get organized, sooner or later, in efficient ways.
This proposition amounts to an efficiency explanation of both the variety of organizational forms that exists at any one time and the way in which the pattern of organizations in the commercial world evolves over time.
The efficiency explanation contrasts sharply with attempts to explain organizational forms in terms of power, drawing on political and sociological concepts.
A comparative evaluation of the alternative approaches should be based not on ideological issues, but on their ability to make sense of empirical observations.
Williamson and Ouchi (1983: 29–30) admit the relevance of power to the analysis of organization but submit that
power considerations will usually give way to efficiency — at least in profit-making enterprises, if observations are taken at sufficiently long intervals […
]This does not imply that power has no role to play, but we think it invites confusion to explain organisational results that are predicted by the efficiency hypothesis in terms of power.
Rather power explains results when the organisation sacrifices efficiency to serve special interests.
We concede that this occurs.
But we do not believe that major organisational changes in the commercial sector are explained in these terms.
The evidence is all to the contrary.
The efficiency thesis should also be contrasted with the ‘inhospitality tradition’ of attempting to explain non-conventional institutions in the commercial world in terms of efforts to enhance monopoly power.
The ‘efficiency’ versus ‘monopoly’debate has dominated theoretical and applied work in the field of industrial economics.
Williamson argues that giving due recognition to the importance of transaction costs serves to redress the balance towards efficiency explanations, particularly if one accepts that rather stringent structural preconditions must be satisfied before anti-competitive behaviour is plausibly successful (1983: 537, n. 38).
A critical evaluation of Williamson's analysis is given later in the chapter.
At this stage, two points are worth making.
Firstly, a purely ‘efficiency’ view of how organizations develop ignores the possibility that the nature of transactions is not completely exogenous: the development of technology and the kinds of production techniques used might depend on whose interests they promote.
It is possible that efficiency considerations dominate once the nature of transactions is given, but that power is important in explaining their nature.
Secondly, one might accept the view that efficiency should not be ignored in analysing the firm, without believing that monopoly issues are relevant in only a few situations.
Some organizational developments might occur because they are more efficient ways of extracting consumer surplus.
2 Internal organization
The concepts outlined in Section I are relevant to the design of markets, the replacement of markets by some internal form of governance (the ‘internalization’ issue) and the design of internal forms of organization.
[…]The rest of this section deals with internalization, and with two aspects of the design of internal forms of organization: hierarchy and hierarchical decomposition.
Internalization
A transaction is said to be internalized when its administration involves the use of authority rather than voluntary bargaining between people in a market.
Coase (1937) argued that familiar tools of economic analysis could be used to explain why one system of organizing transactions would prevail over another.
Williamson (1971) pursued Coase's line of inquiry by using the concepts of Section I to explain the ‘failure’ of markets to organize transactions between vertically related, technologically separable stages of production.
Later, the internalization of financial and international transactions within conglomerate and multinational firms were also analysed within the same framework.[…]
Markets and internal organization are two alternative types of ‘governance structure’ analysed by Williamson.
The type of transaction to which each is most suited can be explained after describing their characteristics.
In a market, bargaining is constrained by threats of imminent termination of any existing or proposed contracts; opportunism is controlled by the readiness of people to sever their dealings with other resource owners; and continuity of an agreement between people is not valued for its own sake: transactions are administered in an impersonal way, typified by the ‘faceless’ bargaining of competitive market models.
The costs of using a market to organize transactions will be lowest when the threat to terminate a contract is an effective control mechanism.
Such a threat is credible only if carrying it out would impose little loss on the person terminating the contract.
This requires the availability of other potential contractors, prepared to offer terms' no worse than those available from the original parties to the contract.
But these conditions do not exist where the original parties have invested in transaction-specific assets.
As discussed in Section 1, any later renegotiation of terms would then be confined to parties to the initial contract.
If this small group tried to draw up a new market contract, bargaining would be protracted because of the known absence of alternative partners.
The costs of using a market, therefore, will be high for the organization of transactions that involve highly specific assets.
In comparison, internal organization is a more attractive way of administering such transactions.
Bounds on rationality are eased by adjusting terms within the small group of people in an adaptive way, as time reveals  new circumstances.
Protracted bargaining, Williamson argues, is less likely for three reasons: people feel part of a unified organization, and so are less inclined to argue; management has the right to demand information from workers in the organization, and therefore can restrict opportunism; and, ultimately, management can use its authority to guillotine any dispute that threatens to be prolonged.
In Williamson's framework, therefore, an internal form of organization is an effective way of economizing on bounded rationality and controlling opportunism in the context of recurring transactions that involve specific assets.
A market would be a relatively costly way of adjusting the uses made of specific assets in response to unforeseen changes revealed over time.
Two general aspects of Williamson's analysis of organizational forms are seen in this explanation of internalization.
Firstly, the question of the best form to use hinges on efficiency in the use of decision-making resources.
Secondly, the advantage that internal organization possesses in certain circumstances turns on its recourse to authority as a means of eliminating information asymmetry or terminating any prolonged wrangling between employees.
There can be little doubt that this explanation of internal organization is an explanation of those authoritative aspects of management in real-world firms that, earlier in this chapter, were taken to be the sine qua non of Coase's (1937) definition of a firm.[…]
Hierarchy
Issues of institutional design don't disappear once a decision has been made to adopt internal organization.
The details of its form influence organizational behaviour and performance just as structure influences conduct and performance within a market system.
An important feature to explain is why a hierarchical system is invariably found in organizations such as firms.
The debate on the rationale of hierarchy has been a heated one.
It is an important focus of the conflict between ‘efficiency’(economic) and ‘power’(political/sociological) explanations of organizational forms.
Williamson's views are hardly equivocal:
it is no accident that hierarchy is ubiquitous within all organisations of any size.
This holds not merely within the private-for-profit sector but among non-profits and government bureaus as well.
It likewise holds across national boundaries and is independent of political systems.
In short, inveighing against hierarchy is rhetoric: both the logic of efficiency and the historical evidence disclose that non-hierarchical modes are mainly of ephemeral duration.
(1980: 35).
His efficiency arguments for hierarchy are connected with both bounded rationality and opportunism.
First, let us define what we mean by hierarchy.
Internal organization is a class of governance whose distinguishing feature is that a resource owner accepts restrictions on his sole rights to use his resources in whatever way he might choose.
Within the bounds of  some agreed domain, he allows his resources to be controlled by an authorized decision-making unit to which he might or might not belong.
How might one define an increase in hierarchy across governance structures within the class?
Williamson (1980) discusses both contractual and decision-making bases for defining hierarchy, and chooses the latter as the most relevant to organizational performance.
On this basis the degree of hierarchy could be said to increase, ceteris paribus, with increases in the domain delegated to authorized control, and with reductions in the extent to which resource owners are involved in making decisions about the deployment of their resources.
In other words, holding constant the controlled domain, hierarchy increases as authorized decision-making becomes more concentrated amongst people in an organization.
In assessing the comparative efficiency of non-hierarchical and hierarchical forms of internal organization, it is instructive to contrast the peer group with a simple hierarchy (see Williamson, 1975: Chapter 3).
The peer group makes decisions in a democratic way, with all owners having a say in the final decision.
This might be achieved either by having all owners involved in all decisions, or having people take turns to make the decisions.
A simple hierarchy puts decision-making authority permanently in the hands of a few people.
Williamson argues that, compared to simple hierarchy, the peer group is inefficient in both making and implementing decisions.
If all input owners have a say in all decisions, decision-making is a costly process: the greater the number of decision-makers, the more resources are used up in sending out the information needed to make the decision; and the more time is needed, in total, to give each person the opportunity to argue his preferred solution to any problem.
One way round this, that remains consistent with the democratic spirit of the peer group, is to have a central decision-making unit comprising, at any one time, only a few people, but to rotate membership of this unit, each person taking a turn.
However, this solution prevents the group achieving any gains from assigning people to tasks according to their comparative advantage.
People can be expected to differ in their abilities and this inevitably gives some people a comparative advantage in processing information, making decisions, and communicating them to others.
Failure to exploit this involves efficiency losses.
But making permanent appointments to a group that has the authority to make decisions creates an elite, and effectively transforms the peer group into a hierarchy.
Opportunism is claimed to be particularly relevant to the implementation of decisions.
If it were absent, all transactors could be relied on to keep a promise to implement any decision to the best of their ability.
With opportunism, a central monitoring unit is a possible way of controlling shirking, by monitoring input performance and adjusting compensation accordingly over time.
Again, the fundamental principles of the peer group would not be compromised if monitoring roles were rotated.
But rotation involves efficiency losses if (as seems likely) some people have a  comparative advantage in monitoring.
In the case of both decision-making and monitoring, therefore, Williamson argues that realizing gains from comparative advantage requires forming an elite, and therefore a hierarchy.
One possible situation in which a peer group would not cause a loss of efficiency is where democracy acts as a spur to individual effort and productivity.
Whether or not this is a common occurrence is a matter for empirical investigation.
Ben-Ner (1984: 248), for example, cites, among explanations for the high incidence of liquidations of producer cooperatives, ‘their inability to settle personal disputes, their lack of discipline in the absence of a central monitor [and]their low motivation caused by excessive egalitarianism’.
This would seem to suggest that a high price, in terms of efficiency, is paid for democracy.
However, more empirical evidence on this is needed.
Criticisms of Williamson's efficiency rationale of hierarchy have the same basis as criticisms of his approach in general, and are dealt with in Section 3 below.
It should be noted at this stage, however, that democracy might be a ‘desirable output’ of an organization, in which case its production at the expense of other outputs would not necessarily involve inefficiency.
Hierarchical decomposition
Within hierarchical organizations of any size, more complex structures are observed than the simple (two-level) system discussed in the last section.
In assessing the relative efficiency of alternative forms of hierarchy, the extent to which they economize on bounded rationality and control opportunism is of some importance.
In this section, two forms of complex hierarchy are compared: the unitary form (‘U-form’) and the multi-divisional structure (‘M-form’).
Williamson argues that the M-form is a more efficient way of administering certain types of transaction.
He claims, therefore, that one of this century's most important innovations in business organization is explained by his approach.
The U-form, illustrated in Figure 1, is a hierarchy organized on functional lines in which the chief executive office (CEO) has responsibility for both long-run (‘strategic’) planning of the organization as a whole and day-to-day (‘operational’) coordination of the functional departments (production, marketing, purchasing, personnel, finance).
Each functional department is hierarchically organized, and is in the charge of a middle manager responsible for coordinating activities within his or her department.
By 1917, vertical integration was a common feature of large US industrial firms, many of whom had adopted the U-form to administer their activities (see Chandler, 1976: 29).
Some of these firms (typically, ones that possessed marketing or technological knowledge that could find application in new product lines: see Chandler, 1962) next tried to grow by diversifying, a strategy which revealed that the U-form had weaknesses   when used to administer activities in several different markets.
If a firm operates in several different markets the occasion more frequently arises for adjustments to be made in coordinating operational activities between functional areas.
With a U-form structure, in which the functional basis of decomposition is preserved all the way up the hierarchy, more of top management's time is devoted to these operational matters, whose pressing need for resolution gives them an urgency not usually attached to issues of a more long-run, strategic kind.
Because of cognitive limits within top management (that is, bounded rationality), the effect that diversification has, therefore, in the U-form firm is for strategic planning to be ‘crowded out’ by operational decisions.
As Simon (1960) pointed out, one of the main tasks in designing a hierarchy is to decide the appropriate level of authority for each class of decision that has to be made.
To economize on top management's bounded rationality there is an obvious need within the diversified firm for operating decisions to be decentralized.
This would not be possible in a U-form because middle management has only functional responsibility: no one below the CEO has responsibility for overall operating performance in a given market.
Strategic planning with a diversified U-form organization is difficult not only because top management's limited attention is more frequently diverted to operational matters.
Problems are caused also by the absence of information on overall operating performance in each separate market.
Firstly, this makes it difficult to decide where best to expand or contract the firm's resources.
Secondly, without such information, the performance of each department within the U-form is assessed by the CEO on the basis of criteria specific to that department, rather than by aggregating its contributions to overall performance in the separate markets.
This severely distorts the incentive system within the organization: since their efforts are judged and rewarded on the basis of functional criteria, middle managers have the incentive to pursue functional (sub-global) goals beyond levels that are optimal from the corporate (global) point of view.
This is an example of opportunism by middle   managers, due to their superiors' inability to check their claims about what is actually in the best interests of the firm.
Williamson argues that the M-form, illustrated in Figure 2, avoids these weaknesses in administering the diversified firm, by economizing on bounded rationality and improving control of opportunism.
In the M-form, below the top level of management, the hierarchy is organized on an operating rather than on a functional basis.
Each division controls the operations of a fairly self-contained part of the organization's activities (for example, a particular product line, or a geographical area).
The aim is to place in one division activities which interact strongly, and put weakly interacting parts in different divisions.
The head of each division is responsible for its operating performance, which is judged by indicators of overall success in its markets (for example, by operating profits, sales growth or market share).
Divisional heads therefore have incentives that, compared to the U-form, are aligned more closely with corporate (global) goals and which discourage over-pursuit of functional (sub-global) goals.
Each division is itself organized on U-form lines.
The M-form economizes on the bounded rationality of top management by decentralizing operational decisions to the divisional level.
Strategic planning for the organization as a whole is the responsibility of top management in a ‘General Office’.
People here are not functional specialists and, therefore, are less likely to advocate policies that promote functional at the expense of corporate interests.
The General Office chooses organizational goals, monitors the performance of the separate operating divisions, and allocates the organization's resources among these divisions.
In doing these things, it is supported by an ‘elite staff’, again  comprising people with no functional interests, whose roles are to audit the operating divisions and advise the General Office.
The M-form was independently developed by several US corporations (Du Pont, General Motors, Standard Oil of New Jersey, Sears) in the 1920s and 1930s, in response to management problems that emerged from their attempts to diversify.
However, its efficiency advantages in these circumstances should not be used to infer that it is a panacea of organizational design.
The general principle is that net gains can be made by identifying and giving effect to decomposability amongst the organization's activities.
The M-form is not appropriate if divisions are formed between which there are strong links on either the supply or the demand side (see Williamson, 1970: Chapter 8).
Steer and Cable (1978) found, among large UK companies, evidence that profitability was increased by having the form of internal organization appropriate to the firm's environment.
The M-form is suitable only in some environments.
As markets and technology evolve, one would expect the nature of transactions to change and present new configurations of administrative problems.[…]
3 Critique
Williamson's theory of the firm, presented in Section 2, is an explanation of why some resources are managed, rather than allocated by markets, and why managerial functions are divided into several different, specialized roles within the firm.
This section briefly reviews the essential features of Williamson's theory, then presents two types of criticism: firstly, that the theory is a confusing mixture of static and dynamic elements, analysed in a loose way that does not make clear which things are endogenous and which are exogenous; secondly, that the approach is too sanguine about the desirability of the organizational forms that are explained.
That transaction-specific assets are organized by management rather than markets is explained by savings on the resources used to decide how to adjust to changes unanticipated at the start of the contract.
Given that resources are managed, hierarchy is explained by gains from allowing people to specialize according to their comparative advantage: in particular, those with a comparative advantage in deciding how to coordinate the diverse resources used in the firm and how to adjust this coordination in response to unforeseen changes, are assigned specialist managerial roles.
Finally, the decomposition of managerial hierarchies allows some managers to specialize in strategic decision-making and for this task to be performed by people who not only possess a relevant comparative advantage but also whose corporate loyalties are not compromised by undue devotion to narrow functional goals.
In essence, therefore, Williamson's theory of the firm explains the existence, division and specialization of management in terms of economizing on resources  used to make decisions.
In addition, allocative efficiency may be improved if the shift to an M-form of internal organization leads to behaviour that is more profit-oriented.
It is a strength of Williamson's theory that attention is drawn to the need for decision-making resources and to the importance of economizing on these.
A further attraction of the approach is its discussion of the role of such resources in deciding how to respond to changes unanticipated at the start of a contract: it is this feature that adds a fundamentally dynamic element to the theory.
A major weakness, however, is that this element is fitted only roughly into the discussion, in a way that makes it difficult to integrate the dynamic with the static features of the analysis.
In particular, given the importance attached by Williamson to efficiency, there is no clear treatment of the tradeoffs that might be necessary between short-term and long-term efficiency.
One example of the inadequacies that arise from such informal presentation of the theory is the absence of a clear analysis of the interdependence of production technique and organizational form.
Instead of focusing on this interdependence, as one would expect of a truly dynamic theory, Williamson discusses the efficient resolution of contractual problems that are associated with given techniques of production.
The techniques themselves, it would seem, are regarded by him as exogenous to his analysis.
If so, only limited claims, if any, should be made for the theory as an explanation of the historical evolution of the firm, and of industrial organization.[…]
The second type of criticism made of Williamson's analysis is its emphasis on efficiency at the expense of distribution.
Malcolmson (1984: 126) argues that ‘an essential feature of the world Williamson is interested in […]is not one in which one can simply assume that economic efficiency will win out in the end’.
The reason is that the organizational changes discussed by Williamson influence the distribution of power both within and between firms, and one cannot presume that power is used to produce efficient outcomes.
Within firms, the existence of a specialized managerial hierarchy inevitably sacrifices equality in the distribution of power, and raises the issue of whether workers are adequately compensated for their loss of autonomy in controlling the work process.
Marglin (1975) 'argues that the development of the factory system was not in the interest of workers who, being left with no alternative but the freedom to starve, were forced to comply.
Putterman (1984), whilst accepting the necessity for hierarchy in a complex organization, questions whether this needs to be associated with the domination of capital over labour.
There is also the possibility that organizational changes might alter the distribution of market power between firms.
Williamson's expressed aim is to redress the balance, in industrial organization theory, between arguments that emphasize the consequences of organizational changes for monopoly power, and those that focus on their efficiency consequences.
Nevertheless,[…]the monopoly power effects of decisions such as vertical integration and multinational production should not be ignored.
If read in isolation, Williamson's analysis is far too sanguine about the efficiency effects of the organizational forms it explains.
4 Summary
Williamson's theory of the firm is an attempt, following Coase, to explain the existence and internal structure of firms rather than to take them for granted.
In doing so, it rightly emphasizes the need for an economic analysis of decision-making resources.
Despite introducing some dynamic elements into the discussion, these are not treated in a formal way.
This lack of formal analysis leaves the dynamic features of the theory inadequately specified, and thereby limits the relevance of claims it makes to explain the historical evolution of the firm.
In isolation, Williamson's discussion neglects the effects of organizational changes on distribution and monopoly power.
6
Creating the Single European Market
Dennis Swann
In 1986 the twelve member states of the European Communityl signed the Single European Act (SEA).
By doing so they amended the three basic treaties which respectively created the European Coal and Steel Community (which came into existence in 1951), the European Atomic Energy Community and the European Economic Community (Euratom and EEC — both of which came into operation in 1958).
In respect of the latter, the SEA strengthened the decision-making powers under the founding Rome Treaty and a more firmly entrenched certain policy objectives, for example research and development cooperation and balanced regional development.
It also accorded formal recognition to the European Political Cooperation Procedure.
It should be explained that while the above three communities were primarily concerned with economic matters, it was always anticipated that the process of integrating economies would spill over into the political sphere.
In other words the members would also begin to collaborate on foreign policy matters.
This has in fact happened.
The process was initiated in 1970 and is now referred to as the European Political Cooperation Procedure.
This foreign policy coordinating mechanism, together with the machinery of economic integration within the three economic communities, now constitute the twin pillars of European unity.
Most important, however, was the modification to the Rome Treaty which committed the ‘twelve’ to completing the internal market by the end of 1992.
The 1992 aspect has attracted an unprecedented amount of attention both within the Community and in the rest of the world.
Within the Community, governments have been actively campaigning in order to explain to business people and to the general public what it implies and promises.
As a result business restructuring is already well under way.
[…]Third country competitors, notably Japan, have also drawn the conclusion that the 1992 commitment demands a fundamental review of business strategy,[…
]What then is 1992 all about?
The origins of 1992
The Rome Treaty envisaged the creation of the EEC (by the original ‘Six’) 2 within a transition period of twelve years, which would end in December 1969.
Its objectives were diverse.
Central was the requirement that internal tariff (customs duty), quota and non-tariff barriers to trade in goods should be abolished so as to create an enlarged European economic space.
In other words, goods produced in one member state would be able to enter and compete in other member state markets, free of all obstacles and barriers.
Around this there would be an economic fence in the shape of the common external tariff, that is a common level of import duty on any particular kind of good entering the Community from without.
Complementing the freedom to supply goods within the EEC there would be a freedom to supply services such as insurance and banking across frontiers.
The Rome Treaty also envisaged free and undistorted movement across frontiers of factors of production, that is labour, capital and enterprise.
When all this was accomplished the Community would, in the language of economic integration theory, constitute a Common Market.
The Treaty did not envisage carrying the process of economic integration to the stage of a monetary union national currencies were to remain.
Control over their supply and the exchange rates between them were, in the final analysis, to be left to national discretion.
In practice the requirement to create the Common Market was not achieved by the end of 1969.
Indeed, even at the time of the negotiations which led up to the SEA the European Communities (EC) Commission (the Civil Service which administers the communities from Brussels) estimated that in excess of 300 measures remained to be adopted before the problem of what came to be called ‘non-Europe’ could be said to have been fully addressed.
In some instances proposals for action had lain on the table of the Council of Ministers (the body which makes Community law) since the early 1970s!
Why the delay?
Some of it could be ascribed to a basic weakness in the Council of Ministers' decision-making machinery.
The need to harmonize national laws was bound to be frustrated by the Treaty's need for unanimity as between all twelve member states.
When, as in the case of insurance, West Germany contemplated the competition from the City of London which would follow in the wake of measures to ensure freedom to supply insurance services, the unanimity rule provided ample scope for postponing the evil day.
Even when the Treaty allowed for majority voting, thus hopefully preventing individual states from applying a veto, progress was frustrated in earlier days by French distaste for the principle and later the British were not averse to opposing majority voting when it suited them.
But other factors also explain the lack of progress.
Deepening the Common Market, that is pressing forward with existing policies, had to compete with the claims of policy widening, such as new initiatives  in regional and monetary policy.
Added to all this were wrangles over the Community Budget and the Common Agricultural Policy together with the protective responses which followed in the wake of the oil price recessions of the 1970s and growing foreign competition.
The renewed impetus which ultimately led to the SEA derived considerable support from the first directly elected European Parliament (EP).
Originally the EP was indirectly elected, that is to say the members were selected by the members of the national parliaments.
In 1979, however, the Community moved over to direct elections — the general public were allowed to vote for their own MEPs.
On the basis of this greatly enhanced authority the EP decided to press ahead with the task of unifying Europe and to this end produced a draft treaty establishing a European Union.
This was a visionary proposal which would have brought economic and foreign policy matters within the ambit of the Union decision-making process, would have strengthened the position of the EC Commission, would have phased out national vetoes to which I referred above and have given the EP an enhanced law-making (as opposed to its largely consultative) role.
Whilst it is true that the summit meeting of heads of state and government (prime ministers and presidents) in Stuttgart in 1983 adopted a Solemn Declaration of European Union, it would be a mistake to assume that the prime ministers and presidents and the European Parliamentarians were on the same wavelength.
Indeed, when an intergovernmental conference was finally convened in 1985 in order to negotiate a European Union treaty, some member states clearly had severe reservations.
One was the UK whose position could be simplified, hopefully not too crudely, as follows.
First things first.
We have not yet completed the Common Market.
What is the point of discussing visionary schemes when we have not even dealt with the basics.
The EC Commission for its part threw into the discussion the now celebrated Cockfield Report3 which detailed the host of measures which would have to be adopted before a single market could be said to exist.
In the upshot the SEA, whilst it made some concessions to the political aspirations of the EP, was notable chiefly for its powerful commitment to the economic concept of completing the internal market.
1992 — the tasks
What does completing the internal market entail?
Broadly speaking the EC Commission's original 300-plus measures were designed to create, in respect of economic activity across frontiers, a situation which would approximate, in terms of its freedom and lack of distortion and discrimination, to the situation which exists when goods, services and factors are supplied within a state.
Putting it another way, movement of goods, services and so forth across the English Channel ought ideally to be no different to movement from England to Wales.
This is a tall order.
In the  Commission's eyes the following are the kinds of measure which must be introduced — they are, it should be emphasized, illustrative and by no means exhaustive.
Frontier controls
Frontier checks and controls would have to be rationalized and relaxed in the short term.
In the longer term they should go so as to create a real ‘Europe without frontiers’.
Standards relating to goods
National official and technical standards by virtue of their difference have in the past fragmented the European market.
Somehow this extremely widespread problem needed to be swept away.
All this requires further elaboration.
The problem is quite simply as follows.
The governments of member states interfere in the market on a very considerable scale by imposing standards upon the producers of goods and indeed services.
These standards often have the force of law.
They are introduced for a variety of reasons but often the aim is the laudable one of protecting the public against physical harm or deception.
As an example of the first we can cite pharmaceuticals and foodstuffs.
The need for government controls to prevent the marketing of dangerous medicines is obvious — the example of thalidomide indicates what can happen when inadvertently a dangerous drug gets through the net.
In the case of foodstuffs a whole host of additives have been used to flavour, colour, emulsify and preserve the products in question.
These can harm the consumer — the ban on the sweetening agent cyclamate on the grounds that it could cause cancer is a case in point.
We have also noted that the problem may be one of preventing deception.
Thus labelling rules may be necessary so that, for example , consumers know what ‘pure wool’ really means.
The desirability of such standards is not in question.
However, to the extent that standards differ, either goods cannot be exported with a consequent loss of competition between countries, or if they are exported they have to be adapted to the rules of each national market.
Either way the economies of large scale, in the form of longer production runs of a standardized product, are in some degree lost.
There is also a reduction in choice.
The idea that such standardization will lead to a lack of choice is not correct, rather it will increase it.
Standardization only refers to certain aspects of a product's design — there is still scope for variation.
Thus in Europe, automobiles have been subjected to a good deal of standardization in matters concerning safety and pollution, but that has not precluded the car industry from providing a vast range of choice in terms of styling and performance.
One obvious way round all this is to harmonize standards, that is to devise a European standard.
All goods which conform to this standard would automatically have to be allowed into all other member state markets.
There are indeed provisions within the Rome Treaty — specifically Articles 100 to 102 — which provide for the approximation of national laws.
This process involves the issuing by the Council of Ministers of harmonization directives.
These lay down European standards and the member states are required to amend their own national laws so as to bring their own standards into line with the European harmonized standard.
All this sounds like the answer to the problem.
In some degree it is and a considerable number of products have been so harmonized.
Unfortunately it is an extremely time-consuming process and at the time of the SEA much yet remained to be done before all the products that needed to be dealt with had in fact been covered.
The sheer size of the task in fact prompted the EC Commission to doubt whether the traditional approach to the standards problem, which had been adopted prior to the SEA, was any longer appropriate.
More will be said on that point later.
Government purchasing
Public procurement is another area where the 1992 programme calls for further progress.
The problem here is as follows.
A substantial proportion of the goods and services which are purchased are bought not by private individuals and private businesses but by governments (central, regional and local) and by public enterprises, that is, nationalized industries.
Such public procurement or purchasing has in the past not been carried out on the basis of buying the cheapest and/or the best.
Rather governments have favoured a policy of buying home-produced goods.
By so doing they have sought to protect domestic employment, the balance of payments and so forth.
In fact such behaviour constitutes an act of discrimination and it should be noted that discrimination on the grounds of nationality, for example giving a preference to British goods as opposed to French goods rather than treating them on their merits, is an offence under Article 7 of the Rome Treaty.
The Council of Ministers has indeed taken specific steps to root out such discrimination.
In 1971 it did so in respect of public works contracts.
Also from 1976 all public supply contracts above a specified limit awarded by local, regional and central governments had to be publicly advertised in advance.
In considering tenders the contract-awarding body was obliged to treat all offers equally — there should be no discrimination between home and foreign bids.
In spite of all this the EC Commission has, from time to time, had to instigate cases against member state governments who were flouting the non-discrimination rule.
The 1992 programme seeks to tighten up the public purchasing process so as to provide businesses with the prospect that in practice, rather than theory, the whole of the EC market is truly open to their competitive offers.
To this end three further developments are envisaged.
Firstly, the 1971 and 1976 directives need to be modified so as to deal with certain procedural weaknesses and to close the loopholes which member states have exploited.
Secondly certain major areas of activity have been  excluded from the directives — these are energy, transport, water and telecommunications.
These now need to be specifically included.
Thirdly, services, for example data processing, as well as goods need to be liberalized.
Free movement of capital
The original Rome Treaty required that factors of production such as labour, capital and enterprise should be free to move from one state to another.
Such freedom of movement was far from complete at the time of the SEA.
The 1992 programme therefore calls for the liberalization process to be carried to completion.
A good example of this is provided by capital transactions.
Whilst some progress had been made complete free movement of capital cannot be said to have been achieved by the time of the SEA.
Rather, the internal market has been compartmentalized.
Action was needed in respect of exchange controls.
Here we are referring to the fact that capital movements require the exchange of currencies.
A French company wishing to build a plant in West Germany needs to be able to turn its French francs into D-marks.
Equally a Dutch investor wishing to buy shares on the London Stock Exchange needs to turn Dutch guilders into pounds sterling.
But member states have sometimes refused to allow currency exchanges designed to facilitate certain kinds of transaction.
Outward investment may be banned because it weakens the balance of payments and allows the life-blood capital to leak out of the system, whilst inflows of currency may be repulsed because they cause the exchange rate to rise to unacceptable levels or add to the domestic supply of money and thus threaten inflation.
In respect of the control of capital movements, the Community made a very significant breakthrough in 1988 when it was agreed that all restrictions on such movements between residents in different member states should be removed by July 1990.
Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal were allowed to keep their controls until the end of 1992.
An escape clause was, however, built in whereby in emergencies short-term capital movements could be controlled for periods of up to six months.
Free competition in services
The Rome Treaty aims to open up the Common Market to competition in respect of services as well as goods.
Here too progress has been limited.
Space does not permit us to review all the actions which needed to be taken so we will focus on two — banking services and air passenger transport.
Proposals concerning banking are part of a broader programme to create a common market in financial services.
One of the main problems in banking is that banks have not been free to establish themselves in other member states — the technical phrase which applies here is the Right of Establishment.
The Right of Establishment relates not merely to a  situation where a parent bank in one member state sets up a subsidiary in another, but also to situations where a parent in one state sets up a branch in another state.
Such activities have been inhibited by a variety of factors.
I will outline just two.
Firstly, member states regulate their banks.
This is often referred to as prudential regulation and it consists of setting down standards in respect of such matters as the capital reserves which have to be maintained by banks.
These and other rules are designed (amongst other things) to guarantee bank solvency and therefore to protect depositors and indeed to maintain a stable monetary system.
If the monetary system topples the economic system will also come crashing down.
To the extent that these prudential rules vary the Right of Establishment tends to be inoperative.
Thus country A may impose more onerous rules than country B and therefore a country B bank will not be admitted to country A. Secondly, some countries have required the branches of foreign banks to have their own endowment of reserve capital.
This puts foreign banks at a disadvantage since the foreign parent has to hold capital reserves and its branch has to do likewise, whereas the home country bank does not have to bear this double burden.
The Community is now on the way to solving these problems on the following lines.
Firstly, it has decided to adopt a system of home country supervision.
In other words, a parent bank and its subsidiaries abroad will be supervised by the parent country regulatory authority.
However, this will not solve the problem unless the supervisory rules in each parent country are brought substantially into line.
Therefore it is proposed that national supervisory rules should be harmonized, not in every detail, but only in the key factors — other less crucial aspects of the rules can be allowed to vary from country to country and be subject to mutual recognition.
In respect of the branch problem, this could probably be solved by building on the fact that a directive adopted in 1983 required that the supervision of credit institutions should be conducted on a consolidated basis.
In other words the branch is part of the parent and therefore the requirement to hold two lots of reserves is really contrary to the spirit of the directive.
Prior to the SEA, scheduled (as opposed to charter) 4 air passenger transport was notable for the absence of any really significant Community impact.
The spirit of the Rome Treaty would suggest that there ought to be competition between airlines in respect of air fares on scheduled services between member states.
Equally the Rome Treaty principle of freedom to supply services suggests that airlines should be free to enter and compete on any inter-state route.
In practice, matters have been quite the reverse.
On particular routes the air fares were not competitive but were fixed by agreement between the national flag carriers, for example BA and Air France on the London/Paris route.
These cartel prices were then rubber-stamped by the member state governments.
Also routes were not open to competition.
Rather, through the agency of bilateral (inter-governmental) air services agreements the traffic was divided up, usually on a fifty/fifty basis, between the two national flag carriers.
Under the inspiration of the 1992 programme all this is now in the process of changing.
In 1987 the Community agreed to a package of measures which will create greater fare competition, will allow the airlines to increase market shares at each other 's expense (rather than maintaining a rigid fifty/fifty split) and will allow other airlines (both from the bilateral partners and from other states) to ply for trade on particular routes.
Indirect tax harmonization
Another area where progress remained to be made was indirect taxation — specifically Value Added Tax (VAT) and excise duties.
We will concentrate on the former.
The Community long ago adopted VAT as its standard form of indirect tax.
Whilst the form of indirect tax was thus harmonized on the VAT model, the base (the collection of goods upon which it is levied) still needs to be brought into line.
In addition, the rate of the tax varies widely from state to state — the standard rate in Ireland is 23 per cent whilst in Spain it is only 12 per cent .
The fact that rates vary does not distort competition since when goods are exported VAT is remitted and tax is applied in the country of destination.
This means that imported goods are treated the same (in terms of the rate of tax levied) as home-produced goods.
The Commission would, however, like to harmonize (in fact bring closer together — see below) national rates of VAT.
Goods could then be exported bearing the tax.
Business cooperation across frontiers
The Commission has long wished to see greater industrial cooperation across frontiers.
This would require companies to be able to merge across frontiers and be able to organize themselves on a Europe-wide basis without discrimination.
Unfortunately fiscal and legal factors and differences have inhibited such arrangements.
The Commission has therefore proposed that such inhibiting factors should be eliminated and that specific forms of cross-frontier business organization should be created.
A European Economic Interest Grouping has already been approved, but the long awaited European Company Statute still lies on the table.
This would provide a system of company law which would be adopted by each country side by side with its own national company law.
The European company law, by existing in identical form in each member state, would provide a vehicle for cross-frontier business integration.
1992 — the techniques
How is all this to be accomplished?
Clearly the task is considerable and calls for an efficient Community legislative system (which needs to be  accompanied by a vigorous process of national compliance).
The SEA focuses on the former and has made two contributions.
Firstly, more harmonization activity has been brought within the scope of majority voting, thus getting rid of national vetoes.
Secondly, institutional changes have also been introduced which hopefully will provide for a more cooperative relationship between the Council of Ministers and the EP.
In addition, the EC Commission lays emphasis on a number of other changes which should contribute to the speeding up of the legislative process.
Court of Justice rulings have stressed the general principle that goods which have been legally marketed in one member state should normally be freely admitted to others.
This means that the ability of states to block imports is reduced.
Thus just because beer is produced in a different way in one country as compared with another does not mean that either country can legitimately prevent imports from the other.
The fact that the beer has been produced in a different way does not mean that it is therefore harmful, and so on.
Thus there may be no grounds for refusing to import it.
If, however, in some instances considerations such as danger to life and limb can legitimately be invoked to block imports then the need to harmonize cannot be avoided.
But harmonization will now concentrate on the essentials — the peripherals will be left to a process of mutual recognition by states.
Mutual recognition of national supervisory standards is also proposed in respect of banking.
As we have seen, some prior harmonization of standards of authorization and supervision will be necessary but, those limited conditions having been met, banks will then be free to set up in other states.
The EC Commission is also now arguing that approximation rather than total harmonization may well suffice.
Thus national VAT rates will not have to be identical — it suffices that they will be sufficiently close to prevent significant distortions.
1992 — the expectations
What is the object of all this 1992 activity?
The short answer is that the elimination of barriers to trade and the boost to competition will have an economic pay-off.
Costs will fall due to the fuller exploitation of economies of scale in a truly European market.
Efficiency will also improve as prices and costs move down under the pressure exerted by more competitive markets.
More economic patterns of resource allocation will result as underlying comparative advantages are allowed to exert their full potential.
Hopefully increased competition will stimulate a more rapid rate of innovation.
By 1992 this could add 4.5 per cent to the EC GDP and create 1.8 million new jobs (Cecchini, 1988).
Internal problems
Inevitably achieving general agreement on market completion involved a delicate balancing of national interests.
The relatively less developed southern members, e.g. Portugal, Spain and Greece, looked for some compensation if they were to face the rigours of a more competitive European marketplace.
The result was a modification of the Rome Treaty which acknowledges the need to achieve social and economic cohesion.
Under this heading the commitment to reduce disparities between the standards of living in the various countries and regions of the Community was given greater emphasis.
This was achieved by transferring this commitment from the preamble to the original Treaty to the main text of the amended one.
This was followed in 1988 by a reform of the Community Budget in which steps were taken to shift expenditure from agricultural to the structural funds, that is those concerned with regional and social matters, and the expenditure rules were recast so as to concentrate such structural spending on the poorest regions.
Having set the process of achieving an ever closer economic union once more in motion, almost inevitably concern arose in some quarters over the possibility that this could spill over into a closer political union.
That after all has always been the federalist hope.
Not surprisingly, those who are averse to surrendering their sovereignty have become increasingly restive of late.
Mrs Thatcher, in her speech to the College of Europe at Bruges in 1988, articulated that concern by declaring that her first guiding principle was that ‘willing and active cooperation between independent sovereign states’ was the best way to build a successful European Community.
Whilst federalism was not mentioned in her critique of Europe's future, she made her feelings plain when she expressed her opposition to the suppression of nationhood and to the fitting of British customs and traditions into an ‘identikit European personality’.
British concerns do not of course merely consist of such generalities.
They have manifested themselves in three specific areas.
Firstly, there is the monetary issue.
Most economists would agree that a single European currency, which would also imply a European Central Bank to control it, would encourage trade thanks to the absence of uncertainty in relation to exchange rates and to the elimination of transactions costs inherent in dealing in a multiple of currencies.
Therefore, as part of the 1992 programme it was agreed at the Hanover summit meeting of heads of state and government in 1988 that the progressive realization of an economic and monetary union should be studied at the highest level.
This ultimately emerged as the Delors Report.
However, the prospects for a single currency, other than in the long run, seem remote.
Against the benefits has to be set the loss of sovereignty.
This manifests itself in various ways.
One is the fear that, against a background of imperfectly working markets, whole regions and, indeed, whole countries could become uncompetitive as their labour costs failed to adjust to labour  costs elsewhere.
Such uncompetitiveness could be persistent and, with a single currency, the normal remedy of devaluation would not be available.
The UK is of course opposed to surrendering its monetary sovereignty and did not begin to participate in the relatively modest exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System until October 1990.
Statements by the West German Bundesbank indicate that it views monetary union as a state which comes only at the end of a very long process of economic convergence.
Secondly, whilst Thatcherite thinking warmed to the free and open market aspect of the 1992 programme, EC Commission President Jacques Delors has quite correctly emphasized that the SEA also has a social dimension.
It seeks to balance the greater play of market forces and a new-found freedom for business with an element of social protection and participation for labour.
In practice the proposed social measures — the right of every worker to be covered by a collective agreement, the right of workers to lifelong educational opportunities, and so on— seem modest enough, but have provoked vigorous opposition in right-wing economic circles in the UK.
Mrs Thatcher also pointed to the contrast between her domestic achievements in rolling back the frontiers of the state and the prospect that if the Delors of this world have their way, power over the economy would be re-centralized in Brussels.
This, it must be said, is unfair to the EC Commission.
If, for example, we survey the field of regulation in airline operation, financial services, and so on it is all too obvious that hitherto it is the member state governments that in the main have clung on to their controls and the EC Commission that has been in favour of deregulation and more competition.
The third area of UK concern, and one which has not yet been resolved, relates to frontier controls.
The SEA declares that ‘The internal market shall comprise an area without frontiers.’
This, as noted earlier, is the EC Commission's long-run aim.
The UK, however, is far from happy about the prospect and sees it as helping to create a paradise for criminals, terrorists and drug traffickers.
The external implications of the 1992 single market
When 1992 is finally accomplished, what will be the nature of the Community's relationship with the rest of the world?[…
]Will the ‘Twelve’ have established a relatively open trading relationship with the rest of the world or will it, accepting that a common external tariff will remain, have gone the opposite way and created a protectionist Europe what is often referred to as Fortress Europe?
[…
]Third World countries have a choice.
They could continue exporting to the Community, facing whatever tariff and other protection the ‘Twelve’ decide to impose.
Alternatively they can seek to avoid the protective wall by setting up subsidiaries and branches within the Community.
These issues are nicely illustrated by the Community's relationship with Japan.
Some member states, for example France and Italy, have already set quantitative limits to their imports of Japanese cars.
To be effective these arrangements have to prevent indirect imports via other member states and such internal border controls fragment the European market.
The completion of the internal market would therefore appear to imply the removal of such protective devices, but member states are not likely to comply until protective measures at the Community level are in place.
This has yet to be agreed.
The liberality or otherwise of such Community arrangements will help to answer our initial question.
Japanese producers of cars and many other products are in fact already behaving as if Fortress Europe is a reality — that is to say they are setting up full-scale manufacturing plants in Europe.
In many cases they have done so because their goods, produced outside the Community, have been regarded as unfair competition and have attracted anti-dumping duties designed to make them more expensive and therefore less competitive.
To avoid this they first of all transferred final assembly to Europe.
That in turn provoked an attack on so-called screwdriver operations5 — this was accomplished by the imposition of local content rules, that is rules which require a minimum amount of domestically produced content.
The Commission's latest strategy now appears to be to devise origin rules which focus on the transfer of technology, since a local content ratio of 80 per cent can still allow Japanese producers to hang on to key technological processes.
In its 1992 programme for liberalizing financial services the Community is also exercising leverage by imposing reciprocity conditions.
Third World country banks (Japanese are very much in mind) will be able to establish subsidiaries in the EC and enjoy the benefits of an enlarged market, but only if their home country reciprocates in respect of Community banks.
[…]
Democratic implications of 1992
Some time ago Jacques Delors let slip the speculation that in the mid 1990's perhaps 80 per cent of domestic economic legislation would derive from Brussels.
Apart from sending a frisson of alarm down the spines of all those who cherish their national sovereignty, such a forecast, if only half true, does point to the emergence of a democratic gap.
Since Community law is supreme, national parliaments would increasingly be consigned to the role of rubber-stamping the actions of the Council of Ministers.
The EP, on the other hand, is largely consultative.
It does not provide a substitute for national parliaments in that the Council of Ministers does not legislate through it and is not accountable to it in the way which is typical of representative democracies.
It would therefore appear that if the Delors prediction is broadly correct there will, in the  medium to long term, be a need to radically redefine the role of the EP in relation to the Council of Ministers.
In other words, the EP would have to take on the role of approving Community legislation similarly to the way in which national parliaments currently make national laws.
Progress and prospects
The basic question is simple to state but more difficult to answer — will the 1992 programme succeed?
This can be approached in a variety of ways:
(a)
Will the Community achieve its legislative target?
(b)
Are business people responding (wisely) in anticipation of the challenge?
(c)
How big will the economic pay-off really be?
(d)
Is an economic pay-off the only measure of success?
In respect of its legislative task, the EC Commission's report of November 1988 indicated that, whilst substantial progress had been made, only a third of the required measures had been adopted.
The Community is therefore currently behind schedule.
As members have to be given time to incorporate measures into national law, it follows that the Council of Ministers will have to complete most of its work by 1990.
This is a formidable task.
We may in fact anticipate some slippage in the timetable as a result of two factors.
Firstly, there are clearly some issues where member states are beginning to dig in their heels.
The proposal to harmonize VAT rates is one which cuts across the UK's wish to cling to its fiscal sovereignty.
Whilst, as noted earlier, the SEA provides for harmonization measures to be dealt with on a majority voting basis, the British were able to insist that fiscal matters should be excluded from that rule.
Slippage may also occur because of derogations from the 1992 deadline.
Thus in the case of the non-life insurance directive, some states have been allowed until 1998 or 1999 to bring their laws into line with the Community standard.
The evidence, such as it is, suggests that business people are responding.
We have already noted the Japanese inward investment reaction.
Within Europe a major programme of corporate restructuring is under way.
Corporate strategists point out that there is no single right answer.
The correct strategy will be industry specific.
This is what the evidence suggests since, while the tempo of mergers and acquisitions (both domestic and cross-border) has been rising rapidly, it is also apparent that some industries have been engaged in divesting themselves of activities which are peripheral or difficult to manage in order to concentrate on areas of strength.
It is clearly too soon to measure the actual as opposed to the estimated economic pay-off.
It should be pointed out that even if the figures cited  earlier are achieved, they are not overwhelming, since they constitute no more than about two years' growth.
If, on the other hand, the single market has the dynamic property of shifting the Community on to a permanently higher growth path, a more favourable judgement would be called for.
On the other hand an undue concentration on economic payoffs is not what the SEA is all about.
The fruits of European Union cannot be measured solely in terms of GDP.
7
Which internal market?
The NHS White Paper and internal markets
Penelope M. Mullen
One of the fundamental proposals in the 1989 Health Service White Paper Working for Patients (DoH, 1989) is the separation of the funding of health care from the provision of health care, using what many commentators have termed an ‘Internal Market’.
However, although it is now widely used, the term ‘Internal Market’ would appear to embrace more than one concept.
What, then is an ‘Internal Market’?
The term ‘Internal Market’ is usually attributed to Enthoven, who put forward proposals for greater import and export of patients between health authorities.
Enthoven explained his proposals thus:
Each District would receive a RAWP (Regional Authority Working Party) based per capita revenue and capital allowance.
Each DHA (District Health Authority) would continue to be responsible to provide and pay for comprehensive care for its own resident population.
[…]It would be paid for emergency services to outsiders at a standard cost.
It would be paid for non-emergency services to outsiders at negotiated prices.
It would control referrals to providers outside the District and it would pay for them at negotiated prices.
[…](Enthoven, 1985a)
He also stressed that: ‘The theory behind such a scheme — which can better be called ‘market socialism’ than ‘privatisation’— is that the managers could then buy services from producers who offered the best value' (Enthoven, 1985b).
This concept of the ‘Internal Market’ was adopted by most contributors during the debate prior to the publication of the White Paper ‘Working for Patients’.
[= =]
However, statements from Ministers and interpretations in the press in the months leading up to the publication of the White Paper appear to describe a rather different concept of the ‘Internal Market’— a patient-led system.
For instance:
moves to create an ‘internal market’ in the NHS where patients are encouraged to seek treatment where waiting lists are the lowest.
(Hencke and Carvel, 1988)
[…
]The Secretary of State strongly endorsed the idea of patients shopping around for treatment to cut waiting times […
](Wood, 1988)
The front-runner for reform remains the adoption of the ‘internal market’, under which GP's could send patients to the health districts with the shortest waiting lists, with the money for their treatment travelling with them.
(Brown, 1988)
This concept would appear rather different from that proposed by Enthoven.
Classification of ‘Internal Markets'
Thus we find that two very different types of system are being described under the heading ‘Internal Market’.
These may be termed Type I and Type 11 systems or models.
Whilst each of the two systems embraces a host of different proposals, the ‘pure’ forms of the two types of system can be characterized as follows […]
Type I ‘Internal Market’ systems
With Type I systems the health authority receives funding for its population; has a specific responsibility for the health/health care of that population; and, in various combinations depending on how radical the proposal claims to be, provides and/or purchases services from other providers, public or private, to meet the health needs of the population.
In the least ‘radical’ forms, the home authorities remain the main providers of services, but purchasing of services from other health authorities is increased.
In the most ‘radical’ forms, the home health authority does not provide any services at all directly, but puts out contracts (with or without competitive tendering) for the entire range of provision.
With the Type I ‘Internal Market’ it is implied, although not always made explicit, that residents of the home health authority may be treated only by ‘approved’or ‘contracted’providers.
Type II ‘Internal Market’ systems
With Type 11 systems, the health authority receives funding for its population; may be a direct supplier of (some) services; but residents can seek treatment anywhere and their home authority is obliged to reimburse the providing authority.
This reimbursement may be either at cost or according to some laid-down scale or negotiated scale of charges.
Popularly when this type of ‘Internal Market’ is mentioned, it is in terms of‘patients being able to shop around to find the shortest waiting list, with their health authority being sent the bill’.
[…
]The National Association of Health Authorities (NAHA, 1988) did in fact point to the two different concepts of the ‘Internal Market’.
Whilst it described an ‘Internal Market’ where ‘[…]the district health authority operates much like the Health Maintenance Organisation in America; here the patient and GP may have less choice concerning where treatment is obtained because the health authority will make its own assessment of value for money services from other authorities or the private sector’, it also pointed out that there is another totally different model being advocated under the generic term ‘Internal Market’, that is ‘Automatic and immediate cross-boundary flow reimbursernent’, which it states ‘carries the internal market concept to its full fruition, involving transferring the initiative from the planners and treasurers, to the market customers (i.e. patients) and their advisers (i.e. GPs) with money following the patient’.
Under this model residents can seek treatment anywhere and their home authority is obliged to reimburse the providing authority, either at cost or according to some laid-down scale of charges.[…]
Implications of the different models of the ‘Internal Market'
[…
]The Type I system has been likened to a Health Maintenance Organization (HMO), with the difference that the ‘organization’ is compulsorily responsible for all residents of a particular location, and thus has no choice over membership.
The Type 11 system is basically a system of retrospective or prospective reimbursement, and is thus very similar to an insurance-based system or to systems such as the American Medicare payments system, where the insurance company, or the state, reimburses the hospital (provider) for care supplied.[…]
Insurance-based systems
Insurance-based health care systems raise questions in two directions.
Firstly, by what mechanism do patients or consumers become insured and, secondly how is health care supplied and paid for?[…]under the pure Type 11 model described here, effectively all residents of a locality would be assumed to be ‘insured’ with their local health authority.
The concern here is how health care is supplied and paid for.
Under most insurance systems, hospitals and health care providers supply services to insured patients and are then reimbursed for the services by the insurer either according to retrospective full cost reimbursement, or according to prospective reimbursement.
In addition, in either case, the patient may have to make a payment at the point of receipt of service.[…]
Retrospective reimbursement
Under retrospective reimbursement schemes, the suppliers of health care receive payment in full from the insurer for all expenditure incurred.
Under this system, suppliers have an incentive to maximize income by encouraging as much activity as possible.
They thus have an incentive to maximize the number of patients treated, maximize the length of stay, maximize the number of surgical procedures performed, and maximize the number of diagnostic tests carried out and drugs supplied.
Such a system is inherently inflationary as it encourages escalation of costs.
Experience in the US, Canada and some European countries was that retrospective reimbursement led to enormous increases in health care costs.
There is no evidence that retrospective reimbursement gives any encouragement to the cost-effective use of different procedures since the health care suppliers know that, whatever the cost, they will be reimbursed.[…]
Prospective reimbursement
The escalation of costs under retrospective reimbursement was so great in the US that there were attempts to introduce regulations into the system to control costs.
In a further attempt to control costs, the US Government and insurance companies turned to a prospective payment system, a form of prospective reimbursement.
Under this system, health care providers are reimbursed at a predetermined price for each defined unit of workload, regardless of the actual cost involved in providing that unit of workload.
The ‘unit of workload’ can be a day in hospital, a diagnostic test or a particular procedure, but more recently has been in the form of a case.
This has led to the development of Diagnostic Related Groups (DRGs)— a method of ‘classifying inpatients into a manageable number of groups, which are both clinically meaningful and homogeneous in resource use’(Culyer and Brazier, 1988).
Providers are then reimbursed at a set price per case treated, according to the DRG into which the case falls.
Prospective payment systems have the advantage that health care suppliers are paid for the number of cases treated and are encouraged to be aware of the costs per case.
Experience has shown that with the introduction of such systems the cost per case dropped, but there is little evidence of whether this resulted from greater efficiency or lower quality of care.
Whilst this system controls the cost per case, the incentive to the supplier is still to treat as many cases as possible and experience suggests that overall expenditure does not necessarily fall, since more cases are treated.
As mentioned above this system requires the classification of hospital activity by case complexity and difficulty.
However, the prospective payment system produces incentives:(a) to treat the lowest-cost patients within any group,(b) to shift the cost of treatment to other agencies and (c) to classify patients in the highest cost group possible — known  as DRG creep.
Thus, with a prospective payment system the funding agency still cannot control total expenditure, unless it can control the number of cases.
Indeed, some insurance companies have tried to do this by requiring prior approval for treatment.
[…]
Type I v Type II ‘Internal Markets'
Following on from the above arguments, the two types of ‘Internal Market’, Type I and Type 11, will now be examined to determine their respective implications, according to the following criteria (see Table 1):
Freedom of choice
— for patients
— for GPs
Health care planning
Ability to promote priorities
Meeting the needs of the population
Equality and equity
Overall expenditure control
Costing detail and information requirements
Freedom of choice for patients and general practitioners
Despite claims by some that ‘Internal Markets’ would increase the freedom of the patient to choose where to seek treatment, it is clear from the discussion above that such freedom is associated only with Type 11 systems.
Indeed, almost all commentators stress that for Type I systems to work, the health authority must have control over the destination of referrals.
Depending on the particular system used, patients would only be permitted to seek treatment from ‘approved’ or ‘contracted’suppliers or would have to get prior agreement from their home authority to seek treatment elsewhere.
Such restrictions would remove any rights GPs currently enjoy to choose where to refer their patients.[…]
However, if the GPs were to act as Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and have a budget to cover the total care for their patients, a Type I system would give them considerable freedom of referral, but would not necessarily increase the patients' freedom.
Although theoretically the Type 11 system permits full GP (and consumer) choice and, indeed, this is seen by its advocates as one of its virtues, some commentators question how much choice would exist in reality.
Firstly, the choice would be that of the GP rather than the consumer, and secondly, it is felt that the implied travelling to receive services would limit freedom.
[…]However, this objection is raised   in respect of both types of system.
Culyer et al.(1988) stress that ‘care will have to be exercised to ensure that very sick and elderly patients are not treated or cared for long distances away from their homes and families’[…]
Planning, priorities, need and equity
Possibly one of the most dramatic implications is the effect of the two different systems on health (care) planning.
Type I systems, because they allocate funds to a health authority, which is charged with responsibility for the health (care) of its (geographically defined) population, will not only ensure, but will require, an important planning role for the health authority […]to ensure that local needs and priorities are pursued.
However, the Type I system is not without problems.
As discussed below, the problems of letting contracts, controlling payments and maintaining quality would be immense in the more radical proposals.
In addition, individual health authorities would enter the ‘Internal Markets’ with different historical endowments of facilities and would be unlikely to be able to compete equally for contracts.
With extreme versions of the Type 11 systems, there would appear little health care planning role for the home health authority and little scope for ensuring that local needs and priorities are met, although, of course, business planning would be necessary for the providing authorities/ hospitals.
This arises from the essence of this type of system which is that patients can go anywhere for treatment, and their home authority must pay for such treatment, whether or not it is considered necessary for that particular patient, whether or not that type of treatment figures in the  local priorities, and whether or not there are ‘more deserving’ cases within the authority.
Providing authorities/hospitals would be paid for cases treated either on the basis of actual cost per case, or on some laid-down or agreed cost per case, and there seems little to prevent them behaving in the same manner as hospitals elsewhere where either ‘Retrospective full cost reimbursement’ or ‘Prospective reimbursement’systems are in operation.
There would be no restraint on services provided or number of cases treated, since the provider authority/hospital would be certain of payment.
The home authority, on the other hand, could find its funds being compulsorily diverted to services and cases it considered low priority.
However, it should not be thought that Type I systems are non-problematic from the point of view of planning for the health (care) needs of a population.
With the more extreme proposals, problems arise from the notion of ‘packages’ of services or care, which would be a corollary of contracting and tendering for services.
Essentially, the arguments revolve around whether the health service should be considered as an agent in the improvement of the health (status) of the population, and thus concerned with promoting and restoring health and preventing ill-health, or whether it is a provider of a commodity — health (care) services.
Much of the debate on the ‘Internal Market’ appears to relate to elective surgery, which lends itself to ‘packages’of care.
It is easy to grasp the concept of tendering for the oft-quoted ‘200 hip replacements’[…
]However, the ‘most radical’ proposals would put the entire health service out to tender — in discrete parcels.
How this could be done for, say, general medicine, other than by letting a contract to provide all services required by a defined population, is difficult to envisage.
If the contract has been given for, say, 100 pneumonia cases, or for 100 fractures (or 100 births!), what do you say to the 101st case that comes along?
Thus, in its most radical form, a Type I ‘Internal Market’ would have to involve a mixture of contracts for numbers of cases, and contracts for particular services for defined population.
Other planning problems arise, of course, from questions such as the interdependence of services.
Is it really possible to ‘contract-out’ some specialities and still retain a comprehensive service?
Considerations of equality and equity reveal somewhat contradictory implications.
Assuming that a health authority has incorporated equity considerations into its planning and priority setting, Type I systems would appear to safeguard equality and equity, especially between health care groups.
On the other hand, Type II systems would appear to allow little scope for equity between groups since large amounts of a health authority's budget would be compulsorily diverted to those areas where patients are more mobile and where providers find it most profitable to supply services, that is mainly elective surgery.
However, Type I systems do create their own form of inequality since, if different health authorities differ in their priorities and make provision only for health care which  they consider to be a priority, residents of different health authorities will find, depending on their local HA's priorities, that access to some forms of health care may be even more unequal than at present.
In contrast, Type 11 systems, by allowing patients to seek treatment anywhere, in theory avoid this form of inequality.
However, it is argued that new inequalities would arise between patients with the resources and knowledge to seek care outside their district and patients without such resources and/or knowledge.
Overall expenditure control
It is virtually impossible to conceive of a Type 11 system operating with cash-limited health authorities.
All discussion of retrospective and prospective reimbursement systems points to the difficulties of controlling overall expenditure.
The NAHA proposals (NAHA, 1988) for workload funding, recognizing something of this point, do suggest that acute services should not be cash limited.
They further suggest that regional planning would limit any unconstrained growth arising from operating what is essentially a reimbursement system.
In practice, if a pure Type II system were operating, the effect would be that health authorities would find very large parts of their budgets being compulsorily removed to pay for a much higher consumption of acute (mainly elective surgery) health care, with a consequential diminution of money available for other services, especially the so-called priority services.
It can be argued that a fairly radical Type II ‘Internal Market’ has already developed in the care of the elderly, where much provision is private but much of the funding is public.
It is however debatable how far this is a relevant model for the rest of the health service.
Firstly, care of the elderly is essentially ‘elective care’(cf. elective surgery).
Secondly, the current pattern of provision grew up initially on the basis of ‘full cost reimbursement’ and latterly on ‘prospective payment’, in both cases from non-cash-limited public funds.
How far would it have developed with cash-limited funds?
Costing detail and information requirements
It appears to be taken as axiomatic by many commentators that any system of ‘Internal Markets’ would require detailed case costing (Bevan et al., 1989).
However, Culyer et al.(1988) make the point that ‘price mechanisms and contracting/franchising systems are not the product of the post-computer age!
Markets have never depended on the existence of detailed information about costs and outcomes:[…
]More cost and outcome data do, of course, help and are highly desirable; they are not, however, particularly more necessary in a provider market system than they are in the NHS as it is.’
However, both types of ‘Internal Market’ would generate a considerable amount of activity in billing, payment and verification which, even  in the computer age, would require vastly increased numbers of administrative and clerical staff.
Type II systems are likely to require full paperwork for each case, whilst with Type I systems the scale of the clerical operations involved would depend on the type of contract.
The proportion of health expenditure devoted to administration is likely to rise nearer to that found in most of Western Europe even if the excesses of the US system are avoided.
Conclusion
The debate on the ‘Internal Market’ has embraced two radically different types of system, both of which exist in minor forms at present and both of which feature in the proposals in the White Paper, Working for Patients.
In their extreme forms, one type would preserve health authority responsibility for planning and meeting the needs of its population (but would have many other problems), the other would make planning and the pursuit of local priorities impossible and co–lld probably not be operated with cash-limited budgets.
However, in their less extreme forms, both types of system probably have a place, but both can be problematic.
Type I systems could pose problems in the creation of ‘packages’ of care, quality, adverse selection, comprehensiveness and so on.
Type II systems could exhibit the problems associated with fee-for-service and reimbursement systems elsewhere.
Such problems would also, of course, be associated with workload funding.
Hierarchies
Introduction
Jeremy Mitchell
In a market each element (individual, firm) pursues its own interest and the interaction between the elements produces a collective outcome — the market coordinates the separate activities.
Coordination by hierarchy is different in that the actions of similar elements (individuals, firms) is to some extent constrained.
Hierarchy presupposes an already determined outcome or purpose; the underlying idea of hierarchy is that such an outcome can be broken down into a set of sub-processes.
So hierarchy depends upon ideas of organization, task specialization and rationality.
In addition hierarchies involve a stratification of authority and the following of rules.
Thus each level of a hierarchy directs the action of those ‘lower down’, ultimate authority resides with those at the ‘top’, and at each level those involved carry out more narrowly defined tasks with less and less autonomy.
Jaques (Chapter 8) presents a general picture of hierarchy as a mechanism for ‘running’ or ‘coordinating’large organizations.
Indeed he suggests that despite its problems hierarchy remains the most efficient mechanism for integrating the activities of a large group of people, of making an organization work effectively.
His examples are largely drawn from the world of business and the workings of private sector firms but the analysis of hierarchy is particularly associated with organizations acting on the authority of the state, that is with those in the public sector.
Much of these public sector organizations are concerned with administration, with the running of government and public agencies.
Such organizations are usually referred to as bureaucracies and much contemporary analysis is derived from the work of the German sociologist Max Weber, who saw them as an essential element of contemporary capitalism.
An extract from his work appears as Chapter 9.
For Weber the growth of bureaucracy in the modern state was a consequence of the extension of rationality in the conduct of public affairs and the substitution of neutral administrative practice for previous modes of state activity.
The growth of bureaucracy is associated with the growth of legality and the  rule of law in contrast to previous administrative arbitrariness.
The modern bureaucracy is a hierarchical organization which is staffed by individuals who have been recruited for a full-time career within such organizations.
Weber draws out the defining function of the rules within such organizations, the nature of the bureaucratic career, the internal stratification of authority and other general characteristics.
He also makes a distinction between the profit-making nature of a private organization such as a firm and the non-profit-making activity of public sector organizations like bureaucracies.
This distinction is further elaborated by Beetham (Chapter 10), who discusses the important consequences that follow for the internal organization of bureaucratic hierarchies.
It is important to recognize that there are general consequences of the use of hierarchy as a coordinating mechanism — the subdivision of tasks, the pyramidal structure of organization, the nature of individual activity within such large organizations, the mechanisms of control and communication, the gradation of autonomy and so on— that apply both to public bureaucracies and to similarly hierarchical organizations in the private sector.
We can thus distinguish between the consequences of hierarchy in general and the particular problems facing public bureaucracies.
But what it is like to exist and survive within a bureaucracy?
This is the issue taken up by Benveniste in Chapter 11.
Here it is the behavioural responses of bureaucrats that is focused upon.
How do they maximize their chances of career development?
What are the strategies participants devise to avoid negative and critical evaluation of their activity?
What risks are associated with innovative behaviour on their part and how are these coped with?
All these issues are essential to the consequences and effectiveness of hierarchical coordination.
The distinction between government and the market is central to Sartori's discussion of planning in Chapter 12.
He describes both market and government as mechanisms of coordination, but whereas bureaucracy/hierarchy is centralized, the market is decentralized.
Hierarchies implement decisions that are made by those in authority; the market gives more autonomy to individual agents.
In the period after 1945 planning was one mechanism used by governments as a substitute for market decision-making and Sartori analyses some of the problems associated with it.
This choice between government (hierarchy, planning) and the market is important in understanding some of the recent changes in the overall process of coordination by central government in Britain, that is to understand how the country is run.
We can summarize a complex process by suggesting that since 1979 central government has tried to extend market provision and market coordination into areas in which non-market, governmental or hierarchical coordination had previously been the norm.
This has been effected by changes such as privatization and liberalization.
In privatization the ownership of an organization is transferred from the public to the private sector — and this theoretically changes one defining characteristic of the  organization (see for example the discussion by Beetham).
Liberalization, on the other hand, allows easier entry into particular markets.
It is these changes that form the background to the discussion by Vickers (Chapter 13).
Some of the organizations that have been privatized — the telephone system for example— were public monopolies; now they have effectively become private monopolies.
The problem of monopoly has been discussed elsewhere, in the general introduction and Chapter 4 by Krizner for example, and the solution adopted in most cases of privatization has been to place constraints upon the operation of these now private monopolies.
Such constraints include the need to adhere to certain standards or a limitation upon their ability to make excessive profits.
Vickers' analysis suggests that paradoxically this creation of new agencies to regulate such activities has actually increased the ability of government to intervene in certain areas of the economy.
In doing this it has also extended the role of hierarchical coordination in the overall process of running the country.
However, this says nothing about coordination between agencies and it is here that one could point to the possible role of networks as well.
It is these network forms of coordination that are considered in the third section of this book.
8
In praise of hierarchy
Elliott Jaques
At first glance, hierarchy may seem difficult to praise.
Bureaucracy is a dirty word even among bureaucrats, and in business there is a widespread view that managerial hierarchy kills initiative, crushes creativity, and has therefore seen its day.
Yet 35 years of research have convinced me that managerial hierarchy is the most efficient, the hardiest, and in fact the most natural structure ever devised for large organizations.
Properly structured, hierarchy can release energy and creativity, rationalize productivity, and actually improve morale.
Moreover, I think most managers know this intuitively and have only lacked a workable structure and a decent intellectual justification for what they have always known could work, and work well.
As presently practiced, hierarchy undeniably has its drawbacks.
One of business's great contemporary problems is how to release and sustain among the people who work in corporate hierarchies the thrust, initiative and adaptability of the entrepreneur.
This problem is so great that it has become fashionable to call for a new kind of organization to put in place of managerial hierarchy, an organization that will better meet the requirements of what is variously called the Information Age, the Services Age or the Post-lndustrial Age.
As vague as the description of the age is the definition of the kind of new organization required to suit it.
Theorists tell us it ought to look more like a symphony orchestra or a hospital or perhaps the British Raj.
It ought to function by means of primus groups or semi-autonomous work teams or matrix overlap groups.
It should be organic or entrepreneurial or tight-loose.
It should hinge on management by walking around or perhaps on our old friend, management by objective.
All these approaches are efforts to overcome the perceived faults of hierarchy and find better ways to improve morale and harness human creativity.
But the theorists' belief that our changing world requires an alternative to hierarchical organization is simply wrong, and all their proposals are based on an inadequate understanding of not only hierarchy but also human nature.
Hierarchy is not to blame for our problems.
Encouraged by gimmicks and fads masquerading as insights, we have burdened our managerial   systems with a makeshift scaffolding of inept structures and attitudes.
What we need is not simply a new, flatter organization but an understanding of how managerial hierarchy functions — how it relates to the complexity of work and how we can use it to achieve a more effective deployment of talent and energy.
The reason we have a hierarchical organization of work is not only that tasks occur in lower and higher degrees of complexity — which is obvious — but also that there are sharp discontinuities in complexity that separate tasks into a series of steps or categories — which is not so obvious.
The same discontinuities occur with respect to mental work and to the breadth and duration of accountability.
The hierarchical kind of organization we call bureaucracy did not emerge accidentally.
It is the only form of organization that can enable a company to employ large numbers of people and yet preserve unambiguous accountability for the work they do.
And that is why, despite its problems, it has so doggedly persisted.
Hierarchy has not had its day.
Hierarchy never did have its day.
As an organizational system, managerial hierarchy has never been adequately described and has just as certainly never been adequately used.
The problem is not to find an alternative to a system that once worked well but no longer does; the problem is to make it work efficiently for the first time in its 3,000-year history.
What went wrong…
There is no denying that hierarchical structure has been the source of a great deal of trouble and inefficiency.
Its misuse has hampered effective management and stifled leadership, while its track record as a support for entrepreneurial energy has not been exemplary.
We might almost say that successful businesses have had to succeed despite hierarchical organization rather than because of it.
One common complaint is excessive layering — too many rungs on the ladder.
Information passes through too many people, decisions through too many levels, and managers and subordinates are too close together in experience and ability, which smothers effective leadership, cramps accountability, and promotes buck passing.
Relationships grow stressful when managers and subordinates bump elbows, so to speak within the same frame of reference.
Another frequent complaint is that few managers seem to add real value to the work of their subordinates.
The fact that the break-up value of many large corporations is greater than their share value shows pretty clearly how much value corporate managers can subtract from their subsidiary businesses, but in fact few of us know exactly what managerial added value would look like when it is occurring.
Many people also complain that our present hierarchies bring out the nastier aspects of human behavior, like greed, insensitivity, careerism and  self-importance.
These are the qualities that have sent many behavioral scientists in search of cooperative, group-oriented, non-hierarchical organizational forms.
But are they the inevitable companions of hierarchy, or perhaps a product of the misuse of hierarchy that would disappear if hierarchy were properly understood and structured?
…
And what continues to go wrong
The fact that so many of hierarchy's problems show up in the form of individual misbehavior has led to one of the most widespread illusions in business, namely that a company's managerial leadership can be significantly improved solely by doing psychotherapeutic work on the personalities and attitudes of its managers.
Such methods can help individuals gain greater personal insight, but I doubt that individual insight, personality matching, or even exercises in group dynamics can produce much in the way of organizational change or an overall improvement in leadership effectiveness.
The problem is that our managerial hierarchies are so badly designed as to defeat the best efforts even of psychologically insightful individuals.
Solutions that concentrate on groups, on the other hand, fail to take into account the real nature of employment systems.
People are not employed in groups.
They are employed individually, and their employment contracts — real or implied — are individual.
Group members may insist in moments of great esprit de corps that the group as such is the author of some particular accomplishment, but once the work is completed, the members of the group look for individual recognition and individual progression in their careers.
And it is not groups but individuals whom the company will hold accountable.
The only true group is the board of directors, with its corporate liability.
None of the group-oriented panaceas face this issue of accountability.
All the theorists refer to group authority, group decisions and group consensus, none of them to group accountability.
Indeed, they avoid the issue of accountability altogether, for to hold a group accountable the employment contract would have to be with the group, not with the individuals, and companies simply do not employ groups as such.
To understand hierarchy, you must first understand employment.
To be employed is to have an ongoing contract that holds you accountable for doing work of a given type for a specified number of hours per week in exchange for payment.
Your specific tasks within that given work are assigned to you by a person called your manager (or boss or supervisor), who ought to be held accountable for the work you do.
If we are to make our hierarchies function properly, it is essential to place the emphasis on accountability for getting work done.
This is what hierarchical systems ought to be about.
Authority is a secondary issue and flows from accountability in the sense that there should be just that  amount of authority needed to discharge the accountability.
So if a group is to be given authority, its members must be held accountable as a group, and unless this is done, it is very hard to take so-called group decisions seriously.
If the CEO or the manager of the group is held accountable for outcomes, then in the final analysis, he or she will have to agree with group decisions or have the authority to block them, which means that the group never really had decision-making power to begin with.
Alternatively, if groups are allowed to make decisions without their manager's seal of approval, then accountability as such will suffer, for if a group does badly, the group is never fired (and it would be shocking if it were).
In the long run, therefore, group authority without group accountability is dysfunctional, and group authority with group accountability is unacceptable.
So images of organizations that are more like symphony orchestras or hospitals or the British Raj are surely nothing more than metaphors to express a desired feeling of togetherness — the togetherness produced by a conductor's baton, the shared concern of doctors and nurses for their patients, or the apparent unity of the British civil service in India.
In employment systems, after all, people are not mustered to play together as their manager beats time.
As for hospitals, they are the essence of everything bad about bureaucratic organization.
They function in spite of the system, only because of the enormous professional devotion of their staffs.
The Indian civil service was in many ways like a hospital, its people bound together by the struggle to survive in a hostile environment.
Managers do need authority, but authority based appropriately on the accountabilities they must discharge.
Why hierarchy?
The bodies that govern companies, unions, clubs and nations all employ people to do work, and they all organize these employees in managerial hierarchies, systems that allow organizations to hold people accountable for getting assigned work done.
Unfortunately, we often lose sight of this goal and set up the organizational layers in our managerial hierarchies to accommodate pay brackets and facilitate career development instead.
If work happens to get done as well, we consider that a useful bonus.
But if our managerial hierarchical organizations tend to choke so readily on debilitating bureaucratic practices, how do we explain the persistence and continued spread of this form of organization for more than 3,000 years?
And why has the determined search for alternatives proved so fruitless?
The answer is that managerial hierarchy is and will remain the only way to structure unified working systems with hundreds, thousands or tens of thousands of employees, for the very good reason that managerial hierarchy is the expression of two fundamental characteristics of real work.
First, the tasks we carry out are not only more or less complex but they also become more complex as they separate out into discrete categories or types of complexity.
Second, the same is true of the mental work that people do on the job, for as this work grows more complex, it too separates out into distinct categories or types of mental activity.
In turn, these two characteristics permit hierarchy to meet four of any organization's fundamental needs: to add real value to work as it moves through the organization, to identify and nail down accountability at each stage of the value-adding process, to place people with the necessary competence at each organizational layer, and to build a general consensus and acceptance of the managerial structure that achieves these ends.
Hierarchical layers
The complexity of the problems encountered in a particular task, project or strategy is a function of the variables involved — their number, their clarity or ambiguity, the rate at which they change, and, overall the extent to which they are distinct or tangled.
Obviously, as you move higher in a managerial hierarchy, the most difficult problems you have to contend with become increasingly complex.
The biggest problems faced by the CEO of a large corporation are vastly more complex than those encountered on the shop floor.
The CEO must cope not only with a huge array of often amorphous and constantly changing data but also with variables so tightly interwoven that they must be disentangled before they will yield useful information.
Such variables might include the cost of capital, the interplay of corporate cash flow, the structure of the international competitive market, the uncertainties of Europe after 1992, the future of Pacific Rim development, social developments with respect to labor, political developments in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and the Third World, and technological research and change.
That the CEO's and the lathe operator's problems are different in quality as well as quantity will come as no surprise to anyone.
The question is — and always has been — where does the change in quality occur?
On a continuum of complexity from the bottom of the structure to the top, where are the discontinuities that will allow us to identify layers of hierarchy that are distinct and separable, as different as ice is from water and water from steam?
I spent years looking for the answer, and what I found was somewhat unexpected.
My first step was to recognize the obvious, that the layers have to do with manager-subordinate relationships.
The manager's position is in one layer and the subordinate's is in the next layer below.
What then sets the necessary distance between?
This question cannot be answered without knowing just what it is that a manager does.
The managerial role has three critical features.
First, and most critical, every manager must be held accountable not only for the work of  subordinates but also for adding value to their work.
Second, every manager must be held accountable for sustaining a team of subordinates capable of doing this work.
Third, every manager must be held accountable for setting direction and getting subordinates to follow willingly, indeed enthusiastically.
In brief, every manager is accountable for work and leadership.
In order to make accountability possible, managers must have enough authority to ensure that their subordinates can do the work assigned to them.
This authority must include at least these four elements:(I) the right to veto any applicant who, in the manager's opinion, falls below the minimum standards of ability;(2) the power to make work assignments;(3) the power to carry out performance appraisals and, within the limits of company policy, to make decisions — not recommendations — about raises and merit rewards; and (4) the authority to initiate removal — at least from the manager's own team — of anyone who seems incapable of doing the work.
But defining the basic nature of the managerial role reveals only part of what a managerial layer means.
It cannot tell us how wide a managerial layer should be, what the difference in responsibility should be between a manager and a subordinate, or, most important, where the break should come between one managerial layer and another.
Fortunately, the next step in the research process supplied the missing piece of the puzzle.
Responsibility and time
This second step was the unexpected and startling discovery that the level of responsibility in any organizational role — whether a manager's or an individual contributor's — can be objectively measured in terms of the target completion time of the longest task, project or program assigned to that role.
The more distant the target completion date of the longest task or program, the heavier the weight of responsibility is felt to be.
I call this measure the responsibility time span of the role.
For example, a supervisor whose principal job is to plan tomorrow's production assignments and next week's work schedule but who also has ongoing responsibility for uninterrupted production supplies for the month ahead has a responsibility time span of one month.
A foreman who spends most of his time riding herd on this week's production quotas but who must also develop a program to deal with the labor requirements of next year's retooling has a responsibility time span of a year or a little more.
The advertising vice-president who stays late every night working on next week's layouts but who also has to begin making contingency plans for the expected launch of two new local advertising media campaigns three years hence has a responsibility time span of three years.
To my great surprise, I found that in all types of managerial organization in many different countries over 35 years, people in roles at the same   time span experience the same weight of responsibility and declare the same level of pay to be fair, regardless of their occupation or actual pay.
The time-span range runs from a day at the bottom of a large corporation to more than 20 years at the top, while the felt-fair pay ranges from $15,000 to $1 million and more.
Armed with my definition of a manager and my time-span measuring instrument, I then bumped into the second surprising finding — repeatedly confirmed — about layering in managerial hierarchies: the boundaries between successive managerial layers occur at certain specific time-span increments, just as ice changes to water and water to steam at certain specific temperatures.
And the fact that everyone in the hierarchy, regardless of status, seems to see these boundaries in the same places suggests that the boundaries reflect some universal truth about human nature.
Figure 1 ‘Managerial hierarchy in fiction and in fact’ shows the hierarchical structure of part of a department at one company I studied, along with the approximate responsibility time span for each position.
The longest task for manager A was more than five years, while for B, C and D, the longest tasks fell between two and five years.
Note also that according to the organization chart, A is the designated manager of B, B of C, and C of D.
In reality, the situation was quite different.
Despite the managerial roles specified by the company, B, C and D all described A as their ‘real’ boss.
C complained that B was ‘far too close’ and ‘breathing down my neck’.
D had the same complaint about C. B and C also admitted to finding it very difficult to manage their immediate subordinates, C and D respectively, who seemed to do better if treated as colleagues and left alone.
In short, there appeared to be a cutoff at five years, such that those with responsibility time spans of less than five years felt they needed a manager with a responsibility time span of more than five years.
Manager D, with a time span of two to three years, did not feel that C, with a time span of three to four, was distant enough hierarchically to take orders from.
D felt the same way about B. Only A filled the bill for any of the other three.
As the responsibility time span increased in the example from two years to three to four and approached five, no one seemed to perceive a qualitative difference in the nature of the responsibility that a manager discharged.
Then, suddenly, when a manager had responsibility for tasks and projects that exceeded five years in scope, everyone seemed to perceive a difference not only in the scope of responsibility but also in its quality and in the kind of work and worker required to discharge it.
I found several such discontinuities that appeared consistently in more than 100 studies.
Real managerial and hierarchical boundaries occur at time spans of three months, one year, two years, five years, ten years, and twenty years.
These natural discontinuities in our perception of the responsibility time span create hierarchical strata that people in different companies, countries and circumstances all seem to regard as genuine and acceptable.
The existence of such boundaries has important implications in nearly every sphere of organizational management.
One of these is performance appraisal.
Another is the capacity of managers to add value to the work of their subordinates.
The only person with the perspective and authority to judge and communicate personal effectiveness is an employee's accountable manager, who, in most cases, is also the only person from whom an employee will accept evaluation and coaching.
This accountable manager must be the supervisor one real layer higher in the hierarchy, not merely the next-higher employee on the pay scale.
As I suggested earlier, part of the secret of making hierarchy work is to distinguish carefully between hierarchical layers and pay grades.
The trouble is that companies need two to three times as many pay grades as they do working layers, and once they've established the pay grades, which are easy to describe and set up, they fail to take the next step and set up a different managerial hierarchy based on responsibility rather than salary.
The result is too many layers.
My experience with organizations of all kinds in many different countries has convinced me that effective value-adding managerial leadership of subordinates can come only from an individual one category higher in cognitive capacity, working one category higher in problem complexity.
By contrast, wherever managers and subordinates are in the same layer separated only by pay grade — subordinates see the boss as too close, breathing down their necks, and they identify their ‘real’ boss as the next manager at a genuinely higher level of cognitive and task complexity.
This kind of overlayering is what produces the typical symptoms of bureaucracy in its worst form — too much passing problems up and down the system, bypassing, poor task setting, frustrated subordinates, anxious managers, wholly inadequate performance appraisals, ‘personality problems’ everywhere, and so forth.
Layering at Corporation X
Companies need more than seven pay grades — as a rule, many more.
But seven hierarchical layers is enough or more than enough for all but the largest corporations.
Let me illustrate this pattern of hierarchical layering with the case of two divisions of Corporation X, which has 32,000 employees and annual sales of $7 billion.
As shown in Figure 2, the CEO sets strategic goals that look ahead as far as 25 years and manages executive vice-presidents (EVPs) with responsibility for 12- to 15-year development programs.
One vice-president is accountable for several strategic business units, each with a president who works with critical tasks of up to 7 years' duration.
One of these units (Y Products) employs 2,800 people, has annual sales of $250 million, and is engaged in the manufacture and sale of engineering products, with traditional semiskilled shop-floor production at Layer 1.
The other unit (Z Press) publishes books and employs only 88 people.
Its funding and negotiations with authors are in the hands of a general editor at Layer IV, assisted by a small group of editors at Layer 111, each working on projects that may take up to 18 months to complete.
So the president of Y Products manages more people, governs a greater share of corporate resources, and earns a lot more money for the parent  company than does the president of Z Press.
Yet the two presidents occupy the same hierarchical layer, have similar authority, and take home comparable salaries.
This is neither coincidental nor unfair.
It is natural, correct and efficient.
It is the level of responsibility, measured in terms of time span, that tells you how many layers you need in an enterprise — not the number of subordinates or the magnitude of sales or profits.
These factors may have a marginal influence on salary; they have no bearing at all on hierarchical layers.
Changes in the quality of work
The widespread and striking consistency of this underlying pattern of true managerial layers leads naturally to the question of why it occurs.
Why do people perceive a sudden leap in status from, say, four-and-a-half years to five and from nine to ten?
The answer goes back to the earlier discussion of complexity.
As we go higher in a managerial hierarchy, the most difficult problems that arise grow increasingly complex, and, as the complexity of a task increases, so does the complexity of the mental work required to handle it.
What I found when I looked at this problem over the course of ten years was that this complexity, like responsibility time span, also occurs in leaps or jumps.
In other words, the most difficult tasks found within any given layer are all characterized by the same type or category of complexity, just as water remains in the same liquid state from 0 degrees to 100 degrees Celsius, even though it ranges from very cold to very hot.
(A few degrees cooler or hotter and water changes in state, to ice or steam.)
It is this suddenly increased level of necessary mental capacity, experience, knowledge and mental stamina that allows managers to add value to the work of their subordinates.
What they add is a new perspective, one that is broader, more experienced and, most important, one that extends further in time.
If, at Z Press, the editors at Layer 111 find and develop manuscripts into books with market potential, it is their general editor at Layer IV who fits those books into the press's overall list, who thinks ahead to their position on next year's list and later allocates resources to their production and marketing, and who makes projections about the publishing and book-buying trends of the next two to five years.
It is also this sudden change in the quality, not just the quantity, of managerial work that subordinates accept as a natural and appropriate break in the continuum of hierarchy.
It is why they accept the boss's authority and not just the boss's power.
So the whole picture comes together.
Managerial hierarchy or layering is the only effective organizational form for deploying people and tasks at complementary levels, where people can do the tasks assigned to them, where the people in any given layer can add value to the work of those in the layer below them, and finally, where this stratification of management strikes everyone as necessary and welcome.
What we need is not some new kind of organization.
What we need is managerial hierarchy that understands its own nature and purpose.
Hierarchy is the best structure for getting work done in big organizations.
Trying to raise efficiency and morale without first setting this structure to rights is like trying to lay bricks without mortar.
No amount of exhortation, attitudinal engineering, incentive planning, or even leadership will have any permanent effect unless we understand what hierarchy is and why and how it works.
We need to stop casting about fruitlessly for organizational Holy Grails and settle down to the hard work of putting our managerial hierarchies in order.