

Prologue
If Murder is Satan's eldest son then Poison, Queen of the Night, is his favourite daughter.
Why do I say this?
Because I dreamt about her last night when my manor house had fallen silent and its mullioned windows gazed like sightless eyes over the dark, lush fields of my estate.
I'd slipped out of bed, leaving Margot the  launderess and her sister Phoebe gently snoring (they sleep on either side to keep me warm), and crept downstairs to my secret chamber, behind the high table in the Great Hall.
Only I know which carved wooden panel to press to release the catch and allow me into the sanctuary of my past.
Everything is there.
Sometimes I just light the candles and squat, going through this coffer or that.
Well, last night, I chose one ‘specially.
I unlocked the three clasps, took out the faded petals of a flower wrapped in oiled leather, as well as all the letters and documents from that fateful summer of 1520.
I read them and cried as they took me back through time, down the long bloody passageways of the last seventy-five years.
I became maudlin, drinking more rich claret than my chaplain would like to imagine.
I hummed a little tune, even as the ghosts gathered round me, silent and threatening.
I didn't care.
Old Shallot never gives a rat's arse.
I leaned against the cold brick wall, cradling the faded flower petals in my hands, and drifted into a demon-haunted nightmare.
I was in Paris again, standing in the dark fields around the Chateau de Maubisson.
Above me, a strange moon, white as snow, waned behind purple clouds.
Strangely, the sun also shone, though it turned a dusty red, blotted out by the dark wings of vultures.
A terrible rushing wind tore at my hair and clothes as merciless demons appeared from all directions, faces twisted with rage, teeth bared between snarling lips, eyes shining like stars whilst flames burst out of their mouths.
Behind them, in the blackest darkness, rode the Lord Satan (oh, yes, I've met the evil bugger a number of times) on his dark-winged steed.
He swept towards me, like the wind raising a storm as soaring eagles raise dust.
When he stopped before me, the steel-shod hooves of his war horse drew sparks from the ground.
I looked up but his terrible face was hidden in the shadow of a helmet.
Suddenly a devil appeared beside me, with red hands and feet and a head as bald as a pig.
This tormentor lifted a gold-ringed trumpet and brayed a terrible blast.
I just stood wondering what would happen.
(Even in my dreams, I follow one of the basic tenets of old Shallot's philosophy: In danger always run and, if you can't run, do nothing!)
I looked towards the chateau entrance and saw Queen Poison, dreadful as an army in battle array, sweep towards me across the lowered drawbridge, arms extended as if she wished to clasp me to her deceitful bosom.
I stared into her white beautiful face, the carmined lips pursed into a kiss, and crumpled to my knees  before this most dread Queen of the Abyss.
I woke stiff as a poker.
My back ached, my bum was sore and my mouth caked with the rich tang of the wine.
I staggered back to a cold bed but Margot and Phoebe had fled.
They always do that, the saucy wenches, they like to tease and make me beg for them to come back.
I was too exhausted.
I slept the sleep of the just till the chapel bells roused me late this afternoon.
Now I feel refreshed, I've downed a venison pie, a tankard of ale and two cups of claret, and have returned to the centre of my maze to dictate my memoirs.
I will tell you what happened in that dreadful summer of 1520, for that's what the dream was about.
I am comfortable in my maze which is laid out like the one at Hampton Court was by the Great Killer's chief minister, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey.
My chair with its high back and strong iron wheels is positioned correctly to catch the sun.
I have a jug of wine, two silver goblets and a jewel-encrusted plate of doucettes.
My clerk is also ready.
My little Mephistopheles, my darling chaplain.
The little turd!
He always takes his time: he must get his ink horn out, his parchment smooth, his quill sharpened, and make sure his little arse is comfortable on the softest cushions my manor can provide.
He says he is ready to take down my memoirs.
The little hypocrite!
I can see the smirk on his fat, greasy face.
He thinks I am a liar.
A liar!
I, Sir Roger Shallot, Lord of Burpham Manor in Guildford, Surrey, Commissioner of Array, Justice of the Peace, the holder of many awards and decorations, Member of the Privy Council (believe me, that's well named), Member of Parliament (I'll tell you a funny story about that soon).
Oh, yes, Sir Roger Shallot, now well past his ninetieth year, the darling and most loyal subject of the great Elizabeth, daughter of Anne Boleyn (she had the most beautiful tits) and, allegedly, the Great Killer himself, Henry VIII — the fat syphilitic bastard!
I say ‘allegedly’ because I know different.
Oh, I'll tell you the truth some day but that's another story.
Anyway, back to my chaplain.
I grip my cane tightly and watch his smile disappear.
Old Shallot is not a liar!
True, sometimes my memory fails me, I get things slightly mixed up, but I am not a liar.
Well, even if I am, at least I am not a hypocrite like him.
Yes, he's a hypocrite and I can prove it.
Two weeks ago in church the snivelling little bastard got up in the pulpit and told us not to be frightened of death.
I sat in my pew and heard him prate on for at least an hour and a half.
Now, usually I don't mind.
I always take a bottle of claret and a meat pie to help me through the service and, when it's finished, I gaze around to catch the eye of some pretty maid.
When I do, I wink and smile at her.
She, of course, becomes agitated and it's so lovely to watch full ripe bosoms rise and fall!
On that particular Sunday my chaplain wouldn't shut up and I was getting hungry.
On and on he droned about how we shouldn't fear death but welcome the joys of heaven, so I picked up my two horse pistols and gave the sod both barrels.
You can still see the holes on either side of the pulpit.
Well, I laughed myself silly.
The chaplain went white as snow and fainted straight out of the pulpit.
I didn't intend to kill him.
I just wanted to see if he practised what he preached.
Instead I concluded he was about as frightened of death as I am so why, in the  good Lord's name, did he get up and bore us stiff telling us different?
He didn't know I always carry pistols under my cloak, and he may well ask why.
For the same reason I dictate my memoirs in the centre of a maze.
You see, old Shallot has many enemies and memories die hard.
The secret order of the Templars still has a price on my life.
The Luciferi of France (I'll come to those bastards later) would like to see my head on a pole.
The Council of Ten in Venice have sent three assassins against me just because I borrowed some of their gold and forgot to repay it.
The silly idiots came nowhere near me.
The great Irish wolf hounds who roam my estate tore them to pieces.
Marvellous animals!
They lounge round my chair now, staring at the chaplain and licking their lips.
Of course, other assassins might come.
Do you know, I once played a game of human chess against the Ottoman Emperor, Suleiman the Magnificent?
Instead of pieces we played with human beings on a great white and black piazza.
When we lost a ‘piece’, the ‘gardeners’, the Ottoman's mute executioners, immediately strangled the poor victim.
Now I won that game, losing just two ‘pieces’, but only after I left with the comeliest ‘piece’ of all, a wench from the imperial harem, did Suleiman discover that I had cheated and publicly marked me down for death.
Perhaps his ‘gardeners’ will come but I am not frightened.
I have my maze, I have my secret chamber, my own silent guards, my wolf hounds and my beloved pistols.
Moreover, I have seen it all.
The knife, the sword, the rope, the garrotte — they don't chill my heart.
Poison, however, is a different matter.
That's why I make my chaplain taste what I eat and drink.
Everything, that is, except my best claret.
I mean, the Bible does say we shouldn't throw our pearls before swine!
Poison…
That takes me back to my nightmare.
Now I have met poisoners, dark, subtle souls who can strike at any time and in a million ways.
You name a poisoner and I'll tell you all about him or her.
By the way, have you noticed that?
How the best poisoners are women?
I mean, look at Agrippina, wife to the Emperor Claudius.
If you have read your books you will discover that the Romans used to have tasters too and loved food so much they'd make themselves sick after each course by sticking a feather down their throats.
Do you know what Agrippina did?
She didn't poison the food.
No, cunning bitch, she poisoned the feather and got rid of her husband.
She reminds me of Catherine de Medici, Queen of France, ‘Madame Serpent’ as I used to call her.
I never accepted anything from Catherine, for what she didn't know about poisons wasn't worth knowing.
I was talking about her last week when our Queen came to visit me Elizabeth, with her white painted face, black teeth and red wig.
The great Virgin Queen — don't you believe it!
Well, she brought me sad news.
How our love-child, Robin, had been captured at sea by the Spanish and taken to Madrid.
I told her not to worry.
If Robin was truly our child, the bloody Spanish wouldn't hold him long and, if they do, then he is not worthy of our blood.
I made her laugh and she reminded me of how Robin had been conceived.
You want to know?
Fine, I'll tell you.
I was once a Member of Parliament and one day in the chamber at Westminster, a Puritan, a lozenge of sanctified humility, got up from his arse and roared at me because I called him a blackened turd.
‘Shallot,’ he bellowed, ‘you'll either die by hanging or die of the pox!’
‘That, sir,’ I coldly replied, ‘depends on whether I embrace your principles or your wife.’
Well, the chamber was in an uproar.
I refused to apologise to the Speaker so the Serjeant-at-arms hustled me to the Tower.
Elizabeth (because I had been defending her) came to visit me.
She insisted on seeing me alone, and you know Shallot!
A cup of wine and a pretty girl in an empty room and anything could happen.
On that occasion it certainly did!
In her younger days Elizabeth was a passionate girl.
She had a cloying sensuousness and, like her mother, Anne Boleyn, she could ride anything.
(I see my chaplain snigger so a quick rap across the knuckles reminds him to keep his mouth shut and his thoughts clean about his betters.)
Ah, poison, the subtle murderer of my dreams.
Well, I have now marshalled my thoughts, summoning memories from that summer over seventy years ago.
Oh, Lord, it seems only yesterday when I and my master, Benjamin Daunbey, nephew to the great Cardinal Wolsey, were sent to the Chateau de Maubisson outside Paris to resolve certain mysteries.
Ah, I have mentioned his name!
Benjamin, with his long, dark face, kindly eyes and lawyer's stoop.
When I think of him I always smile.
He was one of the few really good men I have ever met.
If you have read my earlier memoirs you will know how this occurred.
We went to school together, I saved him from a beating and he rescued me from a hanging, twice; once in Ipswich and then again at Montfaucon, that great forest of gibbets which stands near the Porte St Denis in Paris.
Now, Benjamin's uncle, the great Wolsey, and his black  familiar, the enigmatic Doctor Agrippa, used us both on countless errands in the sinister twilight world of treason, murder and lechery of the courts of Europe.
Lackaday, they have all gone now!
They're just shadows, ghosts who dance under the shade of the spreading yew trees which border the far end of the lawn in front of my manor house.
Ghosts they may be but they bring back memories of broken hearts, foul deeds, sinister minds, and souls stained with the blackness of hell.
I'll tell you this as I sit in the centre of my maze and listen to the clear song of the thrush: the murderous soul I met at Maubisson was one of the most chilling I have ever encountered.
Chapter 1
In the spring of 1520 Benjamin Daunbey and I were the proud occupants of a large manor house on the outskirts of Ipswich.
Really, it was more of a pleasaunce than a manor with its white lathed plaster, ornamental chimney pots, squat black beams, with panelled rooms with carved furniture, and a cellar well stocked with a variety of wines.
On our estate were granges, barns, a mill, carp ponds, lush fields and fertile meadows.
We were the grateful beneficiaries of the largesse of Benjamin's uncle, the great Wolsey, who lavished rewards on us for resolving, only a few months earlier, the sinister White Rose murders.
Now success had not changed Benjamin.
He still dressed drably.
Indeed, I well remember him as he was then, long and lanky, his sombre, solemn face framed by jet black hair.
At the time I was of the same colouring (there's a portrait of me hanging at Burpham).
I was dark, my black hair cropped close, a slight cast in one eye, and a cheeky expression which many said would send me to the gallows.
In a way they were right but, thankfully, I was never hanged though I was close to it on many occasions.
What amuses me is that many of those who claimed I would hang, died violent deaths themselves in some pot-holed alleyway, bleak battlefield or gory execution yard.
I was a  bigger rogue then than I am now but Benjamin was as different as chalk from cheese.
He had that irritating manner of believing all was well and trusting everyone completely.
In theory Benjamin was Lord of the Manor and I, a true man of the world, his steward, his trusted servant and bosom friend.
I was wise beyond my nineteen years and kept a sharp weather eye on all the human kites and ravens attracted by Benjamin's generosity.
You know the sort: wandering musicians, ballad mongers, sharp-eyed priests.
(I see my chaplain's shoulders twitch with annoyance.)
This unsavoury pack of rogues streamed across the meadows to our Manor House like rats towards an unguarded hen coop.
Old Shallot did what he could.
I bought the biggest mastiffs I could find and sent the beggars screaming for the trees, at least for a while.
At the time I had little knowledge of dogs.
One day I took the beasts hunting and they raised a big fat buck.
I never saw the buck again, nor the mastiffs.
God knows what happened to them.
They scampered off, barking like the devil.
Those four-footed mercenaries must have met someone else who took better care of them because they never returned.
Nevertheless my problems with my master's open-handed generosity persisted.
At last I had a serious discussion with Benjamin in our great oak-panelled hall, the walls above the panelling painted a light green and decorated with cunningly devised shields bearing the arms of Wolsey, Daunbey and, finally, Shallot.
Of course, I made the latter up though I am still very proud of them; a mailed fist, middle finger extended, and underneath the Latin motto ‘In dubito curre’ which, roughly translated, means ‘In doubt, run’.
I bear the same arms now but the middle  finger of the mailed fist is no longer extended since the Queen's herald, Rouge-Croix, discovered that in certain parts of France such a gesture could be taken as offensive or obscene.
Nevertheless, at the time I was proud of my skill.
I had developed a deft hand at writing bills and counterfeiting other people's signatures, my master's included.
No, I wasn't a thief!
I just had to look after our property.
And that provoked the confrontation with Benjamin.
‘Master,’ I wailed, ‘we cannot keep feeding every rogue in the neighbourhood.
I am tired of naughty nuns, fornicating friars, mouldy monks, ruthless rogues and virile villains!’
He leaned back in his chair in front of the hearth and laughed till the tears ran down his face.
‘You have a way with words, Roger.’
He straightened his face and sat up.
‘But I still insist that we help those less fortunate.
So, what do you propose?’
‘Children,’ I answered without thinking.
(That's another of my faults, I am too kind-hearted and often speak without thinking.)
‘Start a school,’ I stammered.
‘For the children of the village.
Help those who need such learning.’
‘Marvellous!’
Benjamin replied.
‘But how can I assist you, Roger?’
I looked away, embarrassed.
‘You have helped me enough, master.’
‘You're bored aren't you, Roger?
You miss London?’
Good Lord, it was wonderful how my master could read my mind!
Now, we very rarely went up to the great city and, when we did, Benjamin kept a close eye and a tight rein on me.
You see, he knew me to be like a dog on a leash, straining to break free and head hell for leather into  the nearest mischief.
Of course, we had been to London to visit Benjamin's former betrothed, Johanna, a sweet girl whom he adored.
Johanna had fallen for Cavendish, one of the great lords of the land, who'd broken her heart and destroyed her wits.
Now the girl lived in the care of the nuns at Syon on the Thames, a mere shadow of her former self.
(Oh, by the way, Benjamin killed the nobleman concerned in a duel with swords in Leicester Fields.
Mind you, it wasn't the last time he fell in love.
Oh, no!
But that's another story.)
‘You should go, Roger,’ Benjamin continued.
‘But stay here at least until Easter.
I'll need your help to clear one of the chambers and set up a school room.
You will help?’
I needed no second bidding and, in the last two weeks of Lent, when Benjamin fasted on water and salted fish and abstained from wine (I did the same during the day but, at night, I always crept out to one of the nearby taverns; I have great difficulty fasting for I get this terrible thirst!),
I worked like a Trojan, clearing, cleaning, painting and refurbishing, until the old solar on the ground floor of our manor house gleamed as fresh and as opulent as one of the great Halls of Cambridge.
(Oh, yes, Benjamin and I had also been to university but, due to minor misunderstandings, had both been asked to leave before we received our degrees.
Well, who cares?)
On Easter Sunday, just after morning Mass, Benjamin, as Lord of the Manor, announced the opening of his school to his incredulous parishioners.
My master expected little response.
Sometimes he could be the most idealistic of fools!
The villagers, however, took him at his word, only too willing to dump their scruffy-arsed offspring on him between the hours of ten and five.
Benjamin didn't mind.
He took to schoolmastering like a duck to water.
Horn books, quills, pens, ink horns, an abacus and rolls of parchment were bought.
The hall was invaded by legions of snotty-nosed, tousle-haired, black-faced imps.
I feared the little bastards would destroy the place but Benjamin was always good with children.
He had a way of listening to them as if their every word was a pearl of wisdom.
Sometimes I joined him in the school room.
You see, usually I worked on the accounts and managed the estate.
We raised sheep, corn and crops for the local market and sold hunting rights to our neighbours.
The work proved no real challenge for me.
Benjamin always thought the smooth running of our affairs was due to his just treatment of others.
Don't you believe it!
The best gamekeepers are former poachers and no one took old Shallot for a ride.
Anyway, I'd go down to the schoolroom.
The place seemed awash with dirty, little ankle-biters; some sat on benches, others squatted on the floor listening like round-eyed owls as Benjamin revealed the secrets of Mathematics, the divine truths of the Gospels and, for the most able, the courtly hand, as well as the basics of Greek, Latin, Geometry and Geography.
Do you know, I envied him?
Take Shallot's word for it, most people couldn't give a rat's arse about anyone else but Benjamin was different.
However, I soon tired of his attempts to help our neighbours.
On the Monday after Low Sunday, I saddled my horse, loaded a sumpter pony, tied a money belt round my waist, grasped sword and dagger and made my farewells.
Hell's teeth, I remember it well!
A beautiful spring morning.
The sun made the mullioned glass of the manor house windows shimmer like pools of light.
The air was  thick and sweet with the smell of fresh-cut grass and the wild flowers which Benjamin had allowed to flourish in front of the hall.
My master, his eyes heavy with sleep, came out to bid me farewell.
He stood holding the bridle of my horse and stared innocently up at me like one of the children from his own school room.
‘You will take care, Roger?
You'll come home if aught happens?’
I clasped his hand.
‘I'll take care, master,’ I lied.
‘I have a letter for our banker, Master Waller in the Mercery.
If I run out of silver there's more there.’
‘What,’ Benjamin asked, his eyes narrowing, ‘are you going to do?’
‘Make my fortune, master.’
He smiled.
‘Then make your fortune, Roger, and if Great-uncle sends for me, I shall come for you in London.
Where will you lodge?’
I chewed my lip and stared into the faint mist being burnt off by the early morning sun.
The last thing I wanted was Great-uncle interfering!
I was tempted to lie but, thank God, I decided to break a lifelong habit and tell the truth.
‘Near St Paul's,’ I replied.
‘There's a printer's under the Red Sign and next to it a tavern, the Golden Turk.
You know it?
I will lodge there.’
I clasped my master's hand and, spurring my horse, rode bravely down the tree-lined path, the hooves of the pack pony behind me digging up flurries of white dust.
I felt like a knight-errant riding out for adventure.
Little did I know I was a fool slipping into danger and the black shadow of Benjamin's great-uncle would soon trap me.
My journey was uneventful enough.
When I was young, England seemed green and fresh, in the morning-time of its life.
No armies marched the land, no great lords unfurled the banners of rebellion.
The Great Killer saw to that.
Even then no one dared cross him and he had yet to show the dark side of his soul and prove Merlin's prophecy that he was ‘The Mouldwarp who would drown his kingdom in a sea of blood’.
The abbeys and priories I passed slumbered gently in the lee of fresh green hills, unaware of the destruction about to crawl from the hellish pit of Henry's lusts.
The villages, hamlets and the red-tile-roofed manors boasted their peace and prosperity for Henry was still living on the treasure bequeathed to him by his father.
He had not yet unleashed his army of tax gatherers, commissioners, purveyors and assessors.
The bridges were mended, the ruts in the roads filled in, the spring corn sown, and fat-tailed sheep browsed in the fields.
Oh, there were signs of the furies to come.
At crossroads the gibbets provided plump carrion for the hungry crows and ravens; landless men turned out of their fields as the great lords changed to tending sheep rather than raising crops.
Some were sturdy beggars, thieves and rogues but now and again you passed the honest yeomen, the skeletal, white-faced, puny children and worried, dark-eyed wives who tramped the roads looking for work.
Shallot did what he could.
I have a list of vices as long as your arm but I am not mean.
I scattered pennies and rode on like a young lord through Aldgate and into London.
Now, I have always loved that city, its stench, the colour, bustle and noise, the way the blood beats ever faster through your veins.
I had worked there many years before as a footman in one of old Mother Nightbird's molly  houses, from where she sold plump, perfumed flesh to the great lords and merchants of the city.
Now things were different.
At nineteen Shallot was virtuous, a prosperous man soon to be a merchant prince who would show both Master Benjamin and the great Wolsey that he could rise without their help.
I rode through Cheapside, greedily drinking in the sights and sounds.
I noted with envy the gold-embossed timber mansions of the merchants, the stalls in front of them piled high with goods of every kind: rich cloth of gold, rolls of murrey, silks and satins, leather bottles, Spanish riding boots, gold cord and testers, blankets of pure wool, and tapestries heavy with silver needlework and gold filigree.
The air dinned with the cries of the apprentices, the roar of the crowd, the curses of carpenters, whilst in every corner hawkers and tinkers shouted their wares.
Young nobles from the court, their horses' harness shining in the sunlight, rode through with hawks, falcons and peregrines perched on their wrists, cruel faces hidden by small leather hoods, jesses tinkling like the bells of a tiny church.
I found the Golden Turk where it nestled in a small alleyway, just beneath the great mass of St Paul's.
A fine, well-kept establishment, three storeys high, made all the more welcoming by horn-glazed windows, the beams smartly painted and the white plaster glowing like freshly laid snow.
The landlord knew me, for Benjamin and I often lodged there when we came up to town.
I did think of going down to Syon House but remembered Benjamin's instructions never to approach Johanna without him being present for she dwelt in a twilight world where every man, except Benjamin, was her seducer.
So I made myself at home at the Golden Turk; the  two-faced landlord greeted me civilly enough, providing a chamber on the second floor with a pallet bed and a few sticks of furniture.
He also promised to change the sheets and rushes at least once every six weeks, provide stabling for my horse as well as a meal at morning and night for myself.
On my first day there I acted like a young lord, lying on my bed, my boots on, sipping from a cup of canary and wondering what steps I should take next.
However, business is business and pleasure is pleasure.
I went down to the tap room and ordered a meal though I was hungrier for the dark-eyed slattern I had glimpsed on my last visit with Benjamin.
She was a veritable Venus with her dark eyes and black, curling hair which tumbled down to her shoulders.
And what shoulders!
White as marble, with the juiciest and roundest pair of tits I had ever clapped eyes on.
(There goes my chaplain again, squirming on his stool.
I notice he does that whenever I talk about my ‘amours’, my little love trysts.
The colour of his face always reddens just as it does when fat Margot, the launderess, who keeps me supplied with cups of sack, bends and dips to provide me with a generous view of the most famous cleavage in all of Surrey.)
Anyway, on that spring day so many years ago, I lounged around, teasing and humouring the girl.
Now you know the way of the flesh!
A glance, a smile, a love cup shared, silver exchanged, then heigh-ho to the bed-chamber.
Lackaday, lackaday, what a time we had!
We bounced round on that pallet bed, so much laughing and shouting that the landlord came up.
He banged on our door, saying he was running an honest house, not some bawdy shop in Southwark.
When the bed collapsed under us and the girl's  shrieks could be heard in the taproom below, the landlord came up again shouting abuse through the door, but I ignored him.
He knew what the girl was when he hired her, the bald-faced hypocrite!
The next morning I decided to begin my business.
I rose, broke my fast and slipped the landlord some pieces of silver which made his vinegarish face look more congenial and subservient.
The maid — I think her name was Anna looked a little more tired and heavy-eyed after her exertions of the previous evening.
I, however, strutted out like a barnyard cock, booted and cloaked, a broad-brimmed hat on my head with a black and white plume hanging from it.
I thought I was a Hector and Paris combined.
Good Lord, the folly of youth!
I decided to go to St Paul's, walk past Duke Humphrey's tomb and along the Mediterranean, the main aisle where most men did business; there, the dirty round pillars were festooned with notices, men and women begging for work or prospective employers offering terms.
At one end the professional scriveners sat at their desks, quills and parchment at the ready, to draw up wills, indentures, bills of sale, a letter to a friend or a billet doux to a lover.
At the other end lawyers, in ermine-edged cloaks, touted for business, serjeants-at-law consulted clients, and outside in the porch booksellers and pamphleteers did a roaring trade.
Now I avoided all of these.
I was looking for a business venture worthy of my silver, some trade across the Narrow Seas or perhaps commerce with the Baltic.
You see, in my youth trade was close.
The Cabots had sailed for Newfoundland but that was as far as it went.
The seas down the west coast of Africa and the routes to the Hispanic colonies across the Atlantic were not yet open for English  ships.
We had no sea dogs, no Frobishers or Grenvilles who would fight their way past Spanish galleons.
And, of course, there was no Drake.
(I knew Sir Francis.
Have I told you the story?
I was playing bowls with him when the Great Armada was spotted off Lizard Point and the beacons along the south coast flared into life.
I am sure you must have heard the tale?
When the messenger arrived to inform Drake of the possible invasion, the old sea dog announced he would finish his game of bowls, then he would finish off the Spanish.
The red-bearded pirate was telling a lie!
I had wagered a purse that I would beat him at bowls and Drake never could resist gold.
Moreover, it was I who wet my finger to test the wind and pointed out that, even if he wanted to leave the game, it would be no use.
The wind had to change before his fighting ships could sail against the Spanish.
My chaplain says I am a liar.
What the bloody hell does he know?
I drank with all our great sailors.
Of course, the greatest is Raleigh.
He is still at sea with the silver I gave him to discover fresh treasure.
He says he can find his way up the Orinoco and discover the Seven Cities of Gold where the streets are paved with precious metals, and dusky, full-bosomed maidens scatter gems and pennies.
I only hope the old sea dog is telling the truth!)
Lackaday, I digress!
In Fat Harry's time business was not so adventurous.
Merchants came to St Paul's and walked up and down, thumbs pushed into their belts, looking for gold and bullion to invest in their ventures: wool to Flanders, wine from Gascony, wood to Italy, silks and costly fabrics from Venice and the mills of Florence.
I ignored such men with their closed faces and pinched noses.
Their pompous promises and grandiloquent phrases  failed to convince me so I quickly took the air in the graveyard where all the wolfs-heads, villains and counterfeit men hid from the law.
You see, St Paul's used to be a sanctuary, a refuge against the sheriff's men and, as long as you stayed there, you were safe.
I wondered if some of my old cronies from my days with old Mother Nightbird were still lurking there.
I stalked amongst the booths and ramshackle dwellings built against the wall.
Lord, I have never seen such a collection of rogues, palliards and foists!
Indeed, the whole canting crew.
I kept one hand on my sword hilt and the other on my wallet as I mentally phrased the letter I intended to send to Cardinal Wolsey demanding the graveyard be cleared of such a collection of villains.
At length I grew tired and went back to the joys of the tavern, both the board and the bed.
The only curious thing was that I found in my room a handbill from a Frenchman trying to solicit backers to export parchment to France and import wine into England.
I read it with interest, then forgot it.
The next day I returned to St Paul's and, this time, was successful.
It must have been noon, the time for the Angelus, and the bells of the cathedral clanging fit to break when I first caught sight of the fellow.
He was dressed soberly in a dark brown jerkin with leggings of the same colour pushed into black soft leather boots.
His grey cloak was of pure wool pushed back over his shoulders, yet it was his face which attracted me.
His features reminded me of Benjamin; kindly, honest and open.
Now you know Shallot's golden rule: It takes one rogue to know another, and a real rogue to recognise an honest man.
This man was very honest.
He had a number of handbills which he was distributing to everyone who passed so I took one nonchalantly  and his kind, brown eyes smiled.
He must have been about fifty summers old, his copper-coloured face was lined, his swept back hair silver-grey, but the moustache and the neatly clipped beard still showed traces of a golden youth.
I sauntered into a pie shop and carefully scrutinised the handbill which declared its distributor to be a foreigner: Jean Pierre Ralemberg, from Dijon, with a dwelling and warehouse in an alley off Bread Street.
Basically, the man was a parchment-seller trying to raise good hard silver or gold to finance the export of parchment to Nantes and the import of wine.
Now, I don't want to give you a boring lesson about the markets of the day, suffice to say that in 1520 hard cash was rare, most of it being tied up in fields, lands and houses, so it was natural for people like Ralemberg to tout for business.
It was an intriguing prospect and I was all the more curious why I had found one of his handbills in my chamber at the Golden Turk.
On the one hand I suspected a trap, but on the other the man was patently honest.
I sat in the pie shop kicking my heels and pondering the problem.
The landlord of the Golden Turk didn't know about the handbill, so who had put it there?
Was it some anonymous well-wisher or was I being manipulated?
I slowly munched diced meat pie stuffed with herbs.
The Frenchman looked honest and I was shrewd enough to recognise a prosperous trade venture.
English parchment was needed all over Europe, whilst in England French wines would always be sold.
You see, neither commodity could go stale.
Indeed, the longer you kept them, the better they became.
I walked back to St Paul's and found Ralemberg leaning despondently against a pillar, tapping  the handbills against the side of his leg.
I strode up and doffed my hat.
‘Monsieur Ralemberg, I am Roger Shallot.
I have read your announcement.
You look hungry.
Perhaps we could dine and talk?’
The Frenchman's eyes were guarded.
‘You are young,’ he murmured.
‘What difference does that make to my silver?’
He made a face.
‘No, the truth is you look like a rogue.’
‘That's because I am one,’ I answered.
‘However, my word is good, though my silver is better.’
Ralemberg grinned.
‘An honest rogue!
We shall eat, and we shall talk.
You will buy the food but I will provide the wine.’
Well, it was heigh-ho for the nearest cookshop and, if I remember correctly, a quail pie, the crust golden and crisp, the meat fresh and smothered in a rich sauce, and a jug of new Bordeaux.
I never forget good meals.
I mean, if you have starved like I have in the wilds of Muscovy or the deserts of North Africa, you always remember what you have eaten.
I can swear to every pie I have swallowed, to every cup of sack I have gulped, to the few good women I have met and, thankfully, to every bad woman I have slept with.
Ah, well, back to that cookshop.
At first, Ralemberg told me about himself.
I suspected there was a mystery behind his banal description of a parchment-seller born and raised at Nantes in Brittany; a stationer who knew how to work the new presses from Gutenberg and, for reasons he kept to himself, had moved both his family and business to England.
I didn't tell him about the handbill I had found; indeed, I quickly dismissed that as a mere coincidence.
Moreover, the wine loosened  Ralemberg's tongue and the more he spoke the more convinced I became that his trading venture would be the basis of my own success.
He had, so he related, the service of a trusted captain and a three-masted, seaworthy cog, sailing out of London.
Ralemberg intended to export parchment to Brittany and, for the homeward journey, his ship would bring wine to the London market.
‘I couldn't sell it myself,’ he declared.
‘And nor could you.
We are not members of the Vintners’ Guild.
But we could sell it to the wine merchants themselves and still make a handsome profit.’
I leaned back against the high, wooden bench, assessing Ralemberg as a true businessman who knew the workings of the London market.
In turn he came quickly to the point: his venture needed capital and what monies he had were tied up in his house.
He chattered about bills of sale, the purchase of canvas and parchment, the cost of carters and the money needed for ship and crew.
‘What about warehouses?’
I asked.
‘I have a house off Bread Street,’ he replied, ‘with vacant rooms and a dry, stone-vaulted cellar.
All I need,’ he repeated, ‘is the money to move this business.’
So it was his turn to ask questions and, of course, I only told him what I wanted to.
No!
Not lies, the truth — albeit cut and tailored to suit my own purposes.
Ralemberg studied me attentively throughout and I glimpsed the disbelief in his eyes.
A true rogue recognises an honest man so, I suppose, a truly honest man can recognise a rogue.
My grandiose descriptions faltered so I undid my money belt and emptied one of the pouches on the table.
‘That's my surety,’ I said.
‘You can take it as a pledge of my good faith.’
(This is one of my favourite roles, putting my money where others put hot air and spit.)
Ralemberg pushed the coins back at me.
‘I want to be honest!’
I burst out.
‘Don't we all, Master Shallot?
If I took your silver, I would only be a thief.
But, come, let me show you the warehouse you asked about.’
We rose and he took me a short distance to Bread Street.
His house was a three-storeyed affair.
The horn windows were dusty and holed, the paintwork on the beams cracked and the front door swung crookedly on its hinges.
Ralemberg just shrugged and grinned apologetically.
Inside, however, it smelt sweet and clean.
(The French are always more precise in such matters than the English.)
We went down a passageway to a small panelled hall.
I remember it being dark-beamed with windows high in the wall and wax candles already lit.
Rugs covered the floor and a lap dog played before a small log fire.
On one side of the fireplace a grey-haired woman was absorbed in some needlework whilst on the other side, with her back to us, a young girl crouched over a book, loudly reciting a French poem in a voice shot through with gaiety and laughter.
An old servant, bald as a badger, yellow-faced and wizened, bustled towards us with all the speed of a snail; he mumbled apologies in French but Ralemberg just tapped him gently on the shoulder and told him not to worry.
Of course, our entrance disturbed the domestic tableau around the fireplace.
Both women rose with cries of joy.
Madame Ralemberg was truly French, dark olive features, expressive eyes and neatly coiffed hair.
She looked merry, though her eyes were guarded.
She studied me suspiciously and this strengthened my belief that Ralemberg had his  own secrets.
The other woman, Ralemberg's daughter…well, how can you describe a poem in the flesh?
She must have been sixteen or seventeen summers old, tall and slender, and her eyes were as blue as a clear summer sky.
She had the face of an angel, high cheek bones and perfectly formed nose and mouth.
If she had been at court the young dandies would have written odes and sonnets to her eyebrows, her finger nails and her sweet rose mouth.
Good Lord, she was beautiful!
She was dressed simply enough in a brown gown with a lacy ruff round the neck but she would have outshone any queen.
Her voice was low and musical and her command of English only enhanced by a slight French accent.
She said something to me, a simple introduction, but all I could do was stare open-mouthed at her.
Suddenly she giggled and I realised I was still holding her fingers.
You see, it was those eyes, so blue in a face so dark, one of God's most beautiful mixtures.
I have met such women since, young girls from the west of Ireland, but Agnes Ralemberg was the queen.
Believe me, if the eyes are the windows of the soul, then Agnes's soul was as beautiful as she looked.
She was totally guileless, honest, with a mordant sense of humour and sardonic wit.
She knew me to be a rogue as soon as she clapped eyes on me and, whilst her father ushered me to a seat, she watched girlishly out of the corner of her eye.
She was laughing at me but I didn't care.
Ralemberg talked and I listened.
As far as I was concerned he could have my every piece of silver if he just allowed me to gaze at his daughter.
Good Lord, I feel tears pricking my eyes now.
Old Shallot, who would be under a woman's skirts, given half a chance, sat tongue-tied before  this chit of a young girl.
Do you know, I was frightened of her — or was I shy?
(My chaplain is smirking.
He had better be careful!
Agnes was one of the great loves of my life.
Indeed, the first and only one.
Perhaps I loved those who came after because they were faint imitations of her.)
Ah well, Ralemberg chattered gaily, then took me on a tour of the house.
I walked like some sleepwalker as he showed me empty rooms and a steep, stone-vaulted cellar.
Afterwards, when I would have preferred to stay and stare at Agnes, he took me down to King's Wharf near the Vintry and into a small ale house which stank of carp and salt.
He introduced me to burly, red-faced Bertrand de Macon, the master of a fat-bellied cog and prospective third partner in our business venture.
We sat and drank, discussing sea routes, harbour charges, the hiring of a crew, the wine markets and the stowing of cargo.
To be sure, I was rather bemused but the honesty of both men was apparent.
De Macon was a born sailor who had braved the storms of Biscay.
He agreed to do the first voyage there and back before receiving payment, as long as Ralemberg agreed to underwrite the voyage, using his house as collateral.
I would buy the parchment and arrange its transport down to the wharves and we concluded that, if we sold the wine brought back on the first voyage, we would make a profit.
We all shook hands and drank to seal our agreement before returning to St Paul's and the desks of the scriveners where a tripartite indenture was drawn up.
We agreed on two voyages from the Thames to Nantes and then we would review the situation.
The duties of each of us were carefully delineated.
However, before I signed, Ralemberg took me outside.
I thought he wished to impart further information  but, with the speed of a striking cat, he suddenly pulled his dagger, nicking my neck with its point.
‘Master Shallot,’ he whispered.
‘My daughter Agnes your intentions must be honourable.’
Do you know, I wasn't one bit afraid?
It was one of the few times in my life when I actually spoke the truth.
I held up my right hand.
‘Monsieur,’ I declared, ‘you have my word as your business partner that my intentions towards your daughter are perfectly honourable.’
Ralemberg smiled, sheathed his dagger and clapped me on the shoulder.
We went back inside and signed the indentures, the scrivener cutting the parchment into three and keeping a duplicate copy.
Letters were then drawn up to be enrolled at the Court of Chancery so we would have the necessary licence to trade.
Well, what more can I say?
I skipped back to the tavern as merry as a schoolboy intent on his holiday.
Now, the day had grown dark but I was a burly rogue, carrying sword and dagger, yet my assailants just seemed to step out of the shadows.
They didn't attack me: my arms were pinioned and I was turned round, my face pressed into the dank wall of the alleyway.
Perhaps it was the wine I had drunk but I only gave a short yell before my hair was grabbed and my head jerked violently back.
‘Monsieur!’ a voice hissed.
‘Do not struggle!
There are four of us.
We mean you no harm but Monsieur Ralemberg is not the man he appears.
It would be best if you looked for another business partner.’
‘What do you mean?’
I stuttered, my usual cowardice now taking hold.
‘Ralemberg…who is he?’
‘Monsieur,’ the voice repeated slowly, ‘you should not  be worried about Monsieur Ralemberg but rather us.’
One of my hands was seized and, strange upon strange, a small wax candle thrust into my palm.
‘Next time you meet Monsieur Ralemberg, just tell him his old friends the Luciferi are with him!’
Suddenly a voice bellowed from the top of the alleyway.
‘You, sirs!
What are you doing?’
My face was banged against the wall and my assailants disappeared.
I crouched, holding my bruised temple and cursing the arrow of pain which coursed through my face.
My rescuers were three bully boys, swords and daggers stuck through their waists.
You know the type, with their tight hose, protruding codpieces, puffed doublets and short cloaks.
They didn't chase my assailants but helped me to my feet, solicitously enquiring after my health.
It was dark, I couldn't make out their features, but I was terrified that I had jumped from the pot into the flames.
Even then I should have known something was wrong.
Why should three bully boys help a stranger in a darkened alleyway off Cheapside?
However, they caused me no ill and I staggered back to the Golden Turk and the tender care of the slattern, a bowl of rich broth and countless frothing tankards of ale.
Chapter 2
The next morning I awoke anxious over what had happened.
I stared wonderingly at the small, wax candle which I had thrown on to the floor of my chamber.
I forgot about my rescuers, I was more concerned by the Luciferi.
I knew enough Latin to know this name meant the Light-Bearers, Satan's name before he was thrown out of heaven.
But who were these Light-Bearers?
I wondered.
A rival company?
Personal enemies of Ralemberg?
I felt my stomach lurch and my heart beat a little faster.
My hands felt clammy, the usual signs of old Shallot beginning to wonder whether it is time to cut and run.
My elation of the previous day began to evaporate until I remembered Agnes, the indentures I had signed, and the basic honesty of Ralemberg and de Macon.
I washed, dressed, strapped on my sword belt and strutted out, quietly vowing that a group of cut-throats and alley-sneakers could not frighten this new Merchant Prince.
Oh, Lord, the foolishness of youth!
I went straight to Ralemberg's house, hungry to see the ever-smiling Agnes.
My poor heart soared like a bird when she agreed to accompany me and her father to a parchment-seller in Lothbury.
We kept off the beaten  track, away from those traders who fixed high prices, for Shallot knew where to go.
This shop or that, then across London Bridge under the rotting, decapitated heads of traitors to a small parchment-seller's in Southwark.
The gods smile on those they intend to destroy, and within three days the parchment we bought up was carted down to de Macon's cog and hoisted aboard.
The captain was as happy as a pig in the mire.
‘Better this,’ he bellowed, ‘than begging for trade from Westminster to the Wool Quay!’
He explained how, due to the cessation of hostilities between England and France, the hiring of vessels was now cheap and easy and, for what he had to sell, it was a buyer's market.
Two days later he sailed and I, forgetful of all dangers, was now in my seventh heaven.
(One of my few virtues.
When I am happy, I can't give a rat's arse about anything else!)
Ralemberg was likeable.
He reminded me of Benjamin with his dry wit, sardonic observations and palpable honesty.
We roamed the streets together looking for possible future providers of parchment and, taking advantage of the good weather, rode north to Oxford to the parchment-sellers along Holywell and Broad Street as well as the little shops on the Turl near Exeter College.
Of course, there was always Agnes, and I lived for the nights when I joined the Ralembergs for their simple meal.
The Frenchman treated me like a son; his wife was a little more distant and cool so I complimented her and brought her small gifts, wooing her as if she was the maid.
As for my beloved, what shall I say?
One memory will always remain.
Seventy-five years later, whenever I feel the sun on my face, it springs as fresh in my mind as if it occurred yesterday.
There was a small garden at the back of Ralemberg's house where the roses grew wild, their stems trailing over the small banks of herbs.
The garden was cut off from its neighbour by a high red brick wall.
Ralemberg would sit with his wife in a flower-covered bower sharing a loving cup whilst Agnes and I would walk among the roses.
At first she was shy but then she chattered about Nantes, how she missed the dark woods and green fields of Brittany.
She gave me the names of all her friends and said how proud she was of the life her father had given her.
Sometimes I would hold her lightly by the finger-tips and try to steer the conversation to matters of the heart, but she would blush and her beautiful eyes look down.
She would shake her head and deftly speak of other matters, though never about her father's past.
Now, I knew some French.
You may remember I spent some time in Paris — not the most pleasant of times freezing in the snow, chased by wolves and being half-hanged at Montfaucon.
Hence I had a working knowledge of the language and sometimes, at table, could follow the conversation, though when the Ralembergs lapsed into patois this became impossible.
During these conversations their manner would be grave, their faces serious.
One word they kept repeating was the Latin ‘Luciferi’ and I remembered my assailants in the alley.
Nevertheless, I still believed this was a reference to a rival company and, as my attackers never returned, the memory of their dark threats receded.
Or did it?
Sometimes I felt I was being followed or watched whilst seated in a tavern or moving amongst the stalls in Cheapside.
I had this feeling of menace, of quiet watchfulness.
Oh, yes, I felt tempted to question the Ralembergs.
Once I did ask Agnes about the Luciferi but the girl just paled and shook her head.
‘You must never mention that word again,’ she whispered.
I was happy enough to let the matter drop.
The weeks passed, a full month in all.
De Macon's ship went to Brittany and back, the voyage helped by fair winds and calm seas.
The ship returned with a hold full of wines and a handsome profit.
Ralemberg insisted on meeting de Macon first, saying he wished to discuss some secret matter, so I joined them later in a small tavern on the corner of Vintry and La Reole.
We toasted our success, de Macon informing us that the market was a prosperous one.
Ralemberg said he already had a buyer for the wine, a vintner living in Trinity.
We then laid plans for the next voyage.
I had now used most of my silver and, despite our profits, had to draw heavily, even borrow some more from the goldsmith, Waller, in his musty old shop in Mercery.
At first, the tight old sod wasn't going to lend me a penny.
(Have you noticed that about bankers?
If you have money the bastards want to lend you it; if you haven't and want to borrow, they tell you to go to hell.)
Anyway, this old miser drew up an indenture and the monies were made available.
We bought cartloads of parchment from Charterhouse, Oxford and even sent orders to places as far north as Norwich and Cambridge.
On the day before de Macon sailed on his second voyage, the Ralembergs invited me to a formal supper.
I was delighted.
My wooing of Agnes was proceeding apace.
I had bought her small gifts, I had kissed her hand  whilst on May Day I'd helped deck the house with green boughs and later took her to dance around a Maypole set up near Cattle Street.
However, when I went to the house that night I found the Ralembergs upset.
Even the jovial de Macon was pale-faced and withdrawn.
Agnes looked timid and I could hear the old servant weeping in the scullery.
My hosts shuffled their feet and the meal was unusually silent but, when darkness had fallen and the candles on the table threw huge, black shadows against the wall, Ralemberg filled my glass to the brim, went back to his own chair and nodded at his wife.
‘Master Shallot,’ he began, ‘we have our secrets and you have yours.’
He waved a hand.
‘I shall tell you why we left France.’
He stared down at the white damask tablecloth; I sipped my wine and studied the faces of the others.
If anything, their fear had increased.
‘What's the matter?’
I asked testily.
‘I am the matter,’ Ralemberg answered.
‘I was born in Brittany.
That was an independent province until Duke Francis died, leaving his daughter Anne as his only heir.
She was seized, married off to Charles VIII of France, and Brittany was absorbed into a greater France.’
Ralemberg smiled wanly.
‘Now Brittany had been given assurances by the present King of England's father that the Tudors would fight to protect Brittany's independence.’
He shrugged.
‘It just goes to show, princes are liars.’
(Well, that came as no surprise to me.
Old Henry VII, father to the Great Killer, was a born miser and inveterate liar who wouldn't know the truth if it jumped up and bit him on the nose.
Oh, by the way, Charles VIII of France was no better.
He was a pygmy, an ugly little bastard, forever jumping on the ladies of the court as if he was a dog on heat.
He fancied himself as a new Alexander and said he wanted to learn more about the Renaissance in the neighbouring country, so he invaded Italy.
Charles sacked city after city.
He also found syphilis, the first time that disease appeared in Europe.
His soldiers caught it outside Naples and, when their balls began to drop off, he retreated.
You must have heard how Charles died?
Supposedly, he wandered into a darkened room and banged his head on a cupboard.
I know different.
He was murdered.
I have met the assassin who was on top of the cupboard!)
‘Brittany became part of France,’ Ralemberg continued.
‘I didn't care either way.
I went to university at the Sorbonne in Paris, entered the royal service, and joined the French crown's legion of secret agents called the Luciferi, the Light-Bearers.
These men move in the shadows.
They do not act in the full light of day but deal in subtle trickery, clever fetches, secret assassinations, and every filthy trick of the devil.
I became a high-ranking officer under the chief archangel, Vauban.’
He chewed his lip.
‘The archangel is the title given to the leader of the Luciferi.
He is appointed personally by the French king.
I admit I was party to their tricks for a while but in Brittany the Luciferi began to remove, through assassination or spurious trials, any who opposed the French crown.
One of these was my own brother who led the resistance in the countryside around Nantes.’
He looked down at his splayed fingers.
‘I suppose,’ he murmured, ‘that brought me to my senses.
I began to see the Luciferi as evil.
I fled from them and joined the rebels in Brittany.’
He looked at the sea captain.
‘De Macon was  also one of us.
When the resistance broke, I fled with what possessions I had.’
Ralemberg looked sharply at me.
‘What's the matter, Roger?
I thought you'd say this is England, the Luciferi have no power here?’
‘I have met the Luciferi,’ I replied, and heard Madame Ralemberg moan as I briefly described my assailants in the alleyway and the appearance of my mysterious protectors.
‘Why didn't you tell us?’
Ralemberg snapped.
‘I thought they were another company, personal enemies.
Threats,’ I continued bravely, ‘do not deter me.
But you are right, Monsieur, this is England and the Luciferi have no real power.’
‘The Luciferi are everywhere,’ de Macon replied.
‘Why do you think Monsieur Ralemberg needed your silver and gold?
You were not the only one attracted by his business ventures.
The Luciferi frightened the rest off.’
‘Strange,’ I mused.
‘What is?’
‘Well, Monsieur, before I met you in St Paul's, I found one of your handbills in my chamber at the Golden Turk.
Would the Luciferi have put it there?’
‘Yes, that is strange,’ Ralemberg murmured.
‘And you say that some others protected you?’
I nodded.
He smiled thinly.
‘You must have powerful protectors, Master Shallot.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, the Luciferi threatened you but they were apparently warned off by someone more powerful.’
I went cold.
I had this dreadful feeling that my journey to London and my meeting with this Frenchman had  all been carefully managed by Cardinal Wolsey and his blackguard, Doctor Agrippa.
Was that why Benjamin had let me go?
Was that the reason I found the handbill in my chamber?
I thought back.
Everything had gone so smoothly.
Here was I writing to Benjamin, boasting about being a merchant prince, and it had all been contrived.
Now, I'd mentioned Benjamin to the Ralembergs but told them nothing about his near kinsman, the great cardinal.
‘Monsieur,’ I snapped, ‘were you told about me before we met?’
Ralemberg shook his head.
‘No,’ he answered.
‘All I do know is that others who approached me were warned off.
At first, I thought it was just the Luciferi but, on one occasion, I am sure it was due to intervention from the English court.’
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘Why what?’
‘Why is the English court interested in you?’
Ralemberg smiled and gently removed the crumbs from the table with the tips of his fingers.
His companions sat frozen like statues, watching me intently.
I am sure de Macon had his hand on his dagger hilt and I realised for all they knew I could be a member of the Luciferi.
That's why de Macon was present, in case their gamble went wrong.
‘I accepted you, Roger,’ Ralemberg said, ‘because I liked you.
I also suspected that you had powerful patrons, someone high in your king's court.’
He licked his lips.
‘I was given sanctuary in England in return for information about the Luciferi.’
He shrugged.
‘You know, the usual details: names, places, agents, ciphers and letters.
I told  them all I knew except the one thing the great cardinal wanted.’
‘Which is?’
‘The Luciferi have a spy, a very high-ranking spy, at the English court who provides the French with information about Henry's plans against France, even before such plans are implemented.
Cardinal Wolsey thought I knew his name.’
‘And do you?’
‘No, only that the Luciferi call him Raphael, but Wolsey already knew that.’
‘You say ‘him’?’
‘Yes.’
Ralemberg smiled bleakly.
‘Yes, you're right, Roger, it could be a woman.
All I know is the name Raphael.’
‘But Wolsey,’ I persisted, ‘and the Luciferi, think you know the identity of Raphael?’
He nodded.
‘So why don't the Luciferi just kill you?’
‘My dear Roger, in London there are spies in the service of the Papacy, the Doge of Venice, the Emperor of the Romans, Ferdinand of Aragon…and the same is true of every capital in Europe.
They are like parasites.
They are tolerated here because France tolerates English agents in Paris, but there are certain limitations on their actions — blatant assassination is one of them.
Moreover, as soon as the English think I know the name of their traitor, I will be kept safe.’
I leaned back in my chair and studied Agnes's white face.
I smiled to hide my own unease.
Were Wolsey and Doctor Agrippa somehow managing me?
I wondered.
Did  they think I would loosen Ralemberg's tongue or stir his memory?
‘So why do you tell me all this now?’
I accused.
‘This afternoon,’ de Macon spoke up, ‘the Luciferi made their presence felt.’
Ralemberg pulled a small package from inside his doublet.
He unrolled the piece of linen.
In the centre lay a small, pure white beeswax candle stamped with the fleur de lys of France.
I picked it up and studied it curiously.
It was identical to the one thrust into my hand in the alleyway.
It looked so simple, so pure, yet it had held terrors for the Ralembergs and would be the beginning of fresh horrors for me.
‘You should be careful,’ de Macon murmured.
Of course, Shallot made light of it.
I joked and teased them all until some of the heaviness lifted.
I didn't give a damn about the Luciferi.
Benjamin's uncle would protect us!
I was more concerned with persuading Agnes to go for a walk in the tree-lined garden, and foolishly dismissed the Ralembergs' unease.
The next day de Macon sailed.
I wrote a short letter to Benjamin, proclaiming myself a merchant but asking if his uncle had written to him recently.
I made the letter sound as if all was well, and I suppose it was.
(I must pause.
I can hear the little chaplain sniggering at me, the loathsome turd!
He murmurs that my success is a fable like that of Dick Whittington who became Lord Mayor of London fifty years previously.
Why should the little sod laugh?
Can't old Shallot have a run of luck?
Oh, no, the little bastard's more interested in seeing his patron, his generous master, hunted, beaten and starving in some rotting gaol or facing terrors which would reduce many a  man to an inmate of Bedlam.
Well, the little sod needn't worry, he can have his fill of all that before this murderous tale is finished.)
Four days after the Ralembergs told me about the Luciferi, I was in the Golden Turk carousing by myself.
My partner had told me there were private matters he wished to attend to.
I shrugged and left him alone.
Now, isn't it strange how terrors begin?
A band of gamesters joined me, with a cupful of dice and purses jingling merrily.
Sturdy rogues intent on fleecing me, as I was them.
The wine flowed freely, my pile of silver grew.
The blood in my veins ran high and my usually sharp wits dulled.
Young men who read this, take Shallot's advice!
First, never drink and gamble; secondly, never drink and gamble with strangers; thirdly, if you do fall into temptation, as I sometimes did, make sure you know where the wine comes from.
Anyway, I became as drunk as a vicar.
The noise grew, flashes of fire burst before my eyes.
I danced, I sang.
I threw my largesse round the emptying tap room.
I was full of joy at the prospect of meeting Agnes the next day.
At last I fell back on to my stool and into the blackness of a drunken stupor.
But, oh, what a wakening!
I felt as if I was at the end of a long tunnel where someone was kicking my legs.
I opened my eyes, groaned at the sunlight and peered around.
‘The bastard's awake.’
A grizzled, bearded face pushed itself into mine.
I looked away.
I was in a garden, my clothes wet with dew.
My head thumped with pain, my mouth tasted foul and stale.
I was ringed by men, some in armour, and recognised the blue and mustard livery of the City of London.
I struggled to rise but my arms were pinioned.
I was  dragged to my feet.
My wrists were tied behind my back, an iron brace fixed around my neck and the long chain which hung from it secured round my ankles.
‘For sweet pity's sake!’
I murmured.
The soldier whose ugly face I had glimpsed on wakening punched me in the mouth.
I turned and retched.
I peered round once again.
I was in the Ralembergs' garden where something black and white was floating in the small carp pond.
I stared closer.
It was the corpse of Agnes's dog.
Thick blood from its slashed throat appeared to buoy it up.
Over in the bower where Ralemberg and his wife used to sit were four corpses, each covered by a dirty, canvas sheet.
I glimpsed the feet peeping out from beneath.
‘Sweet mercy!’
I cried.
‘What's happened?’
The soldier seized me by the hair and pushed me across the garden.
On his command the sheets were dragged back.
How can I describe it?
Ralemberg and his wife sprawled there, their throats gashed from ear to ear.
The blood had splashed out, drenching their clothes.
Agnes was different.
Her neck was broken, carefully and expertly.
She lay there as if asleep, those beautiful eyes half-open.
Beside her the pathetic corpse of the servant, the  garotte cord still round his scrawny neck.
I howled like a dog, struggling against my captors, until someone gave me a crack across the head and I slipped into unconsciousness.
I awoke in the Little Ease, a smelly, rat-filled dungeon, watered by the sewers of the Fleet river and the slops of the prison bearing the same name.
I must have been half-mad.
I whimpered like a child, crouching in the cold, slimy darkness, until the grille  above was pulled back and a bailiff with a face like a gargoyle's lashed me with a whip, before lowering a stoup of brackish water and a fly-infested dish of rancid meat.
At last I calmed in the face of the sheer horror of the tragedy.
Agnes was gone.
The Ralembergs were dead and, judging from the dark blood stains on the front of my doublet, I was cast as the murderer.
Those men in the Golden Turk had made me drunk deliberately.
They had drugged my wine before moving me to that horror-filled garden.
I was frightened.
I crouched, shivering with cold, until I was dragged up and thrown into a huge cage on a gaudily painted cart and driven down through the Shambles and Westchepe to the magistrates at the Guildhall.
There the bailiffs pushed and shoved me through a porticoed entrance, down a long, dark, musty passageway into the main well of the court, fastening me to the bar; beyond it sat the three magistrates before a square table ringed by clerks.
I wanted to vomit or faint.
Only the terror of what had happened, and what might yet occur, kept me conscious.
A clerk read the charges out.
‘That he did foully murder and commit the most dreadful homicides…’
Etc, etc.
Shallot's wits resurfaced.
I felt the shadow of the noose and the true danger of my situation emerged.
All my goods at the Golden Turk would be gone by now.
That villain of a landlord was not the one to look a gift horse in the mouth.
I had no money, I had no surety.
De Macon was at sea, it would take weeks to send a petition to Wolsey, and my master was immersed in his good works at Ipswich.
So who would speak for old Shallot?
No one but dear Shallot himself so I pleaded not guilty and made my defence: I was Ralemberg's colleague, I had no grievance against him.
I admired his family and loved his daughter.
There were others, I pointed out, who might wish Ralemberg's death and I was their pathetic dupe.
The chief magistrate, with the face of an old fox and the hard eyes of a weasel, heard me out.
His two companions, however, sniggered as I referred to the great cardinal, affairs of state, and finally to the Luciferi.
Oh, yes, even then I dully understood that the Luciferi were the bastards who had perpetrated such a dreadful crime.
They had decided to move just in case Ralemberg told me anything.
They had executed him and his family, and made sure Shallot paid the price.
Where, I wondered, were my bloody protectors?
Nevertheless, I had a glimmer of hope.
The chief magistrate watched me intently as the prosecutor, a blundering serjeant-at-law, failed to prove I had any grievance against the Ralembergs and could not proffer any motive for the crime.
Under questioning, the prosecutor did confess that a search of the house had revealed Ralemberg's and de Macon's indentures with me, as well as my own pathetic love letters to Mistress Agnes.
His case came to hinge on one point.
Had I left the Golden Turk to commit murder, or was I telling the truth about being drugged and placed in Ralemberg's garden after the dreadful crimes had been committed?
The chief magistrate kept referring to this point and my opponent could not answer it.
Yet I, too, had no proof of my innocence.
I was removed to the dungeon beneath the Guildhall whilst pursuivants were sent to the Golden Turk to investigate.
Searches were also ordered throughout the port  of London about de Macon's ship.
I was hustled away to a cold, stone-flagged cell beneath the Guildhall which I shared with two of the biggest rats I have ever clapped eyes on.
Long, black, fat-bellied and red-eyed, the bastards watched me hungrily as if I was their next meal.
I screamed and rattled my chains; they turned sluggishly away as if to say that one way or another they would eventually dine on my flesh.
Later in the afternoon the sheriff's men came back and dragged me up before the justices.
Weasel Eyes looked as if he hadn't moved but the other two hypocrites must have dined well for they were slouched, half-asleep, in their high-backed chairs.
The court was quiet except for the scratching of the clerks' quills as they sat around their green baize-topped table.
‘Master Shallot.’
The chief justice's eyes seemed to smile.
‘We have made enquiries at the Golden Turk.’
The smile on his long face faded.
‘The landlord cannot remember seeing you the night you were carousing there.’
‘The lying bastard!’
I screamed.
One of the escorts slapped me across the mouth.
‘Master Shallot,’ the justice intoned, ‘moderate your language!’
‘Or else what?’
I yelled.
‘You'll hang me?
You are going to bloody well hang me anyway, for murders I never committed!’
I received a savage jab between the ribs.
‘What about de Macon's ship?’
I moaned.
‘More bad news I am afraid, Master Shallot.
De Macon will never confirm your story.
His ship was seized and sunk by French privateers.’
Well, that was it.
Shallot was going to hang.
The  magistrate put on a black cap, a three-cornered piece of silk.
The clerk of the court, his sanctimonious face relishing the sonorous words of condemnation, stood behind him.
‘Roger Shallot,’ the magistrate thundered, ‘we find you guilty of these terrible murders and so you must pay the full penalty of the law.
You are to be taken whence you came and, at a time appointed by this court, hanged by the neck till dead!’
I thought of everything; praying, begging, laughing, entreating, trying to escape, all the things old Shallot tries to do when he's in a tight corner.
‘Wait!’ a girl's voice shouted from the back of the court.
I turned and saw my saviour, the wench with black curly hair from the tavern.
Beside her, the half-witted ostler she was dragging by the hand struggled with the guards.
‘What is the matter?’ the magistrate roared.
‘Proof!’
I yelled.
‘Sir, you must hear her!’
I give the old bastard his due, he was a fair man.
I think he knew there was something wrong.
Anyway, he ordered the girl forward.
She took the oath and swore she had seen me drunk.
The ostler, whose accent was almost unintelligible, muttered that on the night the murders had been committed, I had been hustled dead drunk out of the tavern and into the hands of strangers waiting in the yard.
The magistrate, staring at the ceiling, asked why the landlord had not remembered this.
The girl shrugged and mumbled about him being too busy.
Who cared?
I was free!
Penniless, beaten, starving, wretched, but I was free!
The guards threw me out.
The wench was waiting for me in the street.
She pressed up against me.
‘I came back, Master Shallot.
You are a rogue but you'd never kill anyone!’
‘Did you see anybody?’
I asked.
She smiled and shook her head.
‘I was busy upstairs with one of my customers.’
‘You committed perjury on my behalf?’
‘Yes.’
‘Why?’
‘You make me laugh.’
‘My possessions?’
I asked.
‘They are all gone.
The landlord took them.’
‘I'll kill the bastard!’
‘No, you won't,’ she whispered.
‘He's dead already.
He was found with his throat cut in one of the outhouses.’
‘Do you know anything about it?’
‘Men who spoke French have been seen near the tavern.
You'd best not come back,’ she added.
‘Here, take this.’
She slipped me a cloth containing strips of dried meat.
Then she stood on tiptoe, kissed me and was gone.
I never saw her again.
Months later I searched London but never found her.
She was one of the kindest persons I ever met.
She had the gentlest soul, and the finest pair of buttocks I have ever held.
Let old Shallot tell you this: when you're in real trouble the women will help; most men are cowards.
Oh, they like to show off in their peacock plumery, but it's all shadow and no substance with them.
Well, there I was in London, penniless; like the man in the gospel, I was too proud to go home so I begged and fought with the rest of the dispossessed in the dirty alleyways and streets of Whitechapel, Alsatia, and even across London Bridge amongst the stews of Southwark.
I went back to Ralemberg's house but it was all sealed up like a tomb so I left it alone.
But don't get me wrong.
I mourned, I really did, and still do.
If you go down to my secret chamber and look in one of the coffers you will find a crushed flower, a faded rose, more black than yellow now, but if I smell it and close my eyes (like I did last night), then I am back again in Ralemberg's garden and my blood runs free and the air is filled with the sweet fragrance of flowers.
I wait for Agnes and, if I really pretend, she will come and stand with me.
Oh, then I am young again and, for one of the few occasions in my life, deeply in love.
I open my eyes and think of my riches.
Before God, I'd give them all up just to see her again, just to touch her!
Good Christ, will no one cry for poor Shallot?
Oh, I did swear vengeance but, believe me, revenge is a dish best served cold and somehow, deep in my innards, I knew that one day I would settle with the Luciferi.
For the moment, however, old Shallot had to survive.
I could have returned to Ipswich but I didn't want to go back like a beggar.
On my third day of freedom I managed to steal some coins and sent a note to my master in Ipswich.
I had a clerk in St Paul's write it out, then stood by Aldgate and bribed a royal messenger, carrying the white wand and wearing the royal gold-and-blue surcoat, who was travelling to King's Lynn, to leave the message with Master Daunbey.
I suppose I should have just gone and begged for help but Shallot has his pride.
God knows where, but I've got it.
A day later I had a stroke of good fortune.
I managed to steal some clothes from a butcher fastened in the stocks.
Then misfortune once again struck.
I was near St Anthony's Hospital, between Bishopsgate and Bread Street, intent on lifting a purse, when my arm was suddenly seized: it was the goldsmith, Waller, demanding his money.
Now, I was dirty and unshaven but he recognised me.
Once again I landed back in prison, the debtor's hold in the Fleet; a dirty, ramshackle place with narrow corridors, windows as thin as a miser's lips, stinking with the refuse of the city.
I was still there the morning my master came and rescued me.
The first I knew about it was a massive gaoler dragging me from the Common side up to the turnkey's lodge.
Master Benjamin was waiting, sitting on a stool.
He took one look at me, smiled and slipped some coins to the turnkey for food and wine.
I sat there for an hour stuffing my stomach and telling him exactly what had happened.
Benjamin listened — and that's what I liked about my master, he never judged, he never condemned.
‘I received your letter,’ he said.
‘I came up to visit Johanna in Syon and made enquiries.
All our gold?’
‘Gone, master.’
Benjamin smiled.
‘Never mind.
I have horses ready.
Uncle wishes to see us at Hampton Court.’
Then I did get frightened.
Whenever ‘Uncle’, the great Lord Wolsey, intervened in our affairs, it always meant trouble.
I wasn't frightened of Wolsey.
He was just a butcher's son from Ipswich who had risen to be Lord Chancellor and leading churchman of England.
Indeed, I always had a sneaking admiration for him and I think he liked me for, as you know, it takes one rogue to recognise another.
In time I became Wolsey's friend, the only man to stand by him when he fell from power and lay in bed gasping out his life and cursing the king who  had turned against him.
Nor was I frightened of Wolsey's familiar, Doctor Agrippa, the black magician with his cherubic face and that strange perfumed smell which always accompanied him.
No, what really frightened old Shallot and turned my innards to water was the thought of the beast Wolsey served, Henry VIII by the grace of God, King of England, Ireland and France.
A fat, bombastic, pig-eyed, treacherous son of a turd who destroyed the best of men because he wanted to get between Anne Boleyn's legs and, when he did, couldn't do much about it.
The Great Slayer really frightened me.
Some men kill because they have to but Henry genuinely thought he was God, with the power of life and death.
Let me give you an example.
When he destroyed the monasteries and the north of the country rose in rebellion under Robert Aske (I'll tell you about that later, a real killing time!), the rebel leader sent envoys to Henry to treat over their grievances.
Henry despatched his royal herald, Rouge Croix, in return.
This poor bastard made the error of bowing before the rebel leader so, when he returned to London, Henry had him drawn, quartered, disembowelled and his balls cut off.
Just because the poor sod made a mistake!
Now you can see why old Shallot was frightened.
No, I lie, not frightened — just terrified witless.
Chapter 3
My master and I left London.
I changed and bathed at the tavern where my master was staying in Great Mary Axe Street near Bishopsgate.
(Oh, by the way, I didn't forget Waller.
I'd bought a special bottle of wine.
I half-emptied it, filled the rest with horse piss and re-sealed it.
Then I sent it to him.
I hope the bastard enjoyed every drop!)
Two days later we reached Kingston and, leaving our horses at the Robin Hood tavern, went by barge to Hampton Court.
The poet Cavendish described the new palace as a paradise on earth and so I thought when we first glimpsed its towers and golden cupolas above the trees.
Wolsey had bought the manor of Hampton from the Knights Hospitallers, levelled it to the ground and, bringing in craftsmen from every part of Europe, built a palace breath-taking in its opulent beauty.
We were given lodgings in the gatehouse and were virtually kept prisoner as the king and the court, as well as the great cardinal, moved into residence.
This palace swarmed with retainers either wearing the golden ‘T.C.’ of Thomas Cardinalis or the scarlet of Henricus Rex.
Carts full of precious belongings were being unloaded in the courtyards; ostlers, grooms and farriers shouted and yelled.
Chamberlains with white wands of office rapped  out orders and, until the king and the lord cardinal were settled in their respective rooms, the common people were banished from the corridors and the galleries.
Wolsey never liked the common man.
The Earl of Shrewsbury once told me that when he walked in the park, Wolsey would suffer no one to come within bowshot of him.
Benjamin, his favourite nephew, was an exception and on the evening following our arrival Wolsey summoned us to his private apartments.
We were led down black-and-white-tiled corridors, through a series of presence chambers, all huge and hung with tapestries which Wolsey had brought from abroad.
Not just little square hangings.
Some of these were five or six yards long and eight yards high, depicting scenes from the Bible or themes from Petrarch's love poetry.
We were ushered into a small chamber ostentatiously furnished.
I noticed with amusement that the tapestries hanging there illustrated the seven deadly sins.
Of course, I was fascinated by Lust, a young girl with long, golden hair, breasts like ripe melons, and long, white, slender legs.
(I wager Wolsey kept an eye on that, too, being most interested in the sins of the flesh.
He had a mistress, you know, a fat, dumpy, little thing, though Wolsey adored both her and the illegitimate children he had by her.)
He was awaiting us, a small skull cap pushed to the back of his black, oily hair.
He looked the powerful prince, his face dark and swarthy like an Italian's, thick, sensuous lips, a beaked nose and lustrous dark eyes.
He was dressed in purple silk and satin trimmed with gold.
On his feet were purple woollen buskins.
Beside him, on a table, the flat tasselled hat of a cardinal.
Naturally, my master bowed and I had to follow suit, reminding myself with a secret smile that Wolsey was only a commoner and no better than me.
The floor was of polished cedar wood and I glanced round enviously at the stools covered with red satin and silver tassels: ‘T.C.’, Wolsey's personal monogram, was everywhere, sometimes a foot high in carved gold.
The air smelt faintly of incense and, of course, that strange smell of faded flowers which emanated from the figure dressed in black who squatted beside Wolsey: Doctor Agrippa, supreme practitioner of the black arts though he looked like a mummer's version of Friar Tuck in some masque about Robin Hood.
Agrippa's face was round, cherubic, his features small and neat like those of a child, except for the hooded eyes and the look of sardonic amusement with which he watched everything about him.
A strange man, I thought.
Some people said Wolsey hired him as a defence against other wizards and warlocks.
No one knew where he came from.
I was wary of him though he was always pleasant to me.
He once told me not to be afraid as my death was many years off and would come in a way I least expected.
(I see my chaplain sniggering at me so I'll voice my fear.
I know that secret agents and societies still hunt me.
I have given strict orders to my henchmen that if I die in suspicious circumstances, they are to hang my chaplain immediately.
Ah, good, that's wiped the smile off the bugger's smug face!)
Anyway, back to Wolsey.
He was eating sweetmeats from a silver dish and, whilst Benjamin and I knelt before him, he kept popping them into his mouth, watching us impassively.
I glanced up under my eyebrows and caught Agrippa's eye.
He grinned and winked, then studied the ring on his right hand, a stone of indeterminate colour.
Agrippa claimed he used it to make sure wine was free of poison, though I don't think it was possible for Agrippa to die.
I believe he was the Wandering Jew, doomed to live forever.
Wolsey finished the plate of sweetmeats and told us to sit.
Strangely enough, he first addressed me.
‘Well, Shallot, you've met the Luciferi?
You'd call them bastards, yes?’
‘You could have protected me!’
I replied bitterly.
‘Oh, but we did.
Don't you remember, in the alleyway?’
‘What about my trial?’
‘You would not have been hanged.
A reprieve would have come through.
That tavern wench was a stroke of good fortune — but then you go and get yourself lost!’
‘It was all arranged, wasn't it?’
I accused.
‘You gave Ralemberg licence to trade.
You put the handbill in my room.
The Luciferi kept away other sponsors, and so did you — till I arrived.’
Wolsey smiled and pulled out a gold-edged handkerchief to wipe his nose.
He was in good fettle, otherwise he would never have traded words with me.
‘You could have saved the Ralembergs,’ I added.
His face hardened.
‘We tried to.
Ralemberg was very useful.
But the Luciferi sent their decoys.’
‘And de Macon's ship?’
I asked.
Wolsey shrugged.
‘The fortunes of war, Master Shallot.
If Ralemberg had been more open, such misfortunes would never have happened.’
He saw my angry glance at Benjamin.
‘My nephew had nothing to do with it, I assure you.’
‘But now that road's closed,’ Agrippa intervened.
‘What road?’
I queried.
‘Oh, come, Roger.
To the Luciferi, Vauban, the five archangels, Raphael!’
He must have seen from my face that I knew what he was talking about.
Wolsey played with the gold pendant around his neck and smirked patronisingly at Agrippa as if he was a favourite son.
A black cat, wearing a jewelled studded collar, crept from beneath a curtain, padded towards Agrippa and, lithe as a dancer, sprang into his lap.
Agrippa stroked it carefully.
(You know, he always wore black leather gloves.
I saw his left hand ungloved once.
The palm bore the inverted cross and the Eye of Osiris and on the back a blood red pentangle.
Those of you who know about black magic will know what all that means, Agrippa was one of the high-ranking Dark Lords.)
Anyway, enough of that.
On that sunny evening at Hampton Court, Agrippa sat and chattered like some benevolent uncle.
‘Let us come to the point,’ he said briskly.
‘Yes,’ Benjamin agreed.
He had been sitting quietly.
‘Uncle, if you have a task for us, then let us begin it.
Master Shallot and I have sworn to be your men in peace and war.
’ Benjamin quoted the last phrase from the agreement he had signed with Wolsey.
‘Uncle, you must trust us more!’
Wolsey's hard eyes softened as he gazed back at Benjamin.
For a few seconds that stony-visaged politician looked kindly and I realised that, apart from his mistress, Benjamin was one of the few people Wolsey really loved.
The cardinal turned and stroked Agrippa's cat.
‘My nephew is right,’ he said softly.
‘Let us describe the task.’
Agrippa rose, putting the cat gently down on the floor.
He stood beside the cardinal's chair, leaning against it with one hand on its gilded back.
‘Our noble king,’ he began, ‘now wishes to contain the power of France.
He can do that by alliance with the Emperor Charles V and the Hapsburgs who control the Low Countries and Spain.
We intend to ring France and contain it like an army encircles a castle.
Unfortunately, the French know in advance every move we make.
We have spies in Paris, and the French Luciferi are in London.
The difference is, the Luciferi have someone close to our hearts who betrays our every step and turn.
Matters have now come to a head.
The English embassy in France has a mansion in the Rue des Medeans, but in early spring they moved to a small castle outside Paris, the Chateau de Maubisson.
‘At the chateau are a number of officials: Sir John Dacourt, our ambassador; his chief clerk, Walter Peckle; Doctor Thomas Throgmorton, physician; Michael Millet, personal assistant and clerk to Sir John Dacourt; and the man responsible for our agents…or rather, who was, Giles Falconer.
We already knew there was a spy either in England or France selling secrets to the French.
It was Falconer who discovered the spy's code-name: Raphael.’
‘How?’
Benjamin asked quietly.
‘One of Falconer's agents was discovered in the Rue des Billets.
He had been stabbed a number of times but, before he died, he used his own blood to etch on a piece of parchment the name Raphael.
Now on Easter Monday last [almost six weeks ago I thought], Falconer retired to his chamber.
Late that night both Millet and Throgmorton heard him going upstairs to the top of one of the towers of the chateau.
Millet peeped out of his chamber, Falconer  had a goblet in his hand, he was smiling but not drunk.
Throgmorton heard him singing.
On Tuesday morning, Falconer was found at the base of the tower, his neck broke, his head shattered.’
‘He could have slipped,’ Benjamin said.
‘Impossible.
The tower does have a crenellated wall but the gaps have iron bars across to prevent anyone falling.
Moreover, the tower roof is sprinkled with fine sand to prevent anyone slipping.
Throgmorton, who surveyed the area after Falconer's body had been discovered, found no trace of any such slip or, indeed, of anyone else being with Falconer on the top of the tower.’
‘Could it have been suicide?’
I asked.
‘I doubt it.
The rest of the embassy met Falconer at dinner that Monday.
He was as happy as ever.
Falconer was a bachelor but a man in love with life.
He enjoyed his work and was one of the best agents we had.’
Agrippa's eyes hardened.
‘Indeed, he was a personal friend of mine.’
Another black magician?
I wondered.
‘No,’ he snapped, ‘Falconer was murdered.’
‘The wine,’ I asked.
‘Was it poisoned?’
Agrippa smiled sweetly.
‘We considered that but Sir John Dacourt, an honest old soldier, was with Falconer in his room when he broached the bottle.
Dacourt had a cup of the same wine and suffered no ill effects.’
‘Who could be the murderer?’
I asked.
‘Any of those four.
Oh,’ he added, ‘we missed out one person: Richard Waldegrave, the chaplain.’
‘You wish us to go to Paris?’
Benjamin interrupted.
‘Yes, we do, so perhaps it's time you met your companions.
’ Wolsey picked up a silver bell but Agrippa raised his hand.
‘Lord Cardinal, I believe your nephew has further questions?’
Benjamin gazed at the cardinal, then at his familiar.
‘Doctor Agrippa,’ he asked, ‘when matters are decided regarding France, how are such conclusions reached and despatched abroad?’
‘The Privy Council,’ Agrippa replied, ‘is divided into chanceries.
There is a chancery for Italy, a chancery for the Papacy, a chancery for Germany, for Spain, and one for France.
My Lord Cardinal chairs each of these but is assisted by a secretary and a number of clerks.
These meet His Majesty in secret session, matters are discussed and, as you put it, conclusions are reached.’
‘Then what happens?’
‘Letters are sent in secret cipher to the English embassy, latterly in the Rue des Medeans, now at the Chateau de Maubisson.
Such letters are sealed with the cardinal's own signet ring.
This signet seal cannot be forged.’
‘Why is that?’
‘Because, my dear nephew,’ Wolsey silkily intervened, ‘only I know what the seal actually looks like.
No one is present when those despatches are sealed, not even Doctor Agrippa.’
I stared at the cardinal.
Do you know, I saw a flicker of fear in those cunning eyes and realised why his Satanic Eminence needed us so much.
He was an archbishop, the king's chief minister, but he was also a cardinal of the Roman church.
If such secret missives were sealed personally by him it might be only a matter of time before Wolsey's enemies at court and parliament began to point the  accusing finger in his direction.
‘What happens then?’ my master asked.
‘The secrets are placed in a despatch bag and sealed with the chancery seal.
Two messengers take them to Paris and deliver them personally to the ambassador.’
‘Have the bag or despatches ever been interfered with?’
‘Never.
They are chained to one of the messenger's wrists.’
‘Has anything ever happened to the messengers?’
Agrippa pursed his lips.
‘Only once, just outside Paris.
You know that in France there are secret societies, peasants with ideas of equality?
They call themselves ‘Maillotins’ or ‘Club-Wielders’.’
(Oh, I knew about these.
Last time I had been to Paris they had rescued me from the freezing streets and hungry wolf packs.)
‘These Maillotins attacked the messengers and killed them but a party of royal guards, who by chance were in the vicinity, hunted the outlaws down.
The bags were returned in accordance with diplomatic protocol, and were found to be unopened and untampered with.’
‘Could the spy be in England?’
‘We suspect he is in France at our embassy.’
‘Why?’
‘The French do not betray what they have learnt until the despatches reach our embassy.’
‘What happens then?’
‘The chief cipher clerk, Walter Peckle, decodes them and hands them to the ambassador.’
Benjamin tapped the toe of his boot on the soft carpet.
‘These messengers?’ he queried.
‘They are professional couriers.
There are two in  England and two in France.
They often cross each other in their travels.’
‘And two of them were killed?’
‘Yes, but they have been replaced,’ Agrippa answered.
‘They are trustworthy men?’
‘They cannot be faulted.
You may question the two in England before you go.
Now,’ Agrippa picked up the bell, ‘perhaps you should meet your travelling companions?’
The silver bell tinkled.
A servant wearing the cardinal's livery slipped like a shadow into the room.
‘Ah, yes.’
Wolsey got up.
‘Sir Robert Clinton?’
‘He is in the presence chamber, Your Grace.’
‘Bring him in!’
Clinton entered, a small man with silver hair brushed back from his forehead, a neatly clipped moustache and beard.
He looked what he was, a veteran soldier, with sun-tanned face, clear eyes, dark doublet and hose, the only concession to fashion being the ornate, thick silver rings on each hand and a gold cross round his neck.
Beside him stood his clerk, Ambrose Venner, a young man with thinning hair and the fat, cheerful face of an over-fed scholar.
Agrippa introduced them, ushering them to seats, clicking his fingers for the servant to serve them wine and sweetmeats.
‘Sir Robert,’ Agrippa began, ‘is chief secretary to the French chancery of the Privy Council.
Sir Robert, Benjamin Daunbey and his servant, Roger Shallot.’
Clinton smiled and sketched a bow to both of us.
He seemed a courtly gentleman with the inbred manners of a diplomat.
Venner gave a gap-toothed grin.
‘Sir Robert,’ Agrippa continued, ‘Master Benjamin and his manservant will be in your retinue.
They will travel to  Maubisson to determine the true cause of Falconer's death and assist you in the hunting down of Raphael.’
‘My Lord Cardinal, Doctor Agrippa.’
Clinton's face was now severe.
‘You already have my thoughts on this matter.
Raphael may well be in England.
I speak for all the servants of the embassy in Paris.
They are loyal to His Majesty.’
‘Yes, yes,’ Wolsey testily interrupted.
‘But we have established that the French only seem to know our secrets after the king's letters and memoranda are delivered to our embassy in Paris.’
‘Yes, yes, Your Grace,’ Clinton snapped back, revealing the tension between the two of them.
‘And you also know my thoughts on that.
His Majesty should stop such letters being sent.’
‘Sir Robert,’ Agrippa smoothly intervened, ‘we have been down this path before.
If our embassy in France cannot receive its instructions, His Majesty's affairs there will come to a halt.’
‘How long has this been going on?’
I asked.
Clinton looked at me in surprise, Wolsey in annoyance as if resenting my interruption.
‘About eighteen to twenty months!’
Agrippa snapped back.
Benjamin nudged me to keep quiet.
I looked away and went cold with fright.
Agrippa's black cat sat beneath one of the heavy, gold-encrusted arrasses, crouched like a panther, his amber eyes studying me as if I was a mouse.
Not a blink, not a change of expression.
I looked back at Agrippa.
His eyes had turned the same colour and I caught a whiff of that strange perfume which sometimes emanated from him, sweet but sickly.
He, too, was watching me and  I shivered.
What deadly game, I wondered, was about to begin?
‘Your Grace,’ Clinton spoke up, ‘your nephew and his companion will be most welcome in our retinue but I cannot promise you any success.’
‘Like your last mission!’
Wolsey snapped.
Clinton flinched.
Wolsey stretched out a hand and patted him gently on the shoulder.
‘Sir Robert,’ he said softly, ‘my words were harsh.
I withdraw them.
It was due to your efforts that we discovered the name of Raphael.’
‘How's that?’
Benjamin asked.
Clinton smiled and I noticed how white and even his teeth were.
A careful, precise man, I thought at the time, one who looked after his health.
‘Over two months ago,’ Clinton explained, ‘I and my wife, the Lady Francesca, visited Maubisson just before Lent to see what help could be given in tracking the spy down.’
He shook his head.
‘I think it was the week before Ash Wednesday.
Falconer — well, Giles, for he and I were friends — devised a scheme whereby one of our agents would use one of Paris's most expensive whores to trap a leading member of the Luciferi.
She passed on to our agent the name Raphael, though he paid for it with his life.
He was attacked and killed whilst leaving Paris.’
Clinton shrugged.
‘I returned to England after Holy Week had begun.
Six weeks later Falconer was discovered at the base of the tower.’
He looked at Wolsey.
‘My Lord Cardinal, have you told your nephew of the other matter?’
Wolsey stroked his chin as if feeling the gentle stubble now growing there.
‘Ah, yes, the king's matter.
Doctor Agrippa?’
The magician turned, stared at the cat and said something in a strange language.
The cat immediately rose, padding like a shadow across the floor, and jumped into its master's lap.
He played for a few seconds with the animal's jewelled collar then turned his eyes on me.
I shivered for they were soulless, clear as ice.
‘The matter of the king,’ Agrippa announced, and I remembered a previous conversation with him on the wild heathlands of Leicester, how he had described Henry as the Great Dark Prince, the Mouldwarp.
He was now using his powers to remind me of that as if the matter he was about to broach was more important than any spy.
Undoubtedly, our journey to France was linked to the growing darkness in our king's twisted soul.
‘Our noble king,’ Agrippa continued, ‘in his youth, went to Paris and visited the Chateau de Maubisson.
He became friendly with a most learned old priest in the village, Abbe Gerard.
Indeed, the abbe was his confessor.
Henry gave him a book and now wants it back but the Abbe Gerard is dead, probably also murdered.
On the Wednesday after Falconer was killed, the good priest was found floating in his own carp pond, no mark of violence on his body.
His house had been searched and the book was missing.’
‘What is this book?’
Agrippa grinned.
‘A copy of Augustine's work On Chastity.’
‘Do you think,’ Benjamin asked, ‘the Luciferi have this book?
Why is it so important?’
‘No, we think the Luciferi did not find it.
The good abbe probably hid it.’
Agrippa made a face.
‘As for its importance?
We do not wish to explain that.’
‘And while we are gone?’ my master asked.
‘What about  the manor, my school in Ipswich?’
‘All will be well.
A steward will manage the manor and My Lord Cardinal has been only too pleased to appoint a schoolmaster so your noble establishment can continue.
Now,’ Agrippa stirred, ‘Master Shallot, Sir Robert, I pray you excuse us.
My Lord Cardinal wishes words alone with his nephew.’
Clinton smiled, rose and he and Venner slipped silently out of the room.
I would have followed but Benjamin held my wrist fast.
‘Master Shallot!’
Agrippa repeated.
‘I have asked you to leave!’
‘Roger is my friend,’ Benjamin answered.
‘I trust him with my life.’
Master Shallot is my friend!’'
Wolsey mimicked spitefully.
‘My good nephew, if you wish to protect Master Shallot, the less he knows the better.’
He looked round.
‘This is my palace but the king is here and God knows who listens in!’
Benjamin looked at me, his dark eyes troubled.
I gently prised my wrist free.
‘Master,’ I said softly, ‘it's best if I go.’
(Quite the diplomat, you think?
Oh, no, old Shallot was getting frightened.
If knowledge was to be imparted that might threaten me, then it was time to show a clean pair of heels and, perhaps, indulge in some honest lechery.)
My master did not demur and I slipped quietly out of the chamber.
I tried to eavesdrop but the door was too thick.
So I wandered round the corridors of Hampton Court.
Now this was not as magnificent then as it is today.
The Great Hall had yet to be built, as had the tennis court and tilt yard.
Of course, if you go there now, you can look  at the great clock built by those two witches Kratzer and Oursian.
You see, when Wolsey fell from power and died in Leicester Abbey, crushing my hand and whispering, ‘If I had served my God as well as I served my king, he would not leave me to die like this,’ Agrippa transferred his allegiance to Henry and brought those two witches over to build a special clock.
It's an astronomical device based on a twenty-four-hour pattern which tells the time of day, the position of the moon, the constellations of the zodiac.
You must go and see it.
It's a work of art!
Nevertheless, even in my green and salad days (Master Shakespeare has asked to borrow this phrase), Hampton Court was a diamond of a residence.
Wainscoted walls.
New hangings replaced every week by yeomen and grooms of the wardrobe.
Silk coverings on the beds.
Massive cupboards which covered an entire wall, all stuffed with silver and gold plate.
Fresh water was brought in through leaden pipes built by Italian craftsmen, there were even privies, and underground streams cleaned the sewers.
I wandered down to the kitchens where Wolsey's chefs were busy creating subtleties, strange confectionery creations: towers and castles of sugar ready to launch their assault on valiant teeth.
The French master chef, dressed in his long bespattered apron, stood by his post chopping, slicing, stirring and mixing with a vigour which drenched him in sweat whilst he swore at his apprentices for this or that.
Indeed, with the great roaring fires it looked like hell and the chef, Satan, attended by an army of demons labouring over turning spits and shining platters, interlarding the dripping, roasting lambs and piglets with their own globules of sweat.
I walked up this way and down that.
Now I knew the king was in residence because his gold and leopard  standards had been planted all around the entrance.
By chance, I found myself in the royal apartments, a long, polished gallery where the freshly waxed wood winked in the sunlight and the walls shimmered with the exquisite tapestries hung there.
I thought the king was hunting with his greyhounds or Flemish falconers.
There were no guards about so I tip-toed along the gallery.
My ear was caught by the sweet sounds of love-making: delicious ‘Oohs’ and ‘Ahs’, interspersed with the grunts and deep groans of a voice I recognised as the king's.
Well, as you know, I am as curious as the devil.
I edged along the wall and peered quickly through a half-open door.
The small chamber inside was brilliant with differing hues.
I saw white wool carpets on the gleaming floor and also glimpsed clothing of the costliest taffeta, lace and cambric, but my eyes were drawn to the great silk-draped four-poster bed.
All I could see were a pair of white legs wrapped round a creaking great torso and the royal arse going up and down like a pair of bellows whilst the ‘Oohs’ and ‘Ahs’were chorused by Henry's groans of lustful delight.
I wondered who the young girl was, acting the doe for Henry's buck, but I decided not to wait and see and promptly fled.
Nevertheless, my excitement was aroused and, when Benjamin left the cardinal's chamber, he glared at my flushed face suspiciously.
‘What have you been up to, Roger?’
‘Nothing, master, just a little sightseeing.
And what did dear Uncle wish to impart?’
Benjamin grinned and linked his arm through mine.
‘Matters of state, Roger, matters of state.’
He stopped, his face long and serious.
‘A dance is about to begin,’ he murmured as if speaking to himself.
‘The musicians in the  gallery are about to put flute to lips and fingers to lyre.’
He breathed out heavily.
‘A sinister dance, Roger.’
I shivered and wondered if it was time for old Shallot to disappear or go ill with ague, but I remembered my promise.
I was Benjamin's man and I was committed, whatever happened.
It sounds so brave, doesn't it?
If I'd known what was about to happen I would have fled like the wind.
(My chaplain squirms on his little bum.
He liked my description of royal love-making but that's nothing to what we had to face: murder; secret assassins; blood-thirsty rebels; the gleaming tusks of a wild boar; and that deadly chase in the maze at the Tour de Nesle.
And yet these are as naught compared to the sheer wickedness of the Luciferi and the treachery of the masters we served.)
We spent the next day lolling round Hampton Court.
Wolsey's clerks drew up the necessary letters of accreditation, warrants and bills for the exchequer.
Grooms and ostlers furnished us with horses for our journey.
That evening we attended a royal banquet in the magnificent setting of Wolsey's hall.
There were so many wax candles you would think it was daylight and the flames dazzled the gold and silver plate stacked high in the ornately carved cupboards.
The carpets on the floor were silk, the hangings on the walls fresh from the looms of Flanders, and the air was thick with the smell of red roses arranged in precious vases round the room.
The table on the dais where King Henry would sit was overhung with a gorgeous cloth of state.
We sat at one of the two tables just beneath the dais.
Benjamin, I remember, was on my left, some beautiful damsel on my right.
I would have liked to have got to know her better but I drank too much.
All the plate was of heavy  gold and the table cloths were silken, perfumed sheets hung heavy with gold embroidery.
The meal was delicious, the wines the best from all over Europe.
There were eighteen courses, the most exotic being the confectionery.
Artists had been hired especially to prepare these culinary masterpieces in the lifelike forms of birds, beasts and cattle, jousting courtiers in full armour, soldiers battling with cross-bows, knights dancing with ladies; all were vividly depicted in the gilded confections which rose over a yard high from the groaning dining tables.
Each one of us was given a chess board complete with chess men made entirely of sweetmeats.
This was a parting gift but I dropped mine and the bloody dogs were on it in a flash, whilst Benjamin, kind as ever, gave his to the page who served us.
Sweet-voiced children from the royal choir sang madrigals and, halfway through the meal, we were escorted by torchlight to watch a Latin comedy by Platus.
One thing I must mention to you.
During the meal a great spider crawled on to the table cloth and I went to kill it with the leg of chicken I was gnawing, but Benjamin stopped me.
‘We must not,’ he whispered, ‘harm such insects.
They are the cardinal's spiders.’
He then explained in a hushed voice how these bloody insects roamed all over the place.
God knows why but the cardinal had taken a liking to them and decreed that no one should harm them.
They were known (and still are) as the cardinal's spiders.
I always wondered if they were his demons or familiars which could scuttle along the walls to listen for treason and search out conspiracy.
(A strange place, Hampton Court!
You know it's haunted?
First, by the nurse of the young Edward VI.
She is said to be bricked up in her room, spinning her hand loom for all eternity.
She was a treacherous bitch who tried to kill the young king, but that's another story.
The other ghost is Catherine Howard.
After she had been arrested for playing the two-backed beast with Culpepper — and me, though I wasn't caught, but there again that's another tale — the king's guards came to take her whilst she was staying at Hampton Court.
Catherine heard that Henry was praying in the royal chapel so ran screaming down the corridor.
It didn't save her.
She went to the block bravely, announcing to the world that she preferred to die the wife of Culpepper than Queen of England.
That really infuriated Henry!
Good Lord, he was hopping mad!
‘Roger,’ he whined, the tears falling down his fat, pasty face, ‘how could she?
How could she?’
Very well, I thought.
She was marvellous but I didn't tell the fat bastard that.
Anyway, as I have said, that's a tale for another time.
But I have seen Catherine's ghost.
A white form screaming down moonlit galleries.)
Ah, well, back to that banquet in Hampton Court where I got royally drunk.
Henry was there, beginning to get a little fat but still magnificent in his jewel-encrusted cloth of gold and drenched in the perfume of his own making; he had to hide the smell of his ulcerated leg.
All right, I'll tell you what happened.
I was fascinated by the woman sitting opposite me: Francesca Clinton, Sir Robert's wife.
She was a real beauty, or so I thought at the time.
She wore her thick, black hair loose and long.
It cascaded unbound below her waist.
Her skin complemented her hair; she had an olive complexion which shone like burnished gold.
Her lips were red, half-open as if waiting to be kissed, displaying teeth as white as ivory, though I noticed one tooth slightly out of line with the others.
But  like Agnes's, it was her eyes which fascinated me — large, dark, and almond-shaped.
Whenever she turned, whenever she spoke, they exuded an excitement which had my young loins stirring.
She hardly noticed me but I was fascinated by her.
I listened to her voice, rather deep but very sensuous, and turned to Benjamin.
‘Is she French?’
‘Who?’
‘Lady Francesca,’ I whispered.
Benjamin stared across the table to where Sir Robert sat, captivated by his wife.
‘Of course she is,’ he whispered back.
‘She is Sir Robert's second wife.
They have been married for two years.’
I suddenly remembered that elegant pair of legs wrapped round the royal torso.
‘What does the king think of her?’
I asked.
‘He does not like her,’ Benjamin whispered back.
‘He does not like the French.’
I nodded and gazed adoringly across the table at those dark, passionate eyes.
Of course, I thought, she has olive skin.
The legs I saw were white.
Suddenly Francesca seemed to notice me.
She smiled dazzlingly.
‘Master Shallot,’ she called in her beautiful French voice, ‘my husband says you are to join us in France.’
I just stared back.
I would have joined her in Tartary!
Lord, when I first met her she was exquisite.
I could have sat and stared all evening but Benjamin suddenly realised the drift of my eyes as well as my lechery and, at the appropriate time, seized me by the arm and hustled me from the hall.
I went unresistingly.
I was drunk as a pig and insisted on stamping on every bloody spider I found on my way back to our chamber.
Chapter 4
The next morning Benjamin shook me awake.
I got up, thick-headed, with a cloying mouth.
But a cold wash and a cup of malmsey soon put me right.
After we had broken fast in the small buttery which adjoined the kitchen, Benjamin dragged me outside to the gardens.
‘Where are we off to, master?’
‘To see Crispin Hollis and Francis Twynham.’
‘Who the hell are they?’
‘They are the two messengers, the ones who carry documents to Paris.’
We found them in the stables, tending to the horses; country lads whose constant talk was of saddles, bridles, reins and spurs; what was good horseflesh and what wasn't; what horses should be fed and when they could drink.
Benjamin, with his usual charm and tact, drew them into conversation, listening to their voluble descriptions of the horses they had ridden.
‘So,’ he interrupted, seizing the right moment, ‘you carry messages from Westminster to the English embassy in Paris?’
Hollis, a fresh-faced yokel, grinned as he cleaned the gaps between his teeth with a piece of sharp straw.
‘From Westminster,’ he replied, ‘Greenwich, Sheen…wherever the court is.’
‘And what route do you take?’
‘Dover to Calais, across Normandy to the Porte St Denis, and either to the Rue des Medeans or across Paris through the Porte D'Orleans to the Chateau de Maubisson.’
‘And you stop where?’
‘At certain taverns.’
‘Nowhere else?’
‘Sometimes at the Convent of St Felice.’
‘Why there?’
The fellow shrugged.
‘You have met Sir Robert Clinton?’
‘We have.’
‘And his beautiful wife, Lady Francesca?’
‘Of course.’
‘Well,’ Twynham interrupted with a grin, ‘Lady Francesca was schooled there by the nuns.
It's a sumptuous place.
Now and again the Lady Francesca asks us to take the good nuns gifts of embroidery.’
‘And that is all?’
‘Sometimes a small purse of silver from the coffers of her husband.’
Benjamin nodded and stared where an ostler was trying to calm an excited horse.
‘And your two companions, the ones in France?
Do they stop there?’
‘Again, sometimes.
It's an ideal place.’
‘But you don't stop there every time?’
‘No,’ Hollis replied.
‘I would say one in every three  times.’
He smirked.
‘We do not wish to lose a good, soft bed because of our greed.’
‘And the pouch you carry?’
I asked.
‘With the letters and documents?’
Twynham's face became grave with self-importance.
‘When we sleep, one of us has it chained to our wrist.
No one can touch that bag.’
‘But two of your companions were killed?’
Benjamin added softly.
Hollis turned and spat a stream of yellow phlegm.
‘Yes, I know, but the French protect and afford us every comfort.
Those messengers were killed by outlaws.
It sometimes happens.’
Benjamin nodded and quietly turned the conversation back to horseflesh.
As we walked away I looked at him sideways.
He had that distant look which showed he was absorbed in solving some problem.
‘Master,’ I touched him on the shoulder, ‘it is strange that these messengers stop at the same convent where the Lady Francesca was educated.
Do you think she could be the spy?’
Benjamin ruffled his long, black hair with his hands.
‘I doubt it,’ he said quietly.
‘First Lady Francesca may be beautiful, she may have a sharp wit, but not the power to collect and convey secret information to some spy-master in Paris.
Secondly, she would not be privy to any information contained in those letters.
Oh, her husband may chatter but I doubt if he gives her a blow by blow account of English activities in France.
Thirdly, you have heard the messengers.
They only stop at St Felice one out of every three times and, when they do, the bag is chained to their wrists.’
He laughed and clapped me on  the shoulder.
‘And even if the good nuns did seduce them, they would have to break the seal on the pouch as well as my lord cardinal's special seal on each letter, decode the cipher and re-seal them again.’
He shook his head.
‘No, no, that's impossible.’
Later in the day we received instructions that Sir Robert and his party would be leaving the following morning.
The lord cardinal wished us to attend one more of his interminable banquets — and this is where I made a bad situation worse.
The banquet began with the usual mumbo-jumbo, except the cardinal dined alone at the high table under a rich cloth of state, his fat body almost hidden by platters of heaped delicacies, whilst all around him stood serving men to refill his goblet, replenish napkins or offer a fresh knife.
There was no sign of the king nor, regrettably, Lady Clinton.
Suddenly we were disturbed by the roar of many small cannons being fired all at once outside the palace.
The gunfire sounded like a burst of thunder.
Everyone sprang to their feet but the cardinal's heralds called for silence and he sent his revels master, Henry Guildford, to see what was going on.
(Oh, by the way, I never saw Agrippa at these banquets.
Indeed, I never saw him eat.
Strange, isn't it?)
Well, the revels master returned, saying that some masked noble figures had arrived at the water stairs.
Wolsey sent the fellow down to escort these strange guests up and we just sat watching the door.
Guildford returned leading a large company of masked figures who marched into the hall to the raucous clamour of tambour and fife.
Now these visitors were dressed in simple shepherds' tunics though they were fashioned in stripes of crimson satin and cloth of gold.
Visors and artificial beards hid  their faces whilst false hair of fine gold wire and black silk covered the rest of their heads.
These masquers filed solemnly, two-by-two, down to the high table.
Their leader had quiet words with the cardinal, who smiled, clapped his hands, and a green baize-covered table and two chairs were brought in and set down in the middle of the hall.
The leading masquer then stood on the dais, whilst a herald challenged anyone in the hall to play this strange man at dice.
Of course, it was a load of mummery, Fat Henry playing at masques and mystery.
Oh, we all knew it was him with his stout legs and big arse, but everyone became involved in the pantomime.
In theory, no one was supposed to challenge the mysterious figure and, if they did, they were supposed to lose.
On that particular occasion matters went wrong.
To cut a long story short, drunk as a bishop, I sprang to my feet.
‘I accept the challenge!’
I yelled, ignoring Benjamin's frantic tugging at my cloak.
The din in the hall stilled.
The masked figure stepped ponderously off the dais, sat down at the baize-covered table and indicated with a gloved hand that I should join him.
I staggered across.
I don't know why.
Perhaps it was pure mischief in me.
Or was it something else?
Perhaps the thought of dice had stirred memories of that terrible evening in the Golden Turk when the Luciferi had trapped me.
Anyway, the very devil was in me.
The masked figure clapped his hands, a cup of dice was produced.
My opponent (of course it was the Great Killer) emptied his purse on the table, so did I, and the game began.
I played as if my very life depended upon it.
The rest of the hall left their places and gathered around us.
I saw Benjamin's  anxious eyes but ignored his warning look.
I played to win and I did.
I won the first purse of gold, then a second, then a third.
The joy and gaiety seeped from that hall as the masked player's irritation became obvious.
A courtier leaned over and whispered in my ear.
‘For God's sake, man, lose!’
But not old Shallot!
I threw the dice and almost my every throw beat his until Wolsey, standing behind the king's chair, gave a sign for the trumpeters to blow and the game ended.
My opponent drew off his mask and I gazed into the red, sweaty face of the king.
Now old Henry was a born actor.
Indeed, I wonder if we ever saw the true Henry.
(Do you know, I was in the council chamber with Thomas Cromwell when, years later, the northern rebels sent their demands and asked for his removal.
Old Henry took his hat off and publicly beat Cromwell, telling him he was a caitiff and a knave and would be sent to the Tower.
Of course, Henry was playing games.
He wanted more time and the rebels gave him it.
Time enough to collect troops and send them north to hang, burn and pillage.
By the time they were finished there were ten men hanging from every scaffold north of the Trent.)
So it was that night at Hampton Court.
Henry smiled, playing the chivalrous loser.
He clapped me on the shoulder, proclaiming I was a great fellow, before sweeping away to join the dancers.
I just took my napkin, filled it with all the coins I had won and tied the corners into a knot.
Of course, Benjamin hustled me away to a corner by ourselves and that wasn't hard, everyone now distanced themselves from us.
The mischief in my veins cooled as I saw the fear in his eyes.
‘Roger,’ he hissed, ‘for the love of God!
If you play against the king you always lose!’
‘I won,’ I quipped.
‘By fair means not foul!’
Benjamin pushed his white, anxious face closer.
‘No, Roger, the game is not yet over.
You will still lose.’
Now, my natural caution exerted itself as I stared round the banqueting hall.
Oh, there was dancing, masques and reels, gaily clad courtiers talking in groups, but I caught the fear-filled glances and realised what might happen.
The Great Killer hated to be beaten.
No one ever challenged Henry and won.
The fat bastard's motto was: ‘When I play, either I win or you lose!’
The napkin now weighed heavy as death in my hands.
My mind raced on how the game might proceed.
I knew that royal turd.
It could be anything from a charge of treason to a nasty accident.
Wolsey swept across the room, his purple silk robes billowing round him.
‘Master Daunbey, Master Shallot.
The king wishes to see you now!’
I caught the stench of fear from the cardinal.
A fine sheen of sweat glazed his heavy, quivering jowls.
The dark eyes were as hard as slate.
He glared at me.
I knew why he was fearful.
I was a member of his party, one of his retinue, and when the great Henry lashed out it was dangerous even to be in the same room as the king's enemy.
We followed the cardinal across the floor.
Benjamin nudged me furiously.
‘For God's sake, Roger,’ he hissed, ‘stop this foolishness!’
I had already decided to do that as soon as I entered the darkened chamber where the royal beast sat slouched on a chair.
(You had to watch the Great Killer's eyes.
They always reminded me of an angry boar's, small, red-rimmed and vicious — and that's when he was in a good mood!
When he lost his temper, and that was often, his cheeks puffed up and his eyes shrank to two small, bottomless black pits.
They had that same expression when we entered the room.)
Wolsey scuttled to sit down behind him.
Benjamin and I needed no second bidding.
We fell to our knees, the gold coins clinking ominously in the napkin I clutched.
‘Master Shallot, you played well.’
The voice was sugar sweet.
‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ I mumbled, hoping I would not lose control of my bowels or vomit in sheer terror.
(I always wore brown breeches.)
‘You played against your king and won!’
My mind raced as nimble as a flea in air.
‘Of course, Your Majesty,’ I stuttered.
‘As the wild woman prophesied.’
‘What's that?’
I gazed up under my eyebrows.
The king was now leaning forward.
Wolsey just quivered in terror, shaking like one of the jellies his chefs had so recently served us.
Benjamin knelt as if carved from stone.
‘What do you mean?’ the king repeated ominously.
‘Your Majesty,’ I stammered, ‘when I was young at school in Ipswich, I helped an old lady cross a bridge.’
I looked sideways at Benjamin.
‘Master, you were with me, you will remember it?’
Benjamin nodded, his eyes fixed on the ground.
‘The old woman was a seer,’ I continued recklessly.
‘She thanked me for my courtesy and prophesied that one day I would play against Europe's greatest prince in  a game of hazard, and win.
That, she said, would be my moment of glory, to tell my grandchildren,’ I added hopefully.
(Oh, what a glorious lie!
Shallot at his best, the born story-teller!
The only old woman I helped in Ipswich was Bridget the Ancient.
I did assist her to cross the river.
I pushed the bloody bitch into it after she had cursed me for not handing over every penny in my pockets!
But, on reflection, it was a good tale.
I liked the bit about grandchildren, a pious hope that the Shallot line did not end there and then!)
Well, you could have felt the atmosphere in the room relax as if someone had opened a window, letting in the cool summer breeze.
Wolsey's mouth twitched, he once more became the most important person after God.
Benjamin's shoulders shook as he controlled the bubble of laughter, but Henry sat back, clapping his hands and grinning from ear to ear like some bloody cat.
‘You must tell that to the court!’ he roared.
And, without further ado, I was marched back into the hall, placed on the dais, the heralds braying on their trumpets.
I repeated my declaration to an admiring court, listening to the plaudits of praise.
All the time the Great Killer stood beside me, his hand on my shoulder.
When I had finished I turned and, sinking to one knee, dramatically handed the napkin full of gold back to the king.
I would have loved to have swung the sodding bag and hit him straight in the balls but the old tight-fist snatched it off me and threw the gold on to the hall floor so he could watch his courtiers scramble.
I thought the cunning bastard was finished with me but his hand remained vicelike on my shoulder.
For a while he watched his courtiers  make fools of themselves, then hissed: ‘A word in thy ear, Master Shallot!’
I was force-marched back to the retiring chamber, Benjamin and the cardinal trooping behind us.
I wondered what was coming next.
Henry sat on the corner of a table, one fat leg swinging.
‘I like your wit, Master Shallot,’ he said, grinning mischievously at Wolsey.
‘I understand you are off to France with Sir Robert Clinton?
You are to search out the traitor Raphael and, when you find him, kill him or bring him back for me.’
‘Yes, Your Majesty.’
‘Look at me, Master Shallot.’
I raised my eyes and stared at that mad, bad face, the fleshy nose, the neatly trimmed gold beard and moustache.
‘I hold you responsible, Master Shallot, you and Master Daunbey, for the return of my book from Abbe Gerard.
And, one more task…’
‘Your Majesty?’
The air in the room became positively icy.
Henry leaned forward and tweaked my ear playfully.
In actual fact the royal bastard's heavy hand sent an arrow of pain down the side of my face.
‘Three years ago, Master Shallot, I was in France.
I wore a beautiful ring, a love token made of sheer gold.
It carried a silver Cupid, the eyes of which were fashioned out of pure diamonds.’
The king licked his lips.
‘My brother King Francis and I had a wager on a shy damsel at his court.
He wagered a necklace of great value so I proffered the ring on who would win her favours first.’
Those dry, prim lips pursed in spiteful annoyance.
‘My  brother Francis won the wager and I handed the ring over.
He wears it always, never taking it off, but he said that if I could steal it back without him knowing, then I could keep it.
Master Shallot,’ he hissed, ‘I want that ring back!
You, with your skill at hazard, will bring it back to me.
You understand?’
‘Of course, Your Majesty!’
(Of course I bloody well did!
The fat bastard had neatly trapped me.
Not only had I to get his damn' book back but regain his ring.
If I failed and the French caught me I would hang.
If I won and the French caught me I would hang.
And, if I failed and returned to England I would hang.
I see my chaplain sniggering!
The little turd!
Mind you, he's right in what he says.
When I look back at my golden youth all I can remember is people trying to hang poor old Shallot.
For what?
For nothing more than being true to himself.)
Henry smiled and dismissed us with a flick of his fingers.
I'll be honest, Benjamin and I scuttled out as quickly as two of the cardinal's bloody spiders.
We did not speak until we were back in our garret above the gatehouse.
‘Master,’ I wailed, ‘what can I do?’
Benjamin sat on the side of his bed shaking his head ‘You could use your wits,’ he replied sharply, ‘and keep a close mouth when you are in the presence of princes.
Roger, we stand on the edge of darkness.
If we are not successful, we will not see England again.’
On that cheerful note he lay down, wrapped himself in a blanket and pretended to fall asleep.
I'll be truthful, I sat quivering with terror until dawn.
And why not?
I had been drawn into the deadly rivalry, both political and personal, which existed between Francis and Henry.
They  were both arrogant, both lechers, both saw themselves as the answer to all the problems on earth.
They took what they wanted and would brook no defiance.
The only difference was that Francis did it with more charm.
But for me, in that garret at Hampton Court, I felt like a rabbit having to choose between the jaws of the fox and the talons of the eagle.
Late the next morning we left Hampton Court.
Benjamin was subdued.
He made his farewells to Wolsey and Doctor Agrippa and we joined Clinton's party as they assembled in the great courtyard.
The cries of ostlers, grooms, outriders, serjeants and clerks rang out.
Horses were saddled, sumpter ponies laden, the marshals of the household imposing order with their white wands of office.
I glimpsed Lady Francesca, resplendent in a sea-green dress and cloak and small hat of the same colour, but for the moment, my lust had subsided.
All I wanted was to be away from Hampton Court before I further incurred Henry's wrath.
Lord, I was pleased to be free of the place, following the white beaten track first west around London, then south across the downs to Dover.
Outriders went first then Sir Robert, Master Benjamin and Lady Clinton.
The first two soon became boon companions: they shared a common love of alchemy and an all-absorbing interest in plants and their natural remedies.
Often our cavalcade would stop so they could both dismount and study foxgloves, fungi on tree bark, or the different types of mushrooms.
Though interested in nature, I was still frightened by the demands of the Great Beast and hung back, watching jealously how the coquettish Lady Francesca seemed to take great interest in Benjamin but remained  impervious to my own presence.
Clinton's chief henchman, Venner, was an amiable enough fellow but his conversation revolved around bear and cock fighting and the virtues of one breed of horse over another.
There was not a pretty face in sight so I sulked all the way to Dover.
We paused now and again at some hostelry and, on one occasion, a Benedictine monastery, I forget its name.
Well, what does it matter?
It's only a pile of rubble now the Great Killer has finished with it.
No, on second thoughts, I wasn't sulking.
I thought a lot about Agnes, her violent death and those of her family.
I was satisfied that the Luciferi had killed her and I was determined, in my own cowardly way, to exact revenge once I was in France.
Something else nagged at my mind and gnawed at my soul.
An idea whose substance eluded me.
Once I was aboard the Mary of Westminster and facing the terrors of the Narrow Seas, I put the matter aside.
Our cog was a sturdy merchantman escorted by a small man-of-war.
We raised anchor, turned, dipping our sails three times in honour of the Trinity, and made our way to the open sea.
Two days later, after a peaceful voyage, we disembarked at Calais — a dreadful place, England's last foothold in France, nothing more than a glorified fortress packed with men-at-arms and archers, who staggered the streets in their boiled leather jerkins, drinking in the many ale houses and generally looking for trouble.
The town was packed with carts and horses for the Great Killer always kept Calais well fortified.
All a waste of time for his daughter, poor Bloody Mary, lost it to the French and died of a broken heart.
(Oh, by the way, I was there when she died.
I held her hand as the death  rattle grew in her scrawny throat.
‘Roger,’ she whispered.
‘My dear, dear Roger.
When I die, pluck out my heart and you'll find Calais engraved upon it.’
I bowed my head.
She thought I was weeping.
Nothing of the sort!
I was terrified she might see the guilty look in my eyes for I am the man who lost the English Calais.
Oh, yes!
I was the silly, drunken bastard who left the gate open and let the French in, but that's another story.)
We were soon free of Calais and heading south for Paris.
The Normandy countryside baked under a warm summer sun.
A peaceful journey.
Even the scaffold and gibbets at the crossroads were empty; indeed, I even saw two festooned with garlands.
‘Strange,’ I muttered to Benjamin as we stayed at a tavern on our first night out of Calais.
‘What is, Roger?’
‘Well,’ I answered, glad to have his attention, ‘those two messengers who were killed by the Maillotins.
It was on the same road we are following now.’
‘So?’
‘Well, the highway seems clear of thieves and rogues and very well guarded.
I have seen at least three troops of cavalry.’
I paused and Benjamin just stared blankly back.
‘Look, master,’ I hurried on, ‘I know the Maillotins.
They attack in the alleys and runnels of Paris, not plan an ambush in the open countryside.’
Benjamin played with the cup he was drinking from.
‘You think it was not the Maillotins who attacked the messengers?’
‘Yes.’
‘So who did the French hang?’
‘God knows!’
I snarled, and turned away.
Benjamin patted me on the shoulder.
‘Roger, you're out of sorts.’
‘Oh, no, not me,’ I replied quickly.
‘You like Sir Robert?’
‘I prefer his wife.’
Benjamin laughed.
‘A strange pair,’ he mused.
‘She's a flirt but he dotes on her.
Sir Robert met her when she was a ward of the French court.’
‘She seems to like you.’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘There's no accounting for taste, Roger.’
He smiled, finished his wine, and deftly turned the conversation to other matters.
Just before we entered Paris we left the main road, and, following winding country tracks, approached the Convent of St Felice, its white stone buildings basking in the sunshine amongst soft green fields and small dark copses.
A beautiful place, one of those convents which reeked of wealth, security, and its own strange kind of serenity.
Everything was clean, precise and in its place.
Even the convent yard, just within the great arched gateway, was neatly strewn with white stone pebbles, whilst around the walls small strips of garden full of flowers gave off their own fragrant perfume.
We were left in the guesthouse, drinking chilled white wine, whilst the sisters welcomed Lady Francesca and Sir Robert Clinton in a flurry of joy at seeing their old pupil and protg.
Lady Francesca was treated as a favoured daughter but Sir Robert was idolised, treated with a deference which I found quite surprising.
You'd have thought he was some fat cardinal from Rome.
The nuns fussed around the Clintons like a group of mother hens.
I found it difficult to follow their chatter (you know old  Shallot, nosy as hell and always looking for mischief), but they seemed most concerned about Lady Francesca's health.
Anyway, they left us alone.
Lady Clinton went to see old friends whilst Mother Superior, a formidable old bird in her gold-edged habit, took Sir Robert away, her arm linked through his, for quiet chatter in her own private apartment.
We stayed for about an hour, then with the sisters' greetings ringing in our ears rejoined our escort outside the walls and continued our journey.
We entered Paris by the Porte St Denis.
It was strange to be back there and my memories were not pleasant: starving in the depths of winter, being beaten up, arrested for some misunderstanding and half-hanged at Montfaucon.
The scaffold there was the first thing I clapped my eyes on when we entered the stinking streets of Paris.
The city fathers had decided to improve the site since I last encountered it.
A few corpses swayed in the breeze at the end of a rope but they had built a wall so when the bodies decayed and fell, their sight, if not their stink, was hidden from passersby.
We followed the narrow, crooked streets, most of them unpaved and packed with a motley crew of citizens, monks, scholars and a legion of beggars.
Stagnant pools of filth made us cover our mouths and noses whilst we kept bobbing our heads to avoid the painted signs which hung outside every house.
All the time we were assailed by the noise of a hundred bells and the screams of hawkers and traders who sold everything from a piece of iron to hot chestnuts.
We crossed one of the five big bridges built over the Seine and passed under the brooding mass of Notre Dame.
Near the Place des Greves, or rather the square close  to it, a great crowd had gathered to witness an execution.
One of the most horrible sights I had ever seen.
A huge vat full of oil was bubbling over a monstrous bonfire and, bound hand and foot inside, stood a criminal being boiled to death.
The screams, the smoke and the stench were, perhaps, a prophecy of the horrors which awaited us.
Lady Clinton turned pale and would have fainted in the saddle if Benjamin had not caught her, whilst Sir Robert shouted abuse at the outriders, telling them to move on.
We left Paris by the Porte D'Orleans and found ourselves back amongst the tilled meadows and windmills which ring the city.
The suburbs dwindled and, after an hour's travelling, we turned a bend in the road and there, on the brow of a hill, outlined against a forest, stood the Chateau de Maubisson, a pleasant sight.
It was ringed by a curtain wall protected by a moat spanned by a wooden drawbridge.
We clattered over this into the outer bailey where chickens pecked and pigs rooted for food.
The place was busy and alive with noise from the stables, forges and outhouses built against the wall.
We rode under another arch, guarded by serjeants-at-arms wearing the royal arms of England; great iron gates were flung open and we passed through these into the inner bailey, stopping before the great four-towered keep which soared up to the skies.
Someone had quite recently built a wing on either side of this huge donjon but at each corner of the central building was a tower.
Clinton said they were named after four ladies: Yolande, Mary, Isabel and Jeanne.
‘From which did Falconer fall?’
Benjamin asked.
Clinton pointed to the one on the right nearside.
We  all stared up at the great tower which soared six storeys above us.
‘So, the castle belongs to the English embassy?’
Benjamin asked.
‘Yes,’ Clinton replied.
‘Beyond this tower there is a garden laid out in the French style — some herb banks, a small rabbit warren, and a few hundred bushes of boxwood.’
He waved his hand airily.
‘Beyond the walls are some vineyards but the weather blights them.
Some marshland, then of course the forest.’
He was about to continue when officials of the embassy came down the steps to greet us.
There was the usual confusion of grooms taking horses, porters carrying chests, and a sea of faces as haphazard introductions were made.
A servant took Benjamin and me off into the main hall, past the great chamber where meals were served, and up a spiral staircase to the third floor above the solar.
The chamber given to us was spacious and clean, the walls freshly painted, the wooden floors covered with thick but clean-looking carpets.
Two pallet beds had been erected, fresh torch sconces placed in the walls, some stools, a chair, a table and an aumbry, a heavy cupboard for our clothes, provided.
Some thick, tallow candles, and jugs and bowls completed the furnishings.
The windows were shuttered but one, glazed with horn, afforded a pleasant view of the boxwood garden and a glimpse of the forest-edge.
We spent that afternoon taking our bearings.
The chateau was like many of its kind, stained by war here and there when the English (or the Goddamns, as the French call us) had tried to conquer Northern France, nothing remarkable.
We met the officials of the embassy  at dinner that same evening.
Now, the hall of the chateau was a simple affair, a great hearthed fire in the centre with some shields and antlers on the wall for decoration.
There was a small gallery at one end which musicians would use and, at the other, against a wooden panelled wall, the dais and high table.
Once supper was over and the retainers had withdrawn, the wine jug was passed round and introductions were made.
Sir John Dacourt, the ambassador, was squat and florid, with frizzed white hair, light blue eyes, and the most luxuriant curling moustache I have ever clapped eyes on.
He was dressed simply in the old-fashioned way with a cote-hardie which fell beneath his knees.
He was a soldier of the old school who believed the only good Frenchman was a dead one.
‘I don't trust the damn’ Frogs!’he boomed.
‘Turn your back and the bastards will have you!’
Walter Peckle, the chief clerk, was a young man grown old before his time, with a complexion sallow and unhealthy, sunken cheeks, and eyes which never stopped blinking.
His fingers were stained with blue-green ink and he constantly kept scratching what was left of his wispy, greasy, grey hair.
Thomas Throgmorton, the physician, was thin as a pikestaff.
Of indeterminate age, he had moist grey eyes set in a pale, thin face.
His close-cropped hair was hidden under a black velvet skull cap.
Michael Millet, Sir John Dacourt's secretarius, was strikingly good-looking.
A young man with thick, blond hair which rose in waves from his forehead, and blue liquid eyes.
Many a woman would have paid a fortune to have had his eyelashes, thick, long and curling.
He was a proper fop: his roses and cream complexion was clean-shaven  and a silver pearl dangled from a small gold chain in his right ear lobe.
He sat like a woman and talked like one, sending coy glances at all of us.
Waldegrave, the chaplain, was small, fat and balding, with the coarsened features and bright red nose of an inveterate drinker.
By the time the meal was finished we were all in our cups but Waldegrave had staggered to the meal as drunk as any bishop.
He sat next to me and I wrinkled my nose at the sweaty odour emanating from the long, black, food-stained gown he wore.
At first our after-dinner conversation was on general matters but when Lady Francesca withdrew, throwing Benjamin a smile which cut me to the heart, Clinton soon brought matters to order.
‘Falconer's death,’ he announced as soon as Lady Francesca's high-heeled step faded from the hall, ‘was it an accident, suicide or murder?’
His words cast a pool of silence.
The warmth and cheer evaporated like mist before the sun.
We all became aware how dark it was, the torches flickering and the shadows dancing against the bleak, white walls.
At the centre of the table, Dacourt looked around.
‘If it was suicide,’ he trumpeted, ‘it's a damn’strange way to go.
If it was an accident, then it can't be explained.
Check the tower yourself, Sir Robert, you know it well.
The wall is crenellated but there are iron bars between the gaps.
Falconer would have had to be standing on the very rim to slip and fall to his death.
Why should a man do that?’
‘Which leaves murder,’ my master intervened smoothly.
‘Impossible!’
Throgmorton, the physician, spoke up.
Benjamin leaned forward and looked down the table at him.
‘How, sir!
Why do you say that?’
‘Oh, our physician knows everything,’ Millet quipped tartly.
‘He's fond of snooping, especially through the half-open doors of any woman's bedchamber.’
The remark provoked faint laughter and Throgmorton flushed with embarrassment.
(Well, as I say, never trust a doctor.
It's surprising how many of them love to see a pretty wench stripped down to her shift.)
Benjamin, however, refused to be diverted.
‘Master Physician, I asked you a question.’
Throgmorton glared once more at Millet, composed himself and ticked the points off on his fingers.
‘First, Falconer had the chamber you have now.’
Oh, thank you very much, I thought.
‘I have a chamber on the floor above.
I saw Falconer go up to the top of the tower.
He seemed cheerful enough, with a cup of wine in his hand.
I bade him good evening and he smiled back.
No one else went up the stairs after him and certainly no one went before.’
‘Are there other witnesses?’
Benjamin asked.
‘Do you doubt my word?’
Throgmorton bellowed.
‘Tush, Tom!’
Millet spoke up, slouching against the table and admiring the cheap, tawdry rings on his fingers.
‘I, too, heard Falconer go up.’
Millet smiled dazzlingly at Benjamin.
‘My humble abode is a garret at the top of this benighted tower.’
Benjamin grinned.
‘And you would confirm what the good physician has said?’
‘Of course!’
‘There's one other matter,’ Dacourt boomed, refilling  his goblet.
‘The top of the tower is covered with a fine coat of sand and gravel.
Millet and I were the first to check that tower, after Falconer's body was discovered by a guard.
It bore only the mark of Falconer's boots.’
‘And the body?’
Benjamin asked.
Throgmorton slurped from his goblet.
‘The head was smashed open and the face badly bruised.
The neck was so twisted you could lay the chin on either shoulder.
Of course, there was bruising throughout his whole body.’
‘And the wine he drank?’
‘Good claret,’ Dacourt boomed.
‘Old Falconer liked his tipple.
On Easter Monday, as the season of Lent finished and we need no longer abstain from wine, we opened a new bottle.
Millet and I were present.
We each had a cup before we left.’
‘It's a custom here,’ Millet added.
‘During Lent, we all, as good sons of the Church, abstain from wine.
On Easter Monday, we broach the best Bordeaux.’
‘So there was nothing strange?’
Benjamin asked.
Dacourt looked at me under lowered brows as if recognising my existence for the first time.
‘No.
Falconer was quiet and secretive but seemed in very good humour, laughing and talking rather garrulously.
I did wonder if he had been in his cups before we opened the wine but he assured me he had not.’
‘I scrutinised the corpse most carefully,’ Throgmorton intervened.
‘There was no real smell of ale or wine fumes nor of any other substance.’
‘And the cup he drank from?’
Benjamin asked, turning his chair slightly to look down the table at Dacourt.
‘A pity,’ the ambassador replied.
‘Smashed to pieces.’
‘Why do you say it's a pity?’
‘Well, it was one of a set, wondrously carved from pewter.
Falconer had four; people call them liturgical cups.
You know, each cup bears a picture of one of the Church's four great feasts: Advent, Christmas, Easter and Pentecost.’
‘And he was drinking from the Easter one?’
I asked.
‘Yes,’ Dacourt replied.
‘But now it's smashed to pieces.’
‘Falconer was a very religious man,’ Waldegrave slurred.
‘Always talking about God.
He was affected by the writings of that new teacher in Germany.
You know, the monk who has jumped over his monastery wall, Martin Luther.’
(Oh, by the way, I once met Luther and his wife Katherine.
He was strange!
Brilliant, but still strange.
Do you know, he was constipated?
Oh, yes, there was nothing wrong with old Luther that a good bowel purge wouldn't have cured.)
‘Did he discuss Luther?’
Benjamin asked.
‘No, not really,’ Waldegrave slobbered.
‘He was always talking about being saved.
About whether he would go to heaven or hell.
And if he wasn't talking about the after life, he was talking about birds.’
‘Birds?
What do you mean?’
I asked.
Waldegrave leaned forward and stared blearily at me.
‘I mean what I say.
He was always watching bloody birds.
Be it a duck, a sparrow, a linnet or a thrush.
Mind you,’ he tapped the side of his fleshy red nose, ‘there were other matters.’
The rest of the company groaned in unison at having to listen to a well-known story.
‘You see,’ Waldegrave squirmed on his fat bottom, ‘he came for confession to me.
He said he thought he knew who Raphael was.
When I asked him what he meant, all he replied was, ‘It is a grave matter’.’
There were further moans and groans at the old toper's repetition of an apparently well-worn story.
‘It's time for bed,’ Dacourt snapped.
‘Sir Robert, you must be tired.
’ He smiled.
‘And the Lady Francesca waits.
As for you, Sir Priest,’ Dacourt glared at Waldegrave, ‘I think you have drunk enough!’
The chaplain just stared back, open-mouthed, and belched like a thunder clap.
Dacourt took a step nearer.
The priest staggered to his feet and waddled off with an air of drunken disdain.
Dacourt watched him go.
‘Bloody priest!’ he muttered.
‘Him and his jokes.’
‘Lord save us!’
Millet said languidly.
‘If it's not his jokes, he is constantly relating how he fought as a moss trooper on the northern march.’
Millet played with a lace cuff.
‘The old drunk thinks he knows about horses, and is always trying to get to Sir John's destrier.
Have you seen it?’
The young man beamed at Benjamin, who shook his head.
‘A beautiful horse.
Pure air, fierce spirit, with the light tread of a dancer.’
Benjamin looked away and examined his finger nails.
‘Sir John, where's Falconer buried?’
‘At St Pierre,’ Throgmorton the doctor interrupted.
‘We couldn't send him back to England.
He had no family and the body was a bloody pulp, so we bought a plot in the cemetery of St Pierre in the village of Maubisson.’
‘The same church where Abbe Gerard was priest?’
‘That's right,’ Dacourt boomed.
‘Though Abbe Gerard  is no longer with us.
He went for a swim in his own carp pond and drowned.’
‘Strange,’ Clinton mused.
He leaned forward in his chair.
So far he had been quiet, staring into the darkness, though keeping a careful eye on Sir John.
‘What is?’
Benjamin asked.
‘Well,’ Sir Robert also stood up, stretching himself carefully, ‘on the Monday after Easter, Falconer dies from a mysterious fall from a tower.
Two days later an old priest drowns in his own fish pond.’
‘Are you saying there's a connection?’
Peckle spoke up.
‘No.’
Sir Robert just shook his head.
‘I just think it's strange.’
Sir John Dacourt gathered his cloak and made to leave.
‘One last question?’
Benjamin pleaded.
‘Falconer's possessions, where are they?’
‘His moveables are kept in the vaults below the hall here.
What documents he had were handed over to Peckle.’
‘You kept them well?’
Clinton asked.
‘Of course,’ Dacourt snapped back.
Oh, dear, I thought, not much love lost here!
‘You've seen them already, Sir Robert.
Was there anything amiss?’
‘No, no, certainly not!’
Sir Robert smiled falsely.
‘But, as you say, Sir John, the hour is late and it's time for bed.’
Clinton put his goblet down on the table, bade us good night and walked softly away.
Dacourt and Millet followed.
Benjamin, however, sat staring down the hall.
He shivered and pulled his cloak closer about him.
‘Master?’
‘Yes, Roger, I know, it's time to sleep.
Perchance to dream.’
(Oh, by the way, I always remembered that line and later gave it to Will Shakespeare.
You will find it in his play Hamlet which I helped to finance.
It's about a Danish prince who finds out his mother is a murderess and spends his time lolling around, mooning about it.
I am not too fond of it but go and judge for yourself.
Old Will Shakespeare was forever asking about the murders I'd investigated.
Strange, I never told him about the horrors of Maubisson.)
We wandered up the darkened staircase back to our chamber.
I lit the candles and stared around curiously.
From here, I thought, Falconer had left for his dreadful fall through the night.
Benjamin went over to the open window, staring across at the darkened mass of the forest.
He shivered at the ‘yip, yip’ of a fox carried by the cool night wind and jumped at the screech of the huge bats which flickered up and down the castle walls.
‘This,’ he murmured, ‘is truly the valley of death.’
He sat on the edge of the bed and stared up at me.
‘You should sleep, Roger.
You are going to need your rest.
We are in the company of a great assassin.
Mark my words: Falconer and the Abbe Gerard were murdered, and things here are not as they appear to be.’
He refused to be drawn any further.
I was young, tired, slightly drunk, and didn't give a rat's codpiece so I undressed and, within a few minutes, was lost in the sleep of the just.
Chapter 5
We rose late the next morning.
Benjamin appeared to be in better humour and chattered about the history of the chateau as we broke our fast in the great hall.
Afterwards, one of the servants led us down to a vaulted cellar.
‘We must examine Falconer's possessions,’ Benjamin explained.
‘Perhaps the first key to this puzzle will be there.’
Venner was already in the cellar, standing over some coffers and trunks.
He grinned in welcome.
‘These are Falconer's goods,’ he explained.
‘But there's nothing much.
We have been through them.
You have just missed Sir Robert.’
‘What will happen to them now?’
I asked, my eyes on a cheap silver bracelet.
‘Well, Falconer had no heirs so they go to the king.’
I decided to leave the silver bracelet where it was; Fat Harry would skin you alive for taking a crumb of bread from his plate.
Venner wandered off and we went through the pathetic pile of possessions: a counter-pane, three dirty bolsters, hose, jerkins, battered boots, more cheap jewellery, a collection of quills and a bar of Castilian soap.
As far as I was concerned, the Great Killer was  welcome to them.
What attracted our attention was the box of pewter cups, each of the three remaining in their small, red-baized compartment.
We examined these carefully, especially the deep bowls ornately carved with the appropriate scene: a large dove for Pentecost, the Virgin Mary on the Advent cup, and a child in a manger for Christmas.
(You know the sort, they were quite common in England before the Great Killer smashed the monasteries.
You drank from each goblet according to the season.
) Benjamin sniffed each cup, then the box.
‘Nothing,’ he exclaimed.
‘There's nothing here.’
We went out to take the air in the inner bailey and stood fascinated as four ostlers struggled with the ropes tied to the bridle of a splendid, black war horse.
They were trying to back it into a stable but the magnificent beast was all set to charge.
The horse stood sixteen hands high, its jet black coat gleaming in the sunlight.
Its ears were back in anger, its eyes rolled, and the horse curled its lips, revealing the foam on sharp, yellow teeth.
Every so often the animal would rear, lashing out with his sharpened hooves, as the men struggled with a stream of oaths to back it into the stable.
Eventually they succeeded, quickly securing both the bottom door and the top flap and, even then, we could hear the horse pounding the thick oaken panels.
The ostlers, covered in sweat, walked away, still muttering curses.
‘That must be Vulcan, Sir John Dacourt's destrier,’ Benjamin remarked.
‘Waldegrave must be mad if he thinks he can control such a beast.’
He stared across at the wing built to the right of the chateau.
‘I wonder if we should visit the priest?
Perhaps he can explain Falconer's macabre joke about graves?’
Benjamin grasped me by the  arm.
‘On second thoughts, let us finish the business in hand.’
We went back, past the hall down a long, stone passageway to Peckle's chamber.
The chief clerk was working there, surrounded by a veritable sea of paper; memoranda, notes, bills, letters and indentures.
He sat with his back to the door, crouched over his desk.
The room smelt stale and musty with the pungent odour of the fat tallow candles placed on the desk.
All the windows were shuttered as if we were in the depths of winter.
Peckle hardly moved but continued to peer at a document covered in strange cipher markings.
‘Good morning, Walter,’ Benjamin said, a little too loudly.
The clerk looked round testily.
‘Can I help?’
‘Well, yes.
Do you have Falconer's documents?’
The fellow, sighing dramatically, rose wearily from his chair like an exasperated parent dealing with two naughty children.
He dug amongst some papers in the corner and tossed us a canvas bag tied at the top.
Benjamin turned and made to leave.
‘No!
No!’
Peckle announced pompously.
‘You cannot take them away.
You must study them here.’
Benjamin stuck his tongue out at Peckle's back, cleared a space on the floor and squatted there for at least half an hour sifting through the contents of the sack.
There wasn't much; a few drawings of birds, quite well done but not of the calibre of the great da Vinci's notebook.
(I met the great sculptor once, you know, when I was hiding from the Doge of Venice's assassins.
But that's another story.)
One strange discovery we did make scraps of paper bearing the word Raphael.
Falconer had  apparently been playing with the letters of the name, breaking them up, distancing each from the other.
Benjamin studied these carefully, shook his head and tossed them back.
We thanked Peckle but he never stirred a hair.
‘What do you think, master?’
I asked as soon as we were out of the chamber.
‘Falconer was murdered.’
‘But how?
He was alone on the tower and he wasn't drunk.’
Benjamin chewed his lip.
‘Falconer was a man who liked birds,’ he replied slowly.
‘So he goes to the top of the tower to study them.’
‘Do you think he discovered who Raphael was?’
‘I don't think so but he did believe the word Raphael contained the name of the traitor.’
Benjamin wandered off, saying he wished to speak to Waldegrave, so I decided to take the air in the garden behind the chateau.
I was even more eager when I glimpsed Lady Francesca, magnificent in her dark green velvet dress, with a small hat of the same texture and colour, ornamented with trailing peacock feathers set rakishly on her head.
I strolled amongst the boxwood as if I was the keenest of gardeners, taking special interest in the herb banks, the ever-green boxwood, and the multi-coloured flowers where hungry bees searched for honey.
The lady was humming a madrigal.
She turned quickly at the sound of my footsteps on the gravel.
‘Monsieur!’ she exclaimed in mock surprise.
‘You follow me!’
‘To the ends of the earth, Madame,’ I replied, fascinated  by the sudden rise and fall of her ample bosom.
She stepped closer, raising the hem of her dress to reveal thick, white petticoats above black, polished boots.
She peered closer.
‘You are Shallot, Master Benjamin's manservant?’
‘His secretarius, Madame,’ I replied more smugly than I intended.
‘La, la, secretarius, and an ugly one at that!’
Well, I blushed and stammered.
‘Well, well, Master Secretarius,’ she continued, ‘how can I help you?’
‘You are pleased to be back in France, Madame?’
‘After two years married to an Englishman, I am more than happy.’
‘But you returned only a few weeks ago, during Holy Week?’
Lady Francesca stared at the flowers as if already bored by the conversation.
Suddenly she jerked, clutching her stomach as if in pain.
‘Madame,’ I seized her wrist, ‘you are ill?’
Francesca lifted her pale face, no mockery or laughter in those staring dark eyes now.
‘Take your hands off me!’ she rasped.
‘Never, do you understand, never touch me!’
She swept by me, leaving old Shallot with the fragrance of her perfume and a deeper knowledge of my true status.
I wandered back to the main entrance of the chateau and found Benjamin, equally disconsolate, sitting on the steps.
‘The Lady Francesca seemed upset,’ he remarked casually.
I spat into the dust at his feet.
‘By the time I'm finished, master, her agitation will be deeper and my hurt will be gone.’
Benjamin rose and, slipping his arm through mine, led me back to the garden, teasing me into a good mood as he explained how he had found Waldegrave drunk as a lord and insensible as a rock in a corner of his opulent chapel.
We spent the rest of the day enjoying the strong sunshine.
Benjamin seemed fascinated by the edge of the forest, saying he was sure he had glimpsed figures slipping in and out of the trees.
‘The chateau is being watched,’ he remarked.
‘Perhaps, Roger, we are about to meet our friends, the Luciferi.’
That damn' word brought me back to the harsh reality of my situation: not just the discovery of a traitor or bringing a murderer to book but vengeance for Agnes and, of course, the Herculean task which the Great Killer had assigned me!
We kept to ourselves for the rest of the day, taking food from the buttery and retiring early for we were both still exhausted after our journey from England.
As darkness fell, the weather changed.
Thick, black rain clouds massed in the sky and, as I fell asleep, rattling raindrops pattered against the wooden shutters.
That sleep proved to be the beginning of our troubles.
We were awoken early in the night, a few hours before dawn, by sharp screams, shouted orders, and the sound of running feet.
We threw blankets around us and hurried down to the inner bailey, now filling with servants and retainers who splashed amongst the puddles carrying torches.
Clinton was there wrapped in a military cloak and Dacourt, looking rather ridiculous in a long night gown, stood near Vulcan's stable.
Both the top and bottom  doors were flung back and the great war horse had apparently galloped away pursued by grooms.
Peckle, Throgmorton and others joined us, though I was surprised to see Millet, the effeminate clerk, dressed as if returning from a visit to the city.
We pushed our way into the stable and glimpsed what appeared to be a blood-soaked pile of rags, the gore and slime gleaming in the flickering torch light.
Throgmorton was leaning over it, his face turning a greenish-white hue.
‘Bring another torch!’
Benjamin ordered.
A sleepy-eyed groom pushed one into his hand and swiftly backed away.
Benjamin knelt down, bringing the torch closer, and I had to put my hand to my mouth to prevent myself retching.
Waldegrave lay there, his body a bloody pulp.
His skull had been kicked in and the dark blood seeped out, mingling with the grey sludge of his brains.
One eye had popped out from its socket, his chest was a bloody black hole, whilst the lower half of his face had been completely kicked away, revealing stumps of yellow teeth.
‘In God's name, what happened?’
Benjamin whispered.
‘The fool tried to get to the horse.
He was always up to these tricks.
Only this time Vulcan was too quick and powerful.’
Benjamin stared at the physician.
‘He'd tried this before?’
‘Yes.
As Sir John described the other evening.
The old toper still thought he was a horseman.’
‘But this is the first time Vulcan attacked him?’
‘Yes.’
Throgmorton rose, the hem of his cloak over his mouth and nose.
‘Sometimes he would try it in the evening but never during the dead of night.’
Benjamin, impervious to the scene, leaned closer and sniffed at what used to be Waldegrave's mouth.
Even from where I stood I could smell the strong, stale wine fumes which permeated the stench of the ripped body.
‘What actually happened?’
I asked Millet, noting how the young man was very much the worse for drink.
The fop shook his head and went outside.
He leaned against the stable, sucking in the cool night air like a man surfacing from a deep river.
‘Everyone in the chateau was asleep,’ I observed.
‘Apart from you?’
The fellow grimaced.
‘Yes, apart from me.
I had business in the city.
Anyway, I returned late.
I stabled my own horse and was in the buttery when I heard screams, the crashing of hooves and Vulcan's neighs.
I ran back here.
Grooms and ostlers were already in the yard.
The top half of the stable door was open but Waldegrave had apparently closed the bottom behind him.
A groom opened it.
The horse shot out like an arrow from a bow.’
Millet nodded towards the general direction of the garden.
‘I understand he's been cornered there and his attendant is trying to calm him.
I came over,’ he continued, ‘and saw what you have now.’
He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘I vomited twice,’ he remarked, ‘and I think I am going to do so again.’
Hand to mouth, slightly stooping, he hurried away into the darkness.
I grinned contemptuously at his retreating back, looked once more at the stable, saw an eyeball glistening on the wet straw and promptly vomited myself.
I looked around; Clinton, Dacourt and others now stood  near the main steps of the chateau, Throgmorton with them.
‘Master!’
I hissed, closing my eyes and leaning against the lintel of the stable.
‘What are you doing?’
Benjamin came out, rubbing the side of his face.
‘There's nothing we can do, Sir John,’ he called across to Dacourt.
‘The poor man's body should be removed.’
The ambassador rapped out an order and four servants, their faces masked by cloths soaked in vinegar, hurried across with a linen sheet.
‘Take it to the infirmary!’
Dacourt ordered.
Benjamin and I watched as Waldegrave's corpse was hoisted on to the sheet.
‘One minute!’
Benjamin called out.
The servants glared angrily, eager to get the grisly business over and done with.
Benjamin seized his torch, brought the flame as near as he could and examined not the wounds, but rather the dead priest's shabby, bloodstained tunic.
‘Most interesting,’ he murmured.
‘Yes, very interesting.’
He smiled at the servants.
‘You may take him away.
Come, Roger!
The night is not over and we need our sleep.’
Clinton, Throgmorton and the rest tried to draw Benjamin into conversation as we went up the main steps of the chateau.
‘The man was as mad as a Maypole!’
Dacourt bellowed.
‘A senseless, stupid, drunken act!’
‘Waldegrave was undoubtedly drunk,’ Benjamin replied.
‘He may have been a fool, but I don't think that was an accident.’
‘What do you mean?’
Peckle jibed.
‘I will explain in the morning,’ Benjamin answered.
‘Sir John, Sir Robert, I bid you good night.’
We returned to our chamber.
My queasy stomach had settled and I was agog with curiosity.
(I see the chaplain smirking again, probably because I vomited.
I'd like to remind him that's nothing to the idiot he made of himself on All Fools Day last when he found the dead stoat I'd placed in the pulpit.
Retched like a waterfall he did!)
However, Master Benjamin was not in a talkative mood.
‘Tomorrow, Roger,’ he promised.
‘But now I need some sleep.’
I lay for a while waiting for the chateau to fall silent again before drifting into a demon-filled sleep of black war horses rearing above me, men flying through the night air, and those dreadful corpses laid out so tidily, so neatly, in that beautiful London garden.
We woke early the next morning.
Benjamin's stomach seemed to have caught up with his memories for he now looked white-faced and confessed he felt queasy.
‘The stupid bastard,’ I murmured.
Benjamin shook his head and finished dressing.
‘Don't speak ill of the dead, Roger.
Waldegrave was murdered.
Come, I must see the corpse once more.’
We went down to the white-washed infirmary where I made Benjamin stop at the kitchen for rags soaked in vinegar and herbs.
We certainly needed them.
The dead priest's body still sprawled beneath his sheet in that small white room.
The stomach had begun to swell and the chamber stank with the evil gases which emanated from it.
I could take no more but stood by the door whilst once more Benjamin peered at the blood-stained clothing.
‘Yes, yes,’ he muttered to himself.
‘Yes, of course, that's how it was done!’
We left the infirmary, standing for a few minutes outside, drinking in the sweet morning air.
Benjamin called a young boy over.
‘Listen, lad,’ he ordered.
‘My compliments to Sir John but tell him Master Daunbey would appreciate his presence here in the courtyard.’
The boy stared blankly back.
Benjamin laughed.
‘Of course.’
He sighed and translated the request into French.
Dacourt joined us a few minutes later, his white moustache bristling with importance, his face a little more puce.
I could smell the fresh wine on his breath.
‘Sir John, I have a favour to ask.’
‘What is it, sir?’
‘Would you have the castle searched, particularly the rubbish tips outside the kitchen, for the corpse of a chicken or a pig, some animal slaughtered for no apparent reason?’
Dacourt's eyes looked bulbous.
‘Please, Sir John!’
Benjamin insisted.
‘I have good reason for my request.’
Dacourt shrugged and bawled orders at a servant.
He followed Benjamin over to Vulcan's stable.
‘The war horse is not there,’ the ambassador remarked defensively.
‘I have moved it to a small paddock beyond the castle walls.’
He kicked the loose cobbles of the yard.
‘Some people say he should be destroyed.’
‘Why?’
Benjamin asked.
‘The horse did no wrong.’
‘But he killed Waldegrave.’
Benjamin patted the ambassador gently on the  shoulder.
‘No, Sir John, he did not, as I will explain in a while.
Now, I wish to discover something for myself.’
He went into the stable, closing the bottom part of the door behind him.
To do this he had to lean over and push the bolt firmly into place.
He then closed the top part and, for a few minutes, remained hidden in the stables.
‘What's the madman trying to do?’
Dacourt mumbled.
Benjamin threw open the top part of the stable door and grinned maliciously.
‘Sir John, you would say I was tall?’
‘Yes, of greater stature than most men.’
‘Whilst Waldegrave was rather small?’
‘Yes.’
‘And to close this door, even I, with my considerable height, face difficulties?’
‘Yes, yes,’ Dacourt muttered.
‘I always have to stand on the bottom panel.
Why do you ask?’
Benjamin drew back the bolt and came out of the stable.
‘I'll tell you why, Sir John, but first I need to break my fast.
I should be most grateful if you would discover the results of your search and gather the rest of our colleagues in the great hall.’
Dacourt threw him an angry glance but, slightly mollified by Benjamin's assertion that Vulcan did not bear the guilt for Waldegrave's death, nodded and stumped off.
We were sitting in the hall finishing off our meal of light ale, freshly baked bread and strips of salted pork, when the others drifted down to join us.
‘What's this all about?’
Peckle moaned.
‘I have work to do.
Waldegrave's possessions must be accounted and assessed.’
Millet yawned and slouched against the table.
Throgmorton  glared angrily at Benjamin as if he recognised a rival.
Venner grinned amiably around whilst Clinton, as cool as ever, drummed his fingers soundlessly on the table top.
At last Dacourt stormed in.
‘You're right!’ he bellowed at Benjamin.
‘You're damned well right!’
‘What's he so right about?’
Peckle observed testily.
‘One of the servants found a young piglet, throat slashed from ear to ear, on a heap of refuse at the back of the kitchen.
The cook didn't order it to be killed and no one will take responsibility for it.’
‘How long has it been dead?’
Benjamin asked.
‘I don't bloody well know!’
Dacourt coughed, slumping down in his chair in the centre of the table.
‘Sometime yesterday, perhaps.
The rats had been at it, the body is already half-gnawed.’
‘What is this?’
Millet yawned languidly.
‘Surely, Sir John, we are not here to discuss the mysterious death of a piglet?’
He smiled appreciatively at the murmur of laughter he'd provoked.
Benjamin rapped the top of the table.
‘No, we are not here to discuss the death of a pig but the murder of a priest, Richard Waldegrave!’
‘Murder!’
Throgmorton was the first to react.
‘Murder!’ he repeated.
‘The drunken idiot wandered into Vulcan's stable and got what he deserved.
Everyone knows Vulcan is a horse trained for war.’
‘But why should he come down in the dead of night?’
Millet jibed.
‘After all, this is not some lady's chamber, is it, Master Throgmorton?’
‘Oh, shut up!’ the physician snapped.
‘It's obvious this sottish priest tried his luck once too often.’
‘I agree,’ my master replied.
‘But, Sir John, has Vulcan ever attacked anyone else?’
Dacourt watched Benjamin attentively, his eyes now not so bulbous but cunning and shrewd.
Sir John, I thought, was one of those men who like to play the role of the bluff, hale soldier.
He was not Henry VIII's ambassador to France for nothing.
‘No,’ he replied carefully.
‘Old Vulcan is fiery, he can rear, bite and lash out, but pound a man to death?
No.
Continue, Master Benjamin.’
Benjamin rose.
‘Let's play out the little drama again,’ he said and, without waiting for a reply, led the group out of the hall into the sunlit courtyard.
Benjamin went across to the stable door.
‘Look,’ he said.
‘There are bolts on the outside, top and bottom.
Waldegrave opens the top.’
Benjamin slid the bolt back.
‘And then-the bottom.’
Again he repeated the action.
‘Waldegrave, a short man, goes into the stable.
What did he do next?’
‘Apparently,’ Millet answered, ‘closed the bottom half of the door after him.’
‘Like this.’
Benjamin leaned over the door and pushed the bolt home.
‘Now.’
He spoke over the door to us.
‘Waldegrave was drunk, he stank of wine fumes.
He was also a man of short stature; he would have to climb on the beam at the front of the door to push the bolt home.
Yes?’
A chorus of assent greeted his question.
‘So,’ Benjamin continued, ‘I am stone sober, taller than Waldegrave, and I find it difficult.
It must have been hard for a short, drunken man to do at the dead of night.’
‘But he did!’
Throgmorton taunted.
‘The stable door was found bolted.’
Benjamin smiled, opened the stable door and joined us in the yard.
‘My good doctor, I agree.
But let us say you are correct and Waldegrave is standing in the stable.
Vulcan rears, he is out of control.
What should Waldegrave have done then?’
‘Try to get out?’
‘But he didn't.
Strange,’ Benjamin mused, ‘this drunk who can so cleverly bolt the door after him, now finds it impossible to repeat the action to escape from an angry war horse.’
‘Perhaps he tried to,’ Clinton remarked, scratching the side of his face with a heavy, beringed hand, ‘but was struck down by Vulcan.’
‘I would like to believe that, Sir Robert.
But examine the corpse.
All of Waldegrave's injuries are to his face and the front of his body.’
Now the group were attentive.
Benjamin spread his hands.
‘You see, I don't think Waldegrave would have locked the door behind him.
He was drunk.
He was of short stature.
Gentlemen, we have all drunk too much at times and seen others in their cups.
They are careless, they knock over tables and chairs, they leave doors open.
But Waldegrave was so precise.
He could get into a stable but was unable to get out.’
I just stood admiring my master's sharp wit.
Of course, I had reached the same conclusions but he was always better at presenting the facts.
He had a way with words, my master.
He should have met Shakespeare and Burbage.
They would have cast him in many a role in one of their plays.
Perhaps Lear, Brutus or Mark Antony.
Benjamin  was a great orator.
In that courtyard of the dreadful castle of Maubisson, he had the rapt attention of those arrogant men.
‘Now,’ my master continued briskly, ‘even if Waldegrave had bolted the door behind him and, let us say, he fell in a dead faint or drunken stupor, Sir John, can you explain why Vulcan would pound his body so mercilessly?’
The ambassador stroked his chin.
‘No, I cannot,’ he replied.
‘Vulcan is trained only to lash out at someone who threatens him.’
‘Not a fat, drunken cleric?’
‘Come, come!’
Peckle snarled.
‘Master Benjamin, tell us your conclusion.’
‘Sir John, would the smell of blood drive Vulcan to a fury?’
‘Of course.
It would remind him of battle, of danger.’
Benjamin pointed towards the infirmary.
‘Last night I examined Waldegrave's clothing.
It was covered in blood and gore which was fresh.
However, his tunic was also stained with dried blood.’
He paused.
‘So, Master Peckle, I will tell you my conclusions.
Last night, Waldegrave drank himself into a stupor.
Someone had earlier gutted a young pig, and drained off the blood.
They went to Waldegrave's chamber and smeared it all over the tunic of our comatose priest.
Our murderer then dragged the body silently across the yard, opened the door to Vulcan's stable, placed the sleeping priest on the straw, locked the stable door behind him and slipped quietly away.
Vulcan, agitated by dark shapes in the night and inflamed by the stench of blood, was driven to fury.
He pounded this strange, blood-stained visitor to his stable, now lying on his back in the straw beneath him.
The fury of the attack, at least for a few seconds, drew Waldegrave from his drunken stupor.
He screamed, perhaps struggled, but Vulcan lashed out once more with a sharpened hoof, shattering poor Waldegrave's head.
’ Benjamin folded his arms.
‘Sir John, Sir Robert, Waldegrave was barbarously murdered.’
A babble of protest broke out but no one could deny the logic of my master's conclusions.
He stilled the clamour with a wave of his hands.
‘I should demand that everyone should account for their movements but,’ he smiled thinly, ‘in the main we all sleep alone and I have no authority to ask.’
He clapped me on the shoulder.
‘Even my good friend Shallot could not swear that I did not slip out of my chamber to commit this dreadful act.’
The rest of the group just stared wordlessly back.
Benjamin shrugged.
‘Sir John, I would be grateful for the loan of a groom who will show us the way to Abbe Gerard's Church of St Pierre in Maubisson village.’
Dacourt, lost in his own reverie, nodded and within the hour our horses were saddled and we followed the groom out of the chateau.
Benjamin stopped for a while, staring across at the forest edge.
‘We are being watched,’ he repeated.
‘All the time, we are being watched.’
‘The Luciferi, master?’
Benjamin pulled a wry mouth.
‘Perhaps, but the danger we face from them is nothing compared to what we face in the chateau.
There is a murderer loose.
Waldegrave was killed because of what he knew, something about that pathetic joke.’
My master patted his horse  absent-mindedly.
‘Or was it that?’ he continued as if speaking to himself.
‘Or because I was the first to show any interest?
We shall see.
We shall see, eh, Roger?’
Chapter 6
I smiled to hide my own fears.
I'll be honest, they weren't caused just by the Luciferi and some maniac loose in the chateau but by the Great Killer at Hampton Court and his desire to get that bloody ring back.
I wanted to broach the matter with my master but he was lost in his own thoughts so I kept my fears hidden as we rode along the lee of the hill.
We wound our way past open fields into shady woods until we entered the neck of a small valley.
Nestling at the bottom, on the banks of a sluggish stream, stood Maubisson village: a collection of wattle and daub huts with thatched roofs, two or three of stone and slate, each with its own fenced garden.
On the far side of the village was a small water mill, probably used for grinding corn.
In the centre of the village green stood a black-spired church, nothing more than a tower and nave hastily thrown together, the type you can see in any village in England or France.
It was ringed by its own walls, a cemetery to one side, the priest's house to the other.
Even from where we looked you could glimpse the glint of the huge carp pond where Abbe Gerard had drowned.
We rode slowly down the beaten track.
Women in thick, serge dresses and wooden clogs gathered at the  doors of their houses and watched us pass whilst half-naked children ran behind us, screaming in their patois for a sou or something to eat.
A few old men dozed on benches.
Around them scrawny-necked chickens pecked at the dust, jostling with thin-flanked pigs for something to eat.
We reached the church and rode through the lych gate.
Benjamin thanked the groom and told him to return to the chateau.
We tied our horses to a small rail and knocked on the priest's house door.
A young, thin-faced man with brown hair, a sharp needle nose and watery eyes answered.
His skin was rather yellow as if he had bile problems or a stone in his kidneys.
He was friendly enough, thankfully a Norman born, so Benjamin could converse easily with him whilst I could follow the general gist of their conversation.
‘I am the Cure Ricard,’ he murmured.
‘You are…?’
(I was sure he was going to say ‘Goddamn’.)
‘English, from the Chateau of Maubisson.’
‘Come in.
Come in.’
The cure ushered us in.
He lived as poorly as his peasant parishioners.
The room was simple.
There were a few sticks of furniture and the floor was beaten earth, rather cold despite the summer.
A fire burnt in the hearth.
Next to it squatted a young girl about fifteen or sixteen years old.
Her hair was thick and coarse, her face raw and peeling from work in the sun.
She hardly looked up as we entered but continued to stir the huge, black pot which hung above the flames, now and again throwing in a scattering of herbs and the occasional piece of raw, fatty meat.
‘My housekeeper,’ Ricard shamefully announced.
(Aye, I thought, and I wager she does more than just  work in the kitchen, but who am I to judge the poor man's morals?
Look at my chaplain!
From what I gather he spends more time in the hay loft with young Mabel from the village than he does in his church.
Ah, see, he squirms!
He thinks I am old and senile.
I tell you this, not even the bloody sparrows land on my lawns without my permission.)
Anyway, back to the poor priest.
At least he did an honest day's work.
He told us to sit down and served us vinegar-tasting wine.
When he wasn't looking I poured mine on to the floor.
‘Monsieur le Cure,’ Benjamin began, ‘you came here after the Abbe Gerard died?’
‘No, Monsieur, I served with him.
But the bishop has yet to make up his mind about a successor.’
‘So you were here the night he died?’
‘Yes and no.
On that Wednesday after Easter I was absent from the church.
The abbe had allowed me to visit friends.
He stayed and cooked his own dinner.’
The cure spread his hands.
‘Some scraps of beef, he opened a small jar of wine.
The abbe liked his claret and he had been fasting during Lent.’
He must have seen the look in my eyes.
‘No more than two cups, certainly not enough to make him drunk.
Just before dusk one of the villagers, walking through the church grounds, saw the abbe in the garden looking down at the carp pond.
I returned after dark.’
He looked sideways at the girl stirring the pot.
‘Simone and I returned.
Abbe Gerard was not to be seen.
I went down to the garden.
It was a beautiful evening.
I thought he might still have been there.’
The cure's eyes filled with tears.
‘He was floating face down in the carp pond!’
‘And there was no mark or sign of violence?’
‘No, Monsieur.’
‘And the cup and jar of wine?’
‘They were found with him in the pond.’
‘Ask him where the wine came from,’ I demanded.
Benjamin translated my question.
The cure shrugged.
‘God knows.
The abbe may have bought it.
But don't forget, Monsieur, it was Easter.
Our parishioners, even the people of Maubisson, send us gifts.
Fruit, flowers, wine and sweetmeats.’
‘Why would the abbe stare at the carp pond?’
The cure laughed abruptly.
‘Monsieur, everyone stands by the edge of the water and stares at the fish, that's why we have such ponds.
It's a bit like asking why someone looks at the sky or watches the sunset.’
Benjamin smiled.
‘A fair point, Monsieur.
Can we see this carp pond?’
Ricard led us out into the garden.
Really, it was a small orchard, with some apple and pear trees and untended grass.
Here and there was the occasional flower bed; the lilies and other wild flowers struggling to thrive amongst the brambles and weeds.
In the middle of the garden was a large, deep carp pond.
It must have been about two yards deep and three yards across.
It was man-made, I glimpsed the grey bricks around the edge, and probably fed by underground streams.
‘Tell us again,’ Benjamin asked.
‘What happened?’
‘Well, the abbe was in the water, floating face down.’
Ricard wiped his constantly dripping nose.
‘I and Simone pulled him out.
He must have been dead for hours.’
‘Do you think he drowned?’
‘He could have had a seizure.
Yet the abbe enjoyed  good health.
He had no fits nor did he suffer from the falling sickness.’
Benjamin sat down on a small bench near the pool and watched the silver, darting carp who swam in dashes of light amongst the water grass and luxuriant lily pads.
He half-closed his eyes and listened to plopping sounds in the water for the place swarmed with frogs, and the buzz of the bees as they hunted for honey amongst the flowers.
‘Did Abbe Gerard have any enemies?’
I asked abruptly.
Ricard shook his head.
‘Monsieur, I don't understand.’
‘My companion asked,’ Benjamin repeated, ‘did the Abbe Gerard have any enemies?’
‘No, he was a compassionate man, even to me with all my failings.’
‘Did he ever talk about his friendship with King Henry of England?
You know our king, when he visited Maubisson, often called on Abbe Gerard and used him as a confessor?’
‘Others at the chateau do,’ Ricard observed.
I winked at Benjamin.
Abbe Gerard, I thought, would be the natural recipient of all sorts of secrets.
In an enclosed community such as Maubisson who would want to confess to a drunken idiot like Waldegrave?
Apart from Falconer, I thought, and he died.
‘The Abbe Gerard,’ Benjamin remarked, speaking my thoughts aloud, ‘must have known the secrets of many hearts.’
He stared up at Ricard.
‘But we were talking about our noble King Henry.’
‘The abbe often boasted,’ Ricard answered, ‘about his friendship with King Henry of England.
He often described him as a truly Christian Prince.’
(It just goes to show you that Henry could fool anyone, and invariably did.
At least two of his wives and three of his principal ministers paid the price, not to mention a legion of others whose only reward for speaking their minds was a short journey to the executioner's block on Tower Hill.)
‘And King Henry's gift to him?’
Benjamin pointedly asked.
‘Oh, the abbe was very proud of the gift.
A copy of St Augustine's On Chastity, I believe.
He showed it to me once.
I am not a scholar but I saw it was personally annotated by your king.
Abbe Gerard usually kept it well hidden.’
‘And you never saw it?’
‘As I have said, only once.’
‘Where is it now?’
‘I don't know.
You see the abbe had very few possessions.
I searched for that but never found it.’
Benjamin stared at the carp pond.
‘Monsieur le Cure, since the abbe's death, has anything strange happened here?’
‘No.
Of course, there was mourning and grief at the abbe's sudden death and his funeral caused disruption in the normal tedium of our lives.’
The cure's voice quickened.
‘Ah, yes, one incident.
The day after the funeral I was out visiting all day.
Simone had gone back to her family.
On my return I found the doors had been forced.
Someone had carefully searched the house from top to bottom but nothing was missing.
I did wonder if they were searching for the book.
In itself it is valuable, being recently translated from the original Greek and annotated by a king.’
‘Did the abbe ever say what would happen to the book after his death?’
‘Yes, he joked and said he would take it to heaven with him.
How it deserved to go to Paradise.’
‘Ask him where the abbe is buried,’ I said, an idea half-forming in my mind.
‘In our cemetery,’ Ricard replied.
‘Under the old yew tree.
The parishioners bought him a head stone.
You can see it there.
It's marked simply with his name and the cross of Lorraine.’
‘May we see inside the church?’
Benjamin asked.
Ricard agreed and was searching for the key on the ring of his belt when we heard the sound of horses and men shouting.
We followed the cure back to the kitchen.
Simone was standing by the front door which she held ajar, her hand to her mouth.
Ricard pushed her aside, stared out then stepped back, his face pale.
Benjamin eased by him and I reluctantly followed.
The path down to the lych gate was packed with armed men, soldiers in conical steel helmets and tough, leather jerkins.
Some wore breastplates, greaves and other pieces of armour, all carried swords and daggers, with shields slung round their necks.
They also carried arbalests, huge wicked-looking cross bows, the type used by Genoese; at our appearance they fanned out into a semicircle.
Beyond the lych gate I could see their horses milling about, raising small clouds of yellow dust.
‘What is the matter?’
Benjamin demanded.
‘A Goddamn!’ one of them replied in a thick, Scottish accent.
I peered closer and my stomach curdled.
These did not look French and, despite the royal livery of France some of them sported, they were not regular troops.
Most  were red-haired with thick beards and moustaches.
They had the cruel faces of born killers.
I stared around.
Some carried standards, chevrons, gules and badges.
I glimpsed one displaying the Red Lion rampart of Scotland as well as the fleur de lys of France.
‘Le Garde Ecossais!’
Benjamin voiced my thoughts.
I took a step back.
These soldiers were the most cruel and professional in the French army, Scottish exiles who served the French crown because of their hatred for England.
(Did you know that whenever the English went to war with France, our soldiers immediately hanged any of these Scottish mercenaries they captured?
Indeed, Henry V used to burn them alive.
And if any of them captured an Englishman, God help him!
I have heard stories of such men taking days to die.
These mercenaries were particularly concerned about the skill and accuracy of English archers.
The first thing they'd do if they captured one would be to hack off the two forefingers of each hand, the very ones our archers used to pull a long bow.
Consequently, our lads, whenever they wished to express their contempt for the French, would show them two fingers.
I thought you might find this little aside interesting.
My chaplain does.
It's a gesture I often use with him when I'm too drunk to argue.)
On that sun-drenched day at Maubisson I kept my fingers well hidden, smiled politely and quietly prayed that these wolves in human flesh were seeking other quarry apart from us.
Suddenly the groups divided and a most extraordinary sight sauntered down the path.
He was their leader, a soldier, but dressed like a popinjay in multi-coloured hose, a billowing tabard of blue and silver  jagged at the edge, a lace-ruffed collar, lambskin gloves and high-heeled Spanish riding boots festooned with bells which tinkled at every step he took.
He wore a sort of bonnet on his jet black hair, apparently dyed, and four great eagle feathers were clasped to this.
A jewelled necklace round his throat glittered in the sun as did the pearl earrings which hung from fleshy lobes on chains of pure silver.
His face was equally extraordinary, pale and soft, smooth like a young girl's, with pursed, prim lips and above them a slightly crooked nose.
The eyes were deep-set and shadowed.
Is this a woman?
I thought, catching a strong whiff of perfume.
You see, the fellow didn't walk, he had this strange mincing walk, hips slightly swaying.
He was unarmed except for a dagger with a mother-of-pearl handle pushed through an ornately embroidered belt.
I stared at that face and something stirred in my memory.
Had I seen him before?
Yet, surely I would remember such an apparition?
The fellow stopped, one leg pushed slightly forward in a pose which, in other circumstances, I would have found laughable.
He peeled one glove off and beckoned like a woman.
Ricard stumbled forward.
‘Not you!’
The voice was soft, well modulated, the command of English perfect.
I had heard that voice before in an alleyway in London.
The apparition waved soft, white fingers.
‘Go away, you dirty little priest, and close the door behind you!’
Ricard vanished and I wished I could follow him.
The apparition smiled lazily at us and beckoned once again.
‘Stay where you are!’
Benjamin hissed, grabbing my arm.
He didn't have to tell me a second time.
I was rooted in terror to the spot.
I don't like soldiers and I particularly hate those who dress like women and smile a lot.
Again the apparition smiled.
‘Preparez-vous!’
The command was tossed languidly over his shoulder and immediately loaded crossbows were brought up and aimed at our chests.
‘On second thoughts,’ I murmured to Benjamin, ‘let's do what he asks.’
Benjamin grasped my wrist again.
‘I will take one step,’ my master called out, ‘if you take one.’
The apparition shrugged.
‘D'accord,’ he murmured, making a languorous movement with his hand.
The crossbows were lowered, he moved forward, so did we.
The apparition tapped Benjamin on the chest.
‘You are Benjamin Daunbey.’
His eyes did not leave Benjamin's.
‘And your companion is the creature Shallot.’
His eyes flicked coldly over me.
‘Creature, we meet again.’
His words confirmed my worst fears.
This fellow was one of the Luciferi who had threatened me in London, carried out the dreadful murders of the Ralembergs and put the blame on me.
(Now the chaplain thinks I should have sprung at him.
If I had loved Agnes so much, surely my passionate nature would have broken all bounds?
He does not know old Shallot.
Do unto your enemy before he does it unto you, but always make sure his back's turned!)
‘My name is ‘Sieur Raoul Vauban.
I am a clerk in the service of His Most Christian Majesty, King Francis I. We were passing through the village and we heard that the cure had visitors.’
Bloody liar, I thought.
‘What are you doing here?’
He stared at Benjamin.
‘We are the accredited envoys of His Majesty the King of England, and of His Eminence, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey.
We are staying at the Chateau de Maubisson and have brought to the village our royal master's deep condolences on the sudden and tragic death of the Abbe Gerard.’
‘No!’
Vauban rasped.
‘You are spies!’
‘Then, Monsieur, we have a lot in common.’
Benjamin held open his cloak so the Frenchman could see his sword.
‘What is more,’ he continued conversationally, ‘you must be a member of the Luciferi.
Perhaps their principal archangel.
Where do you carry that damned candle you always leave at your crimes?’
Well, that shut the bastard up, and, for a few seconds, that infuriating smile disappeared.
My master just stood, cool as you like, his arms folded.
I could see he had taken an intense dislike to Monsieur Vauban.
‘You are not passing through the village,’ Benjamin continued.
‘You followed us here.
You have also been watching the chateau.
Like me, you know the Abbe Gerard was murdered, and you are looking for that book, a gift from our royal master which, by rights, should now be returned to its proper owner.’
Vauban, offended by Benjamin's bluntness, stepped back, his hand falling to his dagger.
Once again those bloody crossbows came up and I heard the click of bolts being placed.
I edged behind my master, ready to give him support and wondering if Ricard had locked the door behind him.
Then, suddenly, Vauban threw back his head and laughed like a girl.
‘Monsieur Benjamin!
Monsieur Benjamin!’
He went up  and clapped my master on the shoulder.
‘Why do we quarrel?
We are both agents of our royal masters.
We have better things to do than kill each other.’
He grinned impishly at me.
‘We get others to do that for us.’
Well, I could have killed the bastard on the spot but I wasn't armed.
He was, and had sixty stout friends to support him.
So I smiled pleasantly.
Vauban stepped back, hands extended, his expression mock-apologetic.
‘Look, we mean no offence.
We will escort you back to the chateau.’
‘We don't want that.’
‘No, we don't,’ I added.
‘I insist,’ Vauban purred.
‘There are rebels, the Maillotins, about.’
Benjamin shook his head.
The crossbows came up again.
‘Of course, we agree,’ I laughed.
‘Good,’ Vauban replied.
‘Let's go.’
We walked down the side of the church and collected our horses.
‘I don't like the perverted bastard!’
Benjamin hissed.
‘Neither do I, master, but keep smiling just in case he changes his mind.’
We mounted and rode back through the lazy summer sunshine, the Scottish troopers massing behind whilst Vauban pushed forward between us.
God knows, I thought of Agnes and could have killed him.
The bastard chattered pleasantly for a while before suddenly producing a small viol from a bag hanging on his saddle horn.
I couldn't believe it.
He strummed for a few seconds then broke into a sweet-sounding madrigal known to both my master and myself.
(We often sang in St Mary's, Ipswich, my bass a good foil to Benjamin's tenor.
Even today there's nothing I like better than to sit in church on Sunday morning and lustily bawl out the hymns.)
But on that dusty track outside Maubisson I found the singing macabre.
This killer dressed like a popinjay, sweetly singing a madrigal to men he knew were his sworn enemies.
He stopped and looked at us.
‘I have a good voice, Messieurs?’
‘God only knows,’ I added sarcastically.
Vauban's eyes narrowed.
‘You know this song?
You will join me?’
Well, I don't know who was the more insane, he for singing or Benjamin and myself for joining in.
Where possible I changed the words, using every filthy, French word I knew.
(And believe me there are quite a few!)
But Vauban didn't mind.
We rode along like three troubadours from some romantic tale.
We finished just before we arrived at the main gate of the chateau.
‘I enjoyed that,’ Vauban said, leaning forward on his horse.
‘Perhaps we can do it again?
Our voices modulate well.’
‘I would love to,’ I replied.
‘Perhaps one day you can be our guest again in London.’
(In the Tower dungeons, I thought, stretched out on the cruellest rack I can find!)
Vauban positively beamed with pleasure, waved us goodbye like an affectionate friend, then he and his horsemen disappeared in a haze of dust.
Once we were arrived in the inner bailey Benjamin gave full vent to his feelings.
He tossed his horse's reins to a groom and went storming off looking for Dacourt.
I trailed behind, still shaking from a mixture of fear and  anger.
Benjamin found the ambassador in a small writing office near the great hall.
‘We must meet, Sir John.
All of us, now!’
‘Why?
Why?’
Dacourt was flustered.
‘Because I want the truth!’
Benjamin roared back.
The ambassador dithered so Benjamin stormed out, grasped a frightened servant and made him take us to where Clinton was sitting with the Lady Francesca in a small bower built against the chateau wall.
Lady Francesca smiled and simpered but, when she glimpsed me, her face became as hard as stone.
She rose and flounced off in a swish of skirts and a whiff of fragrant perfume.
I stood and listened to those sharp, high-heeled shoes clipping along the flagstones.
I shook my head and lowered my eyes.
I was sure she had been holding a small phial with the letters ‘SUL’ written on it.
I glanced at my master but he was too angry to notice, standing tapping the toe of his boot, waiting for Sir Robert to finish reading a letter.
At last Clinton carefully folded the document.
‘Master Daunbey, what is the matter?’
My master leaned forward and in curt, clear tones told him exactly what was the matter.
‘What do you want to do?’
Sir Robert asked.
‘I wish to hold a meeting,’ Benjamin rasped.
‘Of all the ambassador's staff.
I need to get certain matters clear and precise.
The French are just laughing at us as we stumble around in a fog.’
Clinton agreed and we all met in the great hall just before dusk.
The servants setting the tables ready for supper were summarily dismissed.
We all gathered on chairs in a semicircle round the hearth.
Dacourt, angry  that Benjamin had gone to Sir Robert, slurped noisily from a wine cup, then threw the dregs to hiss in the flames of the fire.
‘Master Daunbey,’ he grated, ‘we are busy men and you have convened this meeting.
Why?’
‘I am here,’ Benjamin answered, ‘as the official envoy of Cardinal Wolsey as well as His Majesty the King.
We have certain secret tasks to perform.’
I saw Dacourt fidget nervously at his words.
‘But our main task is to discover the identity of the traitor Raphael and bring to justice the murderers of Falconer and Waldegrave.
I suspect,’ Benjamin added, ‘they are one and the same person.’
He extended a hand.
‘Let us summarise.
How long has this traitor been in existence?’
‘About eighteen months,’ Clinton replied.
‘But we only learnt he was called Raphael about eight weeks ago, during my visit here before Lent.’
He leaned forward in his chair.
‘You may remember, Benjamin, I worked with Falconer and obtained that name?
Even though it cost us the life of a very good agent.’
‘Yes, yes,’ Benjamin said.
‘Now, I believe Falconer was murdered on Easter Monday?’
A chorus of assent greeted his words.
‘He drank some wine from the same bottle you did, Sir John, but he was not in his cups?’
Again there was agreement.
‘He was seen going to the top of the tower.
The Mary Tower, I believe?
And was found dead at the base of it the next morning?’
‘Yes,’ Peckle stammered.
‘We all know this, Master Daunbey.’
‘We also know,’ Benjamin continued, breathing deeply to contain his anger, ‘that on the Wednesday after Falconer was killed, Abbe Gerard from the nearby village also died in mysterious circumstances.
Tell me,’ he continued, ‘did anyone from Maubisson send Abbe Gerard gifts for Easter?’
The group sat silent.
‘Well,’ Benjamin asked.
‘Did anyone?’
Dacourt shuffled his feet.
‘I did.
I sent him some wine, the best of last year's grapes from Bordeaux, a silver dish of sweet comfits and some marchpane.’
‘When was this?’
‘On the Saturday before Easter.’
‘And what happened to these gifts?’
‘Good Lord!’
Dacourt bellowed.
‘I don't know.
The Abbe Gerard was a compassionate, charitable man but one who liked his claret.
I suspect he gave the comfits and marchpane to children in the village, sold the silver dish for alms and drank the wine himself.
It was only a small, stoppered jar.’
Dacourt's voice trailed off.
‘Are you saying the wine…?
But Throgmorton went down to examine the priest's corpse.’
‘Oh, we didn't know that,’ I interrupted.
‘Well, no,’ the physician replied.
‘Why should you?
I went down to examine the poor priest.
There was no sign of poison.
The man probably swooned, fell in the water and drowned.’
‘Master Benjamin,’ Peckle rose to his feet, ‘Sir John, we are busy men.
Do you have further questions?’
‘No,’ Benjamin replied crossly.
My master was still very angry and I was intrigued for he was the most gentle of men and very rarely testy or  sharp, even with fools.
(I have just given my chaplain a good rap across the knuckles; that will teach him to make remarks like, ‘And Master Daunbey had good knowledge of fools, having you as a servant.’)
Anyway, the meeting broke up, though Clinton and his manservant Venner remained seated until the rest had left the hall.
‘Tell me,’ Clinton asked softly, ‘this Vauban — did he know why you were in France?’
‘He said we were spies but even a child could deduce that.
He also knew we were interested in the Abbe Gerard but, again, that would not require deep perception.
Why do you ask, Sir Robert?’
‘He never mentioned Raphael?’
‘No, he didn't.’
Clinton said, ‘So, the Luciferi have still not learnt the true purpose of your mission.
You see,’ he leaned back in his chair, ‘here in the chateau, Dacourt and the rest of his staff know you wish to catch a spy but, so far, little information has been passed to the Luciferi.
Which means…’
‘Which means exactly what?’
I interrupted tartly.
‘That the spy here must have special means of conveying such information to his master and has so far failed to use it.
If you could discover that, then perhaps we can find out who Raphael is.’
‘Nevertheless,’ Benjamin answered, ‘Vauban did know we were here.
I think he was watching the chateau for days and followed us down to the village.’
‘Which brings us to my real point,’ Clinton answered.
‘Master Venner?’
The servant looked towards the door to make sure there was no one standing there.
‘Last night,’ Venner asked, ‘when Waldegrave's corpse was found, did you notice Millet?
He was fully dressed as if he had been out of the chateau.’
‘It could have been a lovers’ tryst,’I observed.
‘Perhaps,’ Venner sneered.
‘But Millet's tastes are obvious.
He dresses like a woman, the type of tryst he keeps is best hidden under the cloak of darkness.’
‘I have raised this matter with Dacourt,’ Clinton interrupted.
‘He did not even know Millet was absent.
I have asked him to keep the matter secret.
Perhaps Millet needs to be followed.’
Benjamin rubbed his face with his hands.
‘Yes,’ he observed drily.
‘Millet's conduct and dress last night were suspicious.
He could be the spy or his messenger.’
He smiled at Clinton.
‘And what you say makes sense, Sir Robert.
Vauban still does not know the true nature of our mission here.’
My master slapped the side of the chair.
‘Of course,’ he breathed, ‘we have been here only a few days.
We think Millet was returning.
Maybe we were wrong.
Perhaps he was on the point of leaving but the fracas caused by Waldegrave's death prevented him.’
Clinton rose to his feet.
‘We leave that to you, Master Daunbey.
If you wish, Venner could follow him.’
‘No, no,’ Benjamin replied.
‘Leave Master Millet to us.’
I watched Clinton and his manservant leave and once again the business of Agnes's death nagged at my memory.
(Do you know, years ago I asked a wise man who lived in a cave outside Alexandria why this happens?
Why something should trouble you, yet you are unable to place it or resolve the matter until months later?
He answered that we never know what a certain piece of  puzzle is until we see the rest and put the piece in place.)
Benjamin and I stayed in the hall whilst the servants returned and finished laying the tables for supper.
My master just sat staring into the flames of the fire.
‘What is the matter?’
I asked.
‘Why did Vauban make you so angry?’
‘I am puzzled, Roger,’ he replied.
‘Why were Falconer, the Abbe Gerard and Waldegrave murdered?
What is the connection between them?
Is their killer Raphael or someone else?
How does Raphael convey his secrets to the Luciferi?’
‘There is one common theme,’ I replied.
‘Which is?’
I ticked the points off on my fingers.
‘First, the secrets of the King's Council are not revealed until they have reached Maubisson.
Now we know the letters are opened by Dacourt and deciphered by Peckle, but Millet is Dacourt's secretary and will be privy to such information.
The same could be true of Throgmorton.
After all, physicians can wander where they wish and prise secrets from others.
Secondly, Falconer was murdered here at Maubisson after broaching a flagon of wine with Dacourt.
Thirdly, the Abbe Gerard apparently drowned after drinking claret which was undoubtedly sent to him by Dacourt, though taken down to the village probably by his secretary, Master Millet.
Fourthly, Waldegrave was killed by Dacourt's horse, Vulcan.’
‘And finally,’ Benjamin interrupted, ‘Master Millet has a tendency to slip out of the chateau at night to meet God knows whom.’
My master sat rocking himself gently in the chair.
‘The common denominators in all these factors, as a mathematician would say, are Dacourt and  Millet but, first, we don't know for certain if the wine sent to the Abbe Gerard was in fact the same he was drinking the night he died.
Secondly, we don't know if Millet took it.
Thirdly, the night Falconer died, Dacourt tasted the same wine he drank.’
‘We have only his word for that.’
‘Yes, but Throgmorton examined the wine later.
He said it was free of any infusion.
He also said neither Falconer nor the Abbe Gerard showed any signs of being poisoned.’
I watched my theories slowly crumble.
‘And, of course,’ I added wearily, ‘though Dacourt's horse killed Waldegrave, anyone could have dragged the drunken priest into the stable.’
Benjamin grinned and clapped me on the shoulder.
‘I did not say your reasoning was wrong, Roger, only that it was faulty.’
We stayed in the hall and dined with the rest of the company.
The conversation was desultory, passing from one banal matter to another.
Benjamin did establish that all memoranda, letters and documents sent from Westminster were handled by Dacourt, Peckle and Millet, whilst our mysterious young secretary did take the ambassador's presents down to the Abbe Gerard.
We retired to bed a little more hopeful that some glimmer of light had been shown but, just before I fell asleep, I realised Benjamin hadn't answered my question about disliking Vauban, so I asked him again.
‘Go to sleep, Roger,’ Benjamin drowsily replied.
‘I'll tell you in God's good time, as I will about the secret instructions dear Uncle gave me at Hampton Court.’
Chapter 7
They say lightning never strikes twice but it does when old Shallot's around.
I could hardly believe it.
We were aroused late that night by the most terrible screams and a pounding on the door.
I leapt from my bed and threw open the door.
(In my youth I was rash.
Now, I'd let someone else do it, whilst I checked to see what window I could jump out of!)
Peckle stood there, eyes rounded in fear.
‘The castle is under attack!’ he screamed.
‘Maillotins!
They are forcing the main gate!’
Benjamin and I seized our arms and rushed out.
This time I made sure my master went first and, whilst he ran down the stairs, I scampered like a rabbit to the top of the tower, forcing back the trap door, standing in the same place that poor Falconer had.
I looked up.
Stars dusted the sky but it was an attacker's moon which slipped treacherously in and out of the clouds.
I peered over the battlements.
The wind whipped at my hair whilst my stomach lurched in horror at the dreadful sight below.
The dark fields in front of the castle were covered in what seemed to be pinpricks of light until I realised they were men carrying torches, streaming towards the main gate.
Indeed, most of the fighting was taking place there.
I heard the hiss of arrows and the crashing of some makeshift battering  ram buckling the beams of the iron-studded gates.
The chateau was ill prepared.
I glimpsed half-dressed soldiers seizing crossbows and other armaments and heard Dacourt's voice on the breeze screaming out orders.
Most of our archers were massing in the gatehouse, shooting at those trying to force an entry.
I sobbed with fright, even as I addressed the one and only question which confronted me in such a dangerous situation.
Was I safe?
I huddled down beneath the parapet.
What happened if the gate was forced?
I could be trapped here at the top of the tower and be either forced to jump or killed like a rat trapped in a barn.
I pushed my head over the parapet.
Some of the chateau guards were on the curtain walls, forcing back the scaling ladders placed there.
Time, I thought, for me to leave.
I looked over to the side wall where the postern gate stood and went cold with terror.
More pinpricks of light were moving down there.
The attack on the main gate was merely a feint.
‘It's time old Shallot moved,’ I murmured.
‘Perhaps search out Benjamin?
Get out of the chateau, steal a horse and ride straight to Calais?’
I hurried down the tower steps, across the yard and into the outer bailey.
The noise was terrible.
Our assailants were now shooting fire arrows and these were already causing havoc amongst the defenders.
One soldier lay on the ground like a blazing torch.
Others had horrible black wounds to their faces and chests.
Dacourt stood grasping his sword like some hero from ancient Troy.
‘To the walls!’ he screamed.
‘To the walls!
Don't let the banners fall!’
I am sure the silly old bastard had suffered a blow to the head and believed he was playing out a role from some  heroic romance.
He saw me and yelled: ‘Shallot, where have you been?
Now is not the time for a faint heart!’
‘Piss off!’
I shouted, losing my temper.
‘The real attack is not here.
They are massing against the side wall!’
I waved my sword like a madman, screamed at some men-at-arms to follow me, and raced like a whippet to the postern gate.
We arrived to see the tops of the first ladder against the wall.
A burly serjeant-at-arms pushed me aside and bravely told ‘his lads’ to follow him up.
I stayed where I was, shouting out orders and near enough to the postern gate if things should go wrong.
Our archers caught the bastards just as they began to climb the scaling ladders, whilst men-at-arms, using the long forked poles lying on the parapet walk, shoved them out of the way.
I heard screams of anguish, then the attack faded away as suddenly as it came.
Dacourt, Clinton and the rest congregated in the main hall whilst servants lit torches and others brought ale or wine for the conquering heroes.
Horses were saddled and scouts sent out.
They soon returned, reporting the attackers had vanished, taking their dead and wounded with them.
Five of the chateau soldiers were killed and Benjamin had a small cut high on his cheek.
Dacourt estimated we had killed scores of our assailants but only three corpses were dragged in, all of them casualties of the ladder which had been pushed away from the outer wall.
They looked scruffy, dirty vermin though surprisingly well armed.
Now, I knew the Maillotins, the peasant rebels who lurked in the alleyways and runnels of Paris.
I'd lived with them for a while.
They were like me, experts in the sudden ambush.
Certainly not well armed, organised or brave enough to attack a chateau in the open countryside.
Dacourt praised my prompt heroic action and I played the role of the modest hero, gulping his wine and giving shrewd assessments of the strategy of the attackers.
However, when I doubted that the Maillotins had ever launched such an attack, Dacourt bellowed his disbelief.
‘I know these vermin!’ he declared.
‘They hate the English.
They grudge us our victories in France and the occupation of Calais.
No, no, the Maillotins were behind this.
Or, if not, who is?’
His watery blue eyes gazed bulbously at me so I let the fool have his way though Benjamin agreed with me.
‘They're too well fed,’ he commented.
‘And supplied with all the necessary arms.
Let's wait till the morning for I am sure Monsieur Vauban had a hand in this.’
Benjamin's words were prophetic.
The next morning Vauban and his horde of cavalry trotted into the castle grounds as if they were a welcoming relief.
Benjamin and I stayed well away from him as he consulted with Dacourt and Clinton.
Only when he had gone did my master ask what had happened.
‘Two things,’ Dacourt bellowed cheerfully.
‘Vauban will leave some of his horsemen camped outside the chateau walls against further attack.
Secondly, tomorrow is His Most Christian Majesty's naming day.
We have all been invited to the festivities at his palace of Fontainebleau.’
The ambassador grinned at both of us.
‘On behalf of all of you, I have accepted.’
Both Benjamin and I wisely kept our mouths shut until we were out of the main hall.
‘Vauban wanted that attack,’ Benjamin muttered.
‘He may wish to kill us all, or some of us.’
He stared down and studied one of the fire arrows dropped the previous night.
‘Or he could just have wished to have an excuse for placing men near the chateau to keep us under closer observation.
’ He smiled sideways at me.
‘But at least we will get to Fontainebleau.
A chance to meet His Most Christian Majesty!’
‘And examine his damned ring!’
I replied crossly.
‘Master, in God's name what are we to do about that?’
‘Nothing,’ Benjamin replied.
‘At Fontainebleau we do nothing but watch and listen.’
He seized me by the arm.
‘At no time, Roger, do we make our move there.
What are we but simple Englishmen?
The French king is well guarded and he covets that ring more than honour itself.
Whatever temptations are presented to us, we must not react.’
‘And if we fail to take it?’
I asked dourly.
Benjamin grinned.
‘In that case, my dear Roger, we learn French well and make friends with Monsieur Vauban because we can never return to England.’
We left the chateau early the following morning, each of us resplendent in whatever finery we could pluck from our wardrobes.
Actually, we looked like a group of crows compared to the Lady Francesca who was resplendent in a gown of gold brocade trimmed with lynx skins.
We reached Fontainebleau late that afternoon, and how can I describe it?
Its great round towers, the dancing outlines of precise yet beautiful Italian architecture, the splendid red spire of St Hubert's Chapel, the great clock with dogs chasing a stag; on the hour, the bark of the dogs accompanied each chime whilst the stag moved to sound the final chime.
Thirteen staircases, hundreds of rooms, alabaster statues of Cupid and Venus with others sculpted in fleshy bronzeness by the French king's Italian artists.
All around the palace were cool, lime-shaded gardens full of lilies, violets and wood sorrel; now and again, white-colonnaded courtyards with shimmering pavements of alternating black and white marble stone.
The rooms inside were stuffed with the loot from Francis's expeditions into Italy; tapestries, more statues, gold and silver artefacts, jewelled vases, and the softest carpets of pure wool in various hues.
Grooms took our horses, and minions in the blue and gold tabards of the French king led Sir Robert and Lady Francesca away.
Dacourt also was provided with his own chamber but we were taken to the top of the palace.
Any higher and we would have been on the bloody roof, and squeezed into rather mean, dark garrets.
Now I have always been very particular whom I sleep with and I didn't like sharing my room with a possible murderer.
I also resented the way Millet was simpering at me.
He was wearing more lace than the Lady Francesca!
I'll keep away from you, my fine bucko, I thought, and if I drop anything I'll kick it to the door before I pick it up.
(No, my chaplain is wrong.
I'm not being unkind.
I just find such people strange though I admit some, like Marlowe, have been great friends.
What I am saying is, it depends on the person.
Marlowe was charming, witty, and very, very funny, but there was something about Millet I didn't like.)
Peckle grumbled about the treatment due to envoys but the good physician, Throgmorton, laughed sourly and said he was pleased to be as far away from the Frogs as possible.
Servants brought up our baggage, we unpacked, then heard a knocking on the wall outside.
Benjamin, who had been sitting on the edge of his trestle bed, got up and opened the door.
He looked out and came  back, torn between anger and laughter.
‘What's the matter, Daunbey?’
Throgmorton asked.
‘The French have just put a painting up outside our room.’
‘Oh, that's nice,’ Peckle observed sarcastically.
‘What is it?
A picture of the French defeat at Agincourt?’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘La Belle Jardiniere.’
‘So what?’
I muttered.
‘What the hell are they doing?’
‘The painting's by Raphael,’ Benjamin replied.
‘They are mocking us.’
Do you know, that's the first time I began to wonder about the name Raphael.
Why did the spy use it?
Why not Ragwort?
Or Fat Cheeks?
Why Raphael?
The name of an angel, an archangel to be sure, and therefore linked to Vauban's motley crew, but also the name of a great Italian painter.
Our debate on this intended insult by the French was summarily ended: a wand-bearing chamberlain told us to assemble in the great hall below for the rare privilege of an audience with His Most Christian Majesty.
Dacourt and the Clintons were waiting for us, Sir Robert dressed in cream silken hose, darted below the knees, and padded doublet and breeches of dark sea blue; Lady Francesca was clothed all in white, a small, lace veil over her lovely hair, pearls clasped round her neck.
I gasped at her beauty and, like the rest, threw envious glances at her most fortunate husband.
Dacourt, however, was dressed as if he didn't give a damn, in sloppy jerkin and breeches which would have shamed an intelligent plough boy.
Millet giggled and, whispering to the old soldier that his points were undone, asked did he wish to astonish the French with his apparent prowess?
Dacourt laughed gruffly and turned surreptitiously away to adjust his dress.
The snotty-nosed chamberlain tapped his wand on the floor and we were led along marble corridors, through chambers being prepared for the great banquet, past nobles draped in velvet and cloth of gold, retainers in blue, violet and scarlet liveries, all chatting merrily in French.
They stood aside and let us pass, though we heard the sniggers and laughter caused by their little jokes.
We stopped before a great, gold-embossed door and the chamberlain turned.
‘You are,’ he announced in English, ‘to be ushered into the presence of His Most Christian Majesty.’
(Most Christian Majesty…that was the biggest lie, especially when Francis was allied to the Ottoman Turks, who were devils incarnate.
You wait till you read my later journals.
I still wake trembling at the-horrors I suffered at Suleiman's silk-draped, terror-filled court.)
Anyway, at Fontainebleau the doors were thrown open so we could feast our eyes on this Most Christian of Kings.
We all trooped in, two by two, as if we were the animals going into Noah's bloody ark.
The room shimmered with light, a treasure house of precious cloths and beautiful jewels.
At the far end I glimpsed a small crowd who stopped talking and drew apart at our approach.
I glimpsed a cloth of state under which two figures sat on thrones and then the devil Vauban appeared.
He looked gorgeous, dressed in a pink silk gown with a gold-tasselled cord round his waist.
He wore blue leggings and his feet were pushed into soft leather buskins.
His chest gleamed like a mirror as the thick, cheap jewellery draped across it caught the sunlight.
Down each arm, from shoulder to sleeve, gleamed those bloody little bells which tinkled every time he moved.
He smiled effusively, gave a  mock bow, and went to stand beside one of the thrones.
‘May I present,’ he announced, ‘Sir Robert Clinton and his wife, the Lady Francesca, Sir John Dacourt and the other English envoys.’
By now I had forgotten Vauban and was surreptitiously staring at the two seated figures.
Francis and his Queen Claude perched like waxen images under a cloth of state of red silk, the oriflamme.
The thrones they sat on were fluted and heavily decorated with clusters of mother-of-pearl along the back and arms.
We all bowed, then Dacourt began the usual boring, diplomatic speech bearing messages from Francis's ‘brother’ the King of England.
I noticed a flicker of a smile cross the French king's face at the usual flowery hypocrisies; Francis hated Henry and the English king responded in kind.
In a way I preferred Francis.
He was a big-nosed bastard with heavy-lidded eyes, high forehead and a weak mouth which he hid beneath a moustache and beard.
He was dressed in cloth of gold from head to toe, a simple crown on his head, and I could see he was as bored as I by Dacourt's vapid pleasantries.
You see, Francis was the Salamander King, that wondrous creature of magic which was surrounded by fire but never burnt.
Someone had called him this more as an insult than a compliment but Francis took a liking to it and you will find salamanders carved all over his palaces.
You know, he shouldn't have been king.
He was fortunate enough to marry Louis XII's only daughter and so became the appointed successor.
And what a change!
Old Louis, feeble and doddering, choking on his own spit.
Henry VIII saw him off or, more truthfully, his sister Mary did.
You see she was as hot for the joys of the bed as her brother, the Great Killer.
She was married for three months to poor old Louis before he collapsed and died of exhaustion and Mary went home to marry the love of her life, Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
If she had been married to Francis, Mary might have had a harder time for he was a consummate bed player.
As one of his courtiers later whispered to me, ‘He slips readily into the gardens of others and drinks water from many fountains.’
Oh, yes, Francis was ardent, he had his own petite bande, a group of young blondes led by Madame D'Estampes who joined in the antics on the black satin sheets of his bed.
Do you know, at Fontainebleau he set up a system of mirrors so he could watch his young ladies pose and inspect them from every angle, whilst his palaces were full of secret passageways with peep-holes in every bedroom for Francis was deeply interested in the sexual exploits of others.
(Poor Francis!
Yes, I say ‘poor’.
At Fontainebleau he was full of the juices of spring but that's before he caught syphilis and his nether parts began to drop off.
He got it from La Belle Fertoniere: her husband knew she had syphilis and allowed Francis to seduce her.
King Francis became so rotten that when they took his corpse to St Denis they had to put it in a lead coffin.
It still stank and his nobles were so keen to avoid the putrid smell, they sent waxen images of themselves to the church.
Can you imagine it?
A church full of wax statues mourning a waxen image?)
Ah, the passage of time!
When I met Francis on the first occasion in that throne room, life had not turned sour for him.
He was still the great lover, and the woman beside him was the reason for his constant philandering.
Queen Claude — or ‘Clod’ as the courtiers called her — was fat, lame and revolting.
Yet she had a kind heart!
(Ah, there goes my clerk, the clever little fool: ‘You're no better than Henry VIII!’ he cries.
‘You, too, regard women as objects of lust!’
What the hell does the little hypocrite know?
Don't you worry, some of the women I've met have proved to be the most formidable of foes.
Like little Catherine de Medici who married King Francis's son, Henry.
She practised the black arts.
Oh, yes, I know about the secret metal box she owned; her turreted chamber at Blois with its magic mirror which told her the future; and her employment of that terrible prophet Nostradamus who prophesied the end of the world.
I'll tell you some other time about Catherine's special squad of ladies, the Escadron Volant, whom she used to seduce her opponents.
I'll finish with this about women: they make the best of friends and the worst of enemies!
A man forgives and forgets.
A woman can forgive but she never forgets.
You mark Shallot's words!)
Now in that room at Fontainebleau so many years ago, I studied Francis but my eyes were drawn to that bloody ring which sparkled on the fourth finger of his left hand.
I knew it was the one Henry wanted back.
The French king, his elbows resting on the arms of the throne, kept playing with the ring, taking it on and off, twirling it around, whilst throwing heavy-lidded glances and the soupcon of a smirk at Benjamin and myself.
Beside him Vauban seemed to share the joke; that extraordinary bastard leaned against the arm of the throne as if he was the king's brother, openly stifling a yawn at Dacourt's ponderous phrases.
The ambassador, however, kept rambling on.
Lord, I thought, he'll never shut up.
I even considered swooning so as to get out of the room when suddenly a secret door  just behind the throne was thrown open and the most incredible sight emerged: a man, black as night, well over two yards high.
A crimson turban was wrapped round his head, the upper part of his body was bare except for gold bands round his arms and wrists.
He wore white, baggy trousers which billowed like silken sails and red, high-heeled, velvet slippers with ornately curled toes.
Dacourt stopped speaking and gaped like a carp.
The big, black mameluke was an eye-catching sight but the beasts which went before him on silver chains were really alarming.
Two great cats, amber-eyed, with tufted ears and spotted skins of burnished gold, padded as soft as death across the polished floor.
The French king suddenly stirred, laughed and clapped his hands.
‘Akim, you're late!’
The mameluke grinned vacuously, his mouth opening like a great, red cavern.
I closed my eyes in disgust.
Where the tongue should have been was a rag of skin.
‘Monsieur Dacourt,’ Francis announced in perfect English, ‘I apologise for the tardy arrival and abrupt interruption of your eloquent speech by Akim and his cats.
By the way, I call them Gabriel and Raphael.
They are a gift from the Pasha of North Africa.
’ The king waved the mameluke to a small stool next to Queen Claude who continued to sit there as if carved from stone.
It was then that I noticed something suspicious.
Never once had the French king offered a seat to Lady Francesca, who stood gazing at the monarch, an awed, frightened expression on her beautiful face.
What really intrigued me was that Francis always honoured women but on this occasion he studiously ignored the Lady Francesca.
Indeed, the only persons the French king seemed