

The day after Sir Nelson Fettiplace's death was announced in Swinbrook church, Magistrate Arnold Peck, accompanied by a full company of local militiamen, rode through Swinbrook village — and no one was in any doubt about his destination.
Christian certainly was not.
He was layering a hedge in one of his top fields when he saw the party riding along the road towards the forest.
Arriving in the stables which Seb was cleaning out, he panted, ‘Quick.
Get up to the gipsy camp and warn 'em.
Magistrate Peck's on his way there with a whole lot of militiamen.
I don't know what he's up to, but it can only mean trouble.’
Seb hurriedly threw a saddle on Romni and rode off across country.
The mare was not as fast as Grye but she had the edge on the stallion when it came to jumping, and Seb did not intend stopping to open any gates.
He crossed the road well ahead of the militiamen and rode into the encampment where the wedding was still being celebrated.
There were many bodies lying around, some gipsies were drunk, others simply exhausted.
The dancing was still going on too, although Seb thought the playing of the fiddlers lacked the exuberance of the first night.
Seb rode to where Noah Plunkett still sat on his sheepskin ‘throne’, giving the impression he had remained in the same place since the wedding party  began.
Seb told the gipsy leader of the approach of the magistrate.
‘How many militiamen are with him?’
‘Somewhere between sixty and eighty, I'd say.’
‘That's too many for us to frighten away with a show of force.’
A number of gipsy men had crowded around to learn why Seb had come galloping into the camp and now Noah Plunkett turned to them and began issuing orders in the Romany tongue.
The men and women lying around on the ground were roughly shaken awake.
Those too drunk to stand were dragged away to their tents and caravans.
When the fiddler leading the dancing stopped playing and asked what was going on, he was ordered to carry on, as though nothing was happening.
A rapid tidying up of the encampment was carried out.
It seemed Noah wanted the magistrate to find nothing with which he could possibly take issue.
When the magistrate and his party from Burford reached the encampment, the militiamen took up positions virtually surrounding the celebrating gipsies.
Peck, accompanied by an officer and two armed and nervous militiamen, rode to the centre of the clearing and Noah rose from his sheepskin to meet them.
‘Who is the leader here?’
Magistrate Peck asked the question whilst looking directly at Noah.
‘There is no leader.’
Noah spoke with the caution bred of years spent dealing with authority.
‘But I'm willing to act as a spokesman if you feel one is needed.’
‘I have an injunction declaring these festivities to be a public nuisance and ordering you to cease immediately.’
‘A public nuisance in the heart of a great forest like Wychwood?’
‘The death was announced yesterday of Sir Nelson Fettiplace, lord of Swinbrook Manor and a verderer of Wychwood Forest.
To have a noisy celebration going on at such a time is causing considerable distress to the family of the late Sir Nelson.’
Arnold Peck looked about him.
‘What's more, I see a great many men here whom I recognise as having already been convicted of vagrancy offences.
You will all be taken into custody and escorted to Burford by the militia.
There you will be charged with various offences against the Vagrancy Act —’
‘You are Magistrate Peck, I believe?’
Noah Plunkett interrupted the mounted man.
‘I am.
I don't think I caught your name?’
Peck was annoyed at the interruption, but there was something in the bearing of the man who stood before him which could not be ignored.
‘My name is Noah Plunkett.
I am well known in much of the country by various men of standing including the Duke of Marlborough.
He, as I am sure you know, is Ranger of Wychwood Forest, an office bestowed upon him by the monarch of this realm.’
Noah's statement and the manner in which he delivered it took Arnold Peck aback, but he said haughtily, ‘I've never heard of you, sir.’
Unconcerned by Peck's manner, Noah replied, ‘Nor I of you until I came to Oxfordshire to attend the wedding of my daughter.
I am told you were recently criticised by a learned judge for wrongly sending a Romany for trial to the Assizes in Oxford?’
‘This is impertinence, sir!
I uphold the law of this  realm — and the law states quite clearly that vagrants are rogues and vagabonds.
The scourge of the countryside.
As such they should be lodged in gaol.’
‘I suggest that most of the sentiments you express so forcibly are your own, Mr Peck.
The Act of which you speak states equally clearly that a rogue and vagabond is a person who wanders abroad without any visible means of subsistence.
I wish to point out that such a definition applies to none of the people present in this forest today.
I personally guarantee that every man, woman and child in this gathering has fifty pounds at his or her disposal.’
Noah's knowledge of the law applicable to gipsies surprised Arnold Peck, but now he glanced about him at the listening gipsies.
Turning a scornful look upon the gipsy spokesman, he said, ‘What you are suggesting is quite preposterous.
There must be five hundred gipsies here at least.’
‘There are seven hundred and sixty Romanies making a total of thirty-eight thousand pounds, I believe.
Do you doubt I have such a sum?’
‘Your finances are no concern of mine.’
In spite of his continued haughtiness in speaking to the gipsy, Noah's authoritative manner had badly shaken the magistrate's confidence.
‘I am here to ensure that the laws of the land are obeyed.’
‘And so they shall be.
We are gathered here to celebrate a marriage but, in deference to the family of the late verderer and lord of the manor, our celebrations will cease.
However, if you attempt to arrest any man or woman here on a charge of vagrancy I will see they are defended in your court — and in any higher court to which they may be sent for trial.
What's more, if I deem it to be necessary I shall call upon the Duke of Marlborough to give evidence on our behalf.’
‘A…a duke give evidence on behalf of gipsies!’
Arnold Peck spluttered his indignation.
‘I have never heard of anything so absurd.’
‘I doubt if you'll have heard of a Romany having a magistrate removed from office either, Mr Peck, but make one arrest here and you're very likely to be the first.’
Arnold Peck glowered at the man who stood before him.
Noah Plunkett was as calm as though they were discussing the state of the weather.
He was bluffing, of course, and yet…
The officer commanding the militia had been listening to the conversation between the two men with growing unease.
The Duke of Marlborough wielded enormous power in the county.
He could have a militia unit disbanded if he wished.
The officer regretted putting his men at Peck's disposal.
He should have known better than agree to support a magistrate whose hatred of gipsies was so well known.
What had begun as an amusing jaunt for the militia showed every promise of ending in disaster.
‘I think you and I should draw aside and discuss this matter, Mr Magistrate.’
‘You are here to assist me in upholding the law, sir.
Nothing more.’
Having firmly put the militia officer in his place and redeemed some of his own wounded pride, Arnold Peck said to Noah, ‘Do you agree to abide by the terms of the injunction I came here to serve upon you?’
Noah nodded.
‘I have already said so.’
‘Very well.’
Inclining his head to the militia officer, Arnold Peck said, ‘We have performed the duty for which we came here.
We may return to Burford.’
As the last of the militiamen were swallowed up by the forest a great roar of delight rose from the gipsies and they crowded around Noah to congratulate him on the unexpected victory he had scored over the Burford magistrate.
When the tumult died down and Seb was able to hear himself speak, he asked Noah, ‘Do you really know the Duke of Marlborough?’
‘We've met,’ declared the gipsy Leader, ambiguously.
‘I doubt if His Grace would ever stand up in a court-room to give evidence on my behalf, but I counted on Magistrate Peck being afraid to put it to the test.’
Smiling benignly at Seb, the gipsy leader said, ‘One of the most important lessons to learn in this life is that if you wish to convince someone of anything you must first convince yourself.
At the time I was talking to the magistrate I had no doubt at all that the Duke of Marlborough would give evidence for me, if necessary.
The time for doubts would have come afterwards.’
Draping an arm about Seb's shoulders, Noah said, ‘Thank you for warning us of the magistrate's approach, Seb.
You've once again proved your friendship to the Romany people.
You'll find it won't be forgotten.’
As Seb walked to where he had tied Romni his name was called and he turned to find Anna walking towards him.
He thought her arms were outstretched for him, but realised with a pang of disappointment they were to ward off any obstruction that might be between them.
Behind her, Nahum was looking on with an unsmiling face.
‘I'm here, Anna.’
When Seb spoke to guide her, she came unerringly to him and reached out to take his hand.
‘Were you going to leave yet again without saying goodbye to me, Seb?’
‘I didn't think it would matter to you any more than it did before.’
‘Of course it matters to me — but I thought you were being well entertained by others on the evening of the wedding.’
‘I'd have enjoyed it more had you found time to speak to me.’
Anna looked unhappy.
‘It's not easy being blind, Seb.
I was dancing much of the time on the wedding day.
When I returned I listened for you.
When I didn't hear you I thought you must be dancing too.’
‘You could have found out where I was by asking your fianc.’
Anna released his hand.
‘Oh!
So you know about that?’
‘It's true, then?’
‘Yes, Seb, it's true.
I should have told you myself, but somehow the opportunity was never there.’
‘What you mean is, you hoped I'd find out from someone else.
Well, you had your way.
I did find out from someone else.’
‘From Melody, no doubt.’
Anna caught her breath and then said, very quietly, ‘You're quite right, Seb.
I didn't want to tell you.
I didn't know how.’
‘How long have you been betrothed to Nahum?’
‘For so long it just didn't seem real any longer.
I still  had my sight when the marriage was arranged between our families.
I don't think any of Nahum's family realised I was blind until they arrived for Boz's wedding to Alamena.
They were so shocked that for a while I was convinced they would go away and not only cancel our betrothal but probably the wedding between Boz and Alamena as well.’
‘Well, Boz and Alamena are married now, so I suppose your wedding to Nahum is still on too?’
‘Yes, Seb.’
Anna's reply came out as hardly more than a whisper.
‘Will you be leaving the forest when Nahum and his family go?’
‘No, I'll be staying here for a while, sharing the caravan with Boz and Alamena.’
‘Then I'll be seeing you again — unless Nahum forbids it.
He's watching us right now so I've no doubt he'll have something to say about it to you.’
‘Nahum won't mind me talking to you.
He understands we're friends, and he likes you.
I'm more concerned about you, Seb.
I'm sorry I've hurt you, truly I am.
Can't we stay friends?
I'd like…
I want you as my friend, Seb.’
‘No, Anna.
It would only be possible if I didn't love you, but I do.’
Nahum was approaching now.
He was not hurrying, but his attitude suggested he thought Anna and Seb had been talking together for quite long enough.
Without another word, Seb untied the mare's reins, mounted and rode away.
As he left the encampment behind, a slim, ragged figure emerged from the undergrowth to intercept him.
Melody was the last person he wanted to see at this moment, but he reined in when she called him.
‘Hello, Seb.
I saw you talking to Anna.
Did she tell you about her and Nahum?’
‘Yes.’
‘You see, I wasn't lying to you.’
Melody looked up at his drawn face and said, ‘I'm sorry it was me that told you, Seb, but I'm not sorry about what we did afterwards, are you?’
Seb looked down at her and wished all the happenings of that night could be obliterated from his memory.
But Melody had her face turned up to him eagerly and he remembered other details of Boz's wedding night party: his meeting with Melody's mother and the small, shabby tent that was her home.
He remembered their talk together and the bleak picture she had painted for him of her life.
Seb had an ache inside him caused by Anna that he believed would never leave him.
Yet he had friends, the love of his mother and he lived a full life.
Melody had nothing.
She had never had anything, and her future was equally as hopeless as her past.
‘No, Melody, I'm not sorry for what we did.
You were very kind to me at a time when I needed comforting and I'm grateful to you.’
As he rode away, Seb thought it had been a very small lie, yet it had brought an expression of joy to Melody's face that he would never forget.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
Christmas was a happy time in Swinbrook for Seb and his mother.
They shared the festivities with Tom, Carrie and Christian, dividing their time between the three houses and enjoying a spell of mild weather that did not last into January.
Seb saw little of the Wychwood gipsies during the hard winter months that followed Christmas.
There were weeks of unremitting frost, occasional snowstorms, and periods of rain that seemed to soak right through the body to chill the bones.
Occasionally one or two gipsy women made their way to Handley Farm from the forest to buy flour.
Others called at Fern Cottage to sell pegs or other wares, made during the short, grey winter days.
Melody still came to the farm to help out with dairy work, but these days, much to Seb's relief, she seemed content just to be near him, making no embarrassing demands.
She brought with her news of the gipsy encampment- and of Anna.
It seemed the blind girl found living with Boz and his bride very restricting, but due to the bad weather she was not allowed to leave the camp for much of the winter.
Seb spent many of the long winter evenings at the Hankses' cottage and his reading and writing improved so much that Carrie was reluctantly forced to admit  there was little more she could teach him in these two spheres of learning.
Then, almost overnight it seemed, Oxfordshire suddenly threw off the mantle of winter.
With the advent of new life in the forest and fields about Swinbrook village, Tom Hanks and Dolly Quilter arranged to be married in the small chapel alongside Fern Cottage.
Amelia Putt had dropped her objection to the wedding of one of her employees taking place in chapel and not church when she learned the identity of Tom's bride-to-be.
Had she insisted on the couple marrying in the village church she would have been obliged to attend the ceremony.
Mrs Putt had no wish to acknowledge her former scullery-maid.
For the same reason, Tom was informed he would not be obliged to attend Sunday services at the church with his new wife.
He was free to follow his inclinations and join the worshippers at the Methodist chapel, if he so wished.
‘It's an unexpected and welcome bonus,’ declared Tom, happily, when he passed on the news.
‘I rarely get away from church without someone finding something for me to do up at the manor.
Mrs Putt might want a stall cleared out and fresh straw put in for some company she's expecting, or she'll want me to hitch up a carriage so she can go visiting.
As for Mr Meredith!
I dread going to church when he's home.
No matter that I'm dressed up in my Sunday clothes.
He expects me to carry on up at the manor as though it's just another working day.?
Tom was speaking when the Hanks and Quilter families were meeting with Christian in Tom's cottage to discuss details of the forthcoming wedding.
‘Has young Meredith changed any of his wild ways  since he took over the reins at the manor?’
The question came from Christian, who sat astride a bench seat at the kitchen table, contentedly puffing on a smoke-blackened clay pipe.
‘Not him!
All it's done is to give him more money to gamble away up in London.
The servants in the house say he and his mother have some dreadful quarrels about his ways.
Last time he came home she said if things went on as they are for much longer he'd lose the manor and the farm on the turn of a card!’
‘It's a pity you can't find work away from that place, Tom,’ said Dolly, shaking her head in concern.
‘I'd be much happier knowing you and I weren't at the beck and call of such a man.’
‘Ah well, you never know,’ said Tom, winking affectionately at his daughter.
‘If young Seb can add to the three horses he's got now he'll soon be needing someone to help him out.
He might find it useful having an old man like me around to give him a few tips on how to manage horses.’
‘I'm working on it, Tom,’ declared Seb.
‘If things go well I hope within a twelve-month to double the number of horses I own.’
‘There's ambition for you!’ exclaimed Dolly, proudly.
‘But you're not old, Tom!’
She gave her future husband a playful dig in the ribs with her elbow.
‘You're hardly older than me, and I've a year or two to go before I'm forty.’
‘You'm right, Dolly.
Why, we might even start another family!’
‘Yes, and I might one day be Queen of England!
We'll keep our feet firmly on the ground if you don't mind, Tom Hanks.’
‘While we're talking of being practical’— Christian removed the pipe from his mouth —‘have you both given any thought to where you'll be living when you're married?’
‘I'm sorry, Christian, Tom and I ought to have discussed it with you.
We've talked about it and decided we'd move in here, in Tom's cottage.
He has a lifetime's belongings here and we could hardly expect Carrie to move into Fern Cottage.’
‘You'll both be moving into Tom's cottage, you and Seb?’
‘Of course.’
Christian had been watching Seb while Dolly was talking and now he asked, ‘Is this the way you see it, Seb?’
‘Well, no, it isn't.’
‘What do you mean it isn't?’
Dolly demanded.
‘You can't stay here on your own.’
‘Why not?
You'll still be working up at the farm and I'll be having my midday meals up there, same as I do now.
Some evenings I expect I can come along and eat with you, Tom and Carrie.’
‘But who'd do your washing, clean the house and make your bed for you?’
‘You can carry on doing my washing, if that will please you — and knowing you as I do, I don't doubt you'll be in here at least once or twice a week clearing things up and telling me what a mess I'm living in — just as you do now.
Besides, it makes sense, Ma.
There are only two bedrooms at Tom's house.
Where would we all sleep?’
‘I don't know, Seb.
I don't like to think of you in the cottage all by yourself.’
‘I shouldn't worry yourself, Dolly,’ said Carrie, with apparent innocence.
‘I expect Melody will come and keep him company sometimes.’
‘Melody in Fern Cottage with Seb, without me around to keep an eye on the pair of ‘em?
Oh no, my lad, you'll come with me, like I say.’
‘Seb's idea makes sense, Dolly.’
Christian came down on Seb's side when the laughter of Carrie and Tom had ceased.
‘Tom might have been talking in jest a while back, but there's nothing to say you won't have another family between the two of you.
If you do it would be a tight squeeze for you all in Tom's house.
Besides, Sir Meredith Putt's not the most stable man these days.
He might one day get it into his head to dismiss Tom.
At least this way you'll still have a home to move into.’
‘Um!
All right, I'll think seriously about it.’
By the end of the evening there was only one person in the room who still felt strongly about Seb living in Fern Cottage on his own.
Yet Carrie dared not speak out for fear they would question her reasons, and she was not clear about them herself.
She only knew she was bitterly disappointed that she and Seb would not be living under the same roof.
The wedding of Tom and Dolly was as quiet as that of Boz and Alamena had been rowdy, although the chapel was far more crowded than Seb had anticipated.
Dolly was still not very well known in the village but Tom was a popular member of the community.
It was a warm but simple ceremony and, as at the previous wedding, the Burford minister officiated, with Christian assisting him.
Afterwards a small party was  held at Christian's farmhouse, attended only by the bride and groom, Seb and Carrie, Christian and the minister, together with half a dozen villagers who were related to Tom.
The weather had been kind for Boz's wedding but it was less so for Tom and Dolly.
Bitterly cold, it rained hard, although, once inside Christian's snug farmhouse, no one cared very much.
Seb was in the kitchen fetching ale for the men when, through the window, he saw Melody.
Barefooted and bare-armed, she was bringing in the cows from the fields for milling.
She wore no coat and was soaked through.
When he took the ale into the warm farmhouse living room and saw everyone standing around the crackling log fire with food and drinks in their hands, he thought again of what he had just seen through the kitchen window.
Returning to the kitchen, Seb filled a pint pot with ale from the small barrel and shovelled a large portion of hot meat pie into a dish.
Opening the door, he splashed his way across the farmyard to the milking parlour.
There was room for eight cows in here and every stall was full, but he could see no sign of the half-gipsy girl.
‘Melody, are you in here?’
Hearing a movement that sounded too quick for a cow, he called again, ‘Where are you?’
‘I'm up here, Seb.
In the loft.’
Melody sounded as though she was speaking through chattering teeth and he climbed the ladder, carefully balancing pie and ale.
‘I've brought this for you.’
His head rose above the floor level of the hay-loft in time to see a great deal more of Melody than he had anticipated as she slipped  her ragged clothes back on.
‘I just dried myself with some hay and wrung out my dress before putting it back on.
It'll soon dry on me while I'm leaning against the cows, they're warm, they are.’
‘And wet.
You'll catch your death of cold if you're not careful.
Here, take this.
I saw you through the window and thought you could probably do with something to eat and drink.’
‘You've brought it out here, specially for me?’
Melody's delight and incredulity were genuine, but it did not prevent her from taking the food and drink from his hands and bolting it as though she were starving.
From what Seb had seen of her body — and he had seen a great deal— he suspected it was not far from the truth.
When the pie had gone and half the ale been downed, she offered the tankard to him.
‘It's good.
D'you want some?’
‘There's plenty in the house.
I brought this for you.
I'd better get back now.
I can't have them all trooping out in their wedding finery looking for me.’
Seb had two feet on the ladder when Melody took him by surprise and caught him in a hug.
Pressing herself close as she kissed him, she pleaded, ‘Can't you stay here for a while, Seb?
You and me in the hay, like that night in the forest…do you remember?’
Her body moved against his, leaving him in no doubt what she meant, whether he remembered or not.
‘No, Melody.
If I don't get back they'll miss me.
They might even be on their way across here now.
If Christian catches us he won't have you back on the farm again.’
Melody released him reluctantly — and only just in time.
The door to the cow-shed opened and Carrie stood there.
‘I saw you come over here and guessed Melody would be somewhere near.
Can't you wait until you have a cottage to yourself and can do what you like with your life, Seb Quilter?’
‘I saw Melody through the window.
She was bringing the cows in and was soaked through.
I brought her some hot pie and ale.’
When Carrie looked at Melody's dripping hair hanging all about her face and the sodden dress clinging to her body, she realised Seb was telling the truth and her face lost its tightness.
‘Melody, you'll catch a chill if you stay like that.
You must go back and change into something dry.’
‘I've nothing to change into, but I'll be all right now I've had a drink, and something nice and hot to eat.’
‘I suspect it's probably the first decent meal you've had for days, Melody.
Isn't that so?’
Melody did not reply to Seb's question, but her face gave her away.
‘You just wait here.
I'm going back to the farmhouse to fetch my coat, then you'll come with me to our cottage.’
Carrie's tone of voice brooked no argument.
‘I've had to clear out lots of things to make room for Dolly, including a couple of dresses.
They're not all that good, but they're better than that soaking wet rag you're wearing now.
You'd better come back to the farmhouse too, Seb.
They're calling for you to give some sort of speech.’
As Carrie limped back to the house beside Seb, she said, ‘You'll need to watch yourself, Seb.
Melody is a  poor soul and I feel very sorry for her.
She's never had a chance in life — but she trades on her ill-luck.
One day someone is going to feel so sorry for her he'll end up marrying her.
You're soft on those who've been treated badly by life — and if you're not very careful it might well be you.’
As she limped into the farmhouse behind Seb, Carrie thought of her own words.
She wondered why Seb had never fallen for her.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
In April of that year, Seb took two of the Handley Farm horses to the Spring Fair at nearby Witney.
Riding Grye, he led the cart-horses, tied to ropes behind him.
As was usually the way when the magnificent horses were offered for sale, they sold within the hour, leaving Seb to look around at the other animals and sample the pleasures offered to the fair-goers.
Towards noon, Seb went in search of something to eat before making the return journey to Swinbrook.
As he walked through the centre of the town he saw a large group of navvies sauntering across the wide market square, whistling at the women and calling out to any particularly young or good-looking girls — or those of any age who were careless enough to throw a smile in their direction.
Among their number Seb recognised Jacob Brailey, the Cockney gang-boss whom he had last met at the Wychwood Forest Fair.
Jacob saw Seb at almost the same time.
Breaking away from his fellow navvies he elbowed through the crowd to shake Seb vigorously by the hand.
‘It's good to see you here, lad.
Have you come to ride in the race this afternoon?’
‘I didn't know there was one,’ said Seb honestly.
‘Didn't know…
Why, damn me, boy.
I thought that was why you was here.
You've disappointed me  now.
The race could have been laid on especially for that horse you rode before.
Four miles long and over some good country.’
‘I own the horse now.
I rode it to the market today.’
‘Well, there you are, then!
There's twenty-five guineas to the winner — and if you had some money to back yourself to win you could make as much as that again.’
Seb had ten pounds in his pocket, saved from his previous winnings.
He had brought it in the hope of finding a second-hand saddle of his own.
Until now he had been using one loaned to him by Christian.
He reached a rapid decision.
‘Grye's in good condition.
As fit as he was at the Wychwood Forest Fair.
If I enter him for the race will you wager ten pounds for me?’
‘Ten for you, ten for me and as much as the others can add to it.
You go and enter your horse for that race, lad, and I'll be there to cheer you on when you're first past the winning-post.’
Seb had no difficulty entering Grye for the race.
There were only seven other runners.
The organisers were eager to attract more entries.
When someone there recognised Seb as the jockey who had won the previous year's race at the Wychwood Forest Fair it created a sudden surge of interest and betting became very much brisker.
There was no horse of Vulcan's calibre in this race and Seb went to the front half-way around the four-mile course.
From this moment the gap between Grye and the remainder of the field increased with every stride until Seb passed the winning-post.
Jacob was not waiting there, but he put in an  appearance only a few minutes later, beaming cheerfully.
‘I knew you'd do it, lad.
I told me mates it was a sure thing and they emptied their pockets and put every last halfpenny on you and that horse of your'n.
Here, the best I could get for you is evens, but with another fiver collected for you from me mates, and the prize for winning, you'll go home with fifty pounds in your pocket.
That's not a bad day's work for a lad, I'd say.’
Seb grinned happily.
‘It'll do — but talking of work, what are you doing in Witney?
I know Meredith Putt's been doing a lot of talking about the railway, but I didn't know it was on its way.’
‘It will be, lad.
The railway will come at least as far as Witney, you mark my words.
There'll be more rail than road in this country of ours one day.
But we're not working on a line at the moment.
We've been taken on as a whole gang with lots of others, to make roads for those who are chopping down the trees in Wychwood Forest.
In little more than a year's time the forest will be gone and there'll be farms in its place.’
Seb and Christian spoke until well into the night about the changes that total disafforestation would bring to the area — and to the gipsies in particular.
They agreed that nothing could be done until it was learned exactly what was taking place.
Christian set off early the next morning to ride to Burford.
He was going to speak to James Price, the solicitor acting for him, to ask what information he had gained about the disafforestation.
Seb was repairing a fence in one of the fields when Melody brought the cows back to the pasture for  milking.
She came across to speak to him.
Seb always felt vaguely uncomfortable when Melody caught him on his own.
This unease was not helped when she hitched her dress above her knees and squatted cross-legged on the grass to talk to him as he worked.
‘D'you like my dress, Seb?’
‘It's fine.’
He spoke without looking at her, in case his gaze rested on her bare legs and gave her ideas.
‘Better than the dress you were wearing on Ma's wedding day.’
‘This is one of those Carrie gave me.’
Melody smiled as she plucked at the material of the loose sleeves.
Her actions reminded Seb that Melody was really a very simple soul, her emotions straightforward and uncluttered.
‘Carrie's nice.
She's promised to give me some schooling if I can get to chapel in the mornings.
Do you think girls should have schooling, Seb?’
‘I think you ought to give it a try.
The light mornings are coming along and the cows can be taken in for milking earlier.
I'm sure Ma would help you with that, if you'd like her to.
You should be able to spend at least two or three hours learning with Carrie.’
‘Would you like me more if I had some schooling, Seb?
Would you do things with me like you did when Boz got married?’
‘Now, Melody…
I've apologised many times for what happened that night.
I don't want to talk about it any more.
It shouldn't have happened.’
Melody shrugged her shoulders in a gesture of feigned indifference.
‘I know.
You were drunk and wouldn't have done it otherwise.
Well, I haven't the  money to get you drunk every time I want you to love me.’
She hesitated before adding, ‘I doubt if Anna would have to get you drunk afore you did it to her.’
‘I've said I don't want you talking about it — or about Anna in that way, either.’
‘Anna isn't very happy, Seb.’
It came out almost reluctantly.
He stopped working.
‘Why do you say that?
What's making her unhappy?
It's got nothing to do with me, I'm certain of that.’
‘Are you?
I don't think she is.
But no, it isn't you.
Alamena, Boz's wife, is making life difficult for her, telling her she's not to leave the camp and that she's too free and easy with everyone.
She's making it very clear she doesn't believe Anna's good enough for that brother of hers.
Everyone always said it wouldn't work having two women sharing a caravan.
They were right.’
Seb felt guilty.
He had not been in the forest since Boz's wedding.
Had not seen Anna since then, but he said, ‘Why doesn't Nahum do something about making things easier for Anna?’
‘Nahum Plunkett isn't in the camp.
He went back up north to be with his family.
He's been gone a month or more.’
Melody looked speculatively at Seb.
‘Are you still fond of Anna, Seb?’
It was a wistful question and Seb softened his attitude towards Melody.
‘Yes, I suppose I am.’
‘I think she feels the same way about you too, but Romanies and gorgios shouldn't marry.
I should know if anyone does.
Our lives are too different.’
Stretching her brown, barefooted legs out in front of her and exposing half of her thighs, Melody gave Seb what he had come to think of as one of her ‘looks’.
‘You'll never get from Anna what you can have from me, Seb.’
With a stout and newly repaired fence between them, Seb felt he could afford to smile at her.
‘Be off with you, Melody.
If you stay here any longer it'll be time to take the cows in for their evening milking.’
As he watched Melody walking back to the farm, deliberately exaggerating the swing of her hips for his benefit, Seb was thinking of Anna.
He wondered what was going to happen to her now the forest was actually being cut down.
He could not imagine her living anywhere else but in Wychwood Forest.
Christian returned late that evening.
He had spent much of the day with lames Price.
The Burford solicitor had confirmed what Jacob Brailey had told Seb.
The forest, or much of it, was being cut down and the land enclosed.
Most of that land had been allocated to those with forest grazing rights, whose method of running stock would be affected by the enclosures.
The remainder was being retained by the Crown and would be used to form seven large, Crown-owned farms.
‘Two small sections of Wychwood are to be left standing.
The largest part is over by Charlbury, where the forest fair is held.
That will become part of Cornbury Park.
The other piece is right here, from Widley Copse to Stockley — that's the area where the gipsy encampment is now.’
‘So they'll be able to stay after all?’
Seb's delight was short-lived.
‘I doubt it very much.
This part of the forest is being  allocated to the manor.
Even though he'll not be allowed to cut it down, Putt will have the gipsies out.’
Seb's spirits sank.
‘Meredith Putt will be overjoyed when he hears the news.’
‘I shouldn't think so.
He'd have been hoping for lots more land.
Although he was one of the prime movers in having the forest cut down and enclosed, Putt's come out of it badly.
That piece of forest is the only land allocated to the manor.
Most has been given to farmers like me who have long-standing grazing rights.
I've been given a hundred and fifty acres, Seb.
The only condition is that fifty acres of it remain as woodland.
If Boz and his people have to move their camp but wish to remain hereabouts they're welcome to camp there.’
‘That's wonderful news for you and for them, Christian.
Congratulations!
It gives you an impressive land-holding — and offers a way out of their problems for Boz and his people.
When will you go and speak to him about it?’
‘The sooner the better, otherwise he'll be hearing any number of garbled stories about disafforestation from others.
We could go now, if you wish — I presume you'll want to come with me?’
As Seb saddled Grye, his mind was working hard.
By the time he set off with Christian he had half formulated a plan to help with the future he had in mind for himself.
As they entered the forest, Seb asked, ‘What will you do with your extra hundred acres of farming land, Christian?’
‘They'll need to be ploughed and planted with a root crop for the first year.
Perhaps turnips, or mangels.
Something like that.’
Seb nodded thoughtfully.
‘How many other farmers hereabouts have been given similar awards?’
‘Dozens.
Most of those with lands bordering the forest.’
Seb's enthusiasm quickened.
‘Do any of them own horses like ours?’
‘I can name four farmers who own single horses.
No more than that.
Why do you ask?’
‘It will take a team of at least three horses to plough such rough land — and even then it will be difficult going with all the roots that'll be left around when the foresters have moved on.’
‘True.
But what does that prove, except that you've learned something about farming since you've lived in Swinbrook?’
‘If I use my own money to buy a plough, will you supply the horses and let me spend two or three days a week hiring out to those with new lands?
We could share all the money I earn — and I believe we'd make a great deal.’
The idea took Christian by surprise, but he did not dismiss it out of hand.
‘It makes sense, but why do you think they'll hire you?’
‘They'll have to hire someone with good horses, and they won't find a better team of animals than we can supply.’
‘Where will you get the money to buy a plough?’
‘I've already got money that I've saved from Grye's winnings.’
Seb did not amplify his statement.
He had not forgotten that Christian disapproved of gambling.
Christian rubbed his chin as he looked at Seb and thought seriously about the plan he had put forward.
Eventually he nodded twice.
‘All right, Seb, I'm willing  to give it a try.
Mind you, you're not the only one who's thinking of the future.
I've been giving it a great deal of thought myself in recent weeks.
Once I'm absolutely clear in my own mind I'll put my plan to you — but here's the encampment and unless I'm mistaken that's Boz coming out to meet us.’
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
The circle of seated gipsies listened to Christian's account of his meeting with the Burford solicitor with growing alarm.
There was also anger.
Before the Swinbrook farmer had finished talking to them, Boz leaped to his feet to say, angrily, ‘We Romanies have been using the forest for hundreds of years.
Except for one or two magistrates like Peck we've been left alone, and have never done anything to trouble those who live around the forest.’
When Christian tried to interrupt the angry outburst, Boz waved him into silence.
‘Oh, I know a few Romanies have been sent to prison for poaching — but so have a great many gorgios.
Why has no one bothered to tell us what's happening?
Are they intending to cut the trees down all around us without any warning?’
‘This particular part of Wychwood won't be coming down, Boz, but it will be passing into private hands-as part of the manor's lands.
However, I'm able to offer you an alternative, in Faws Grove.’
Christian went on to tell the gipsies of the award made to him by the enclosure commissioners, but he was interrupted abruptly by Boz, who said, ‘There's no water in Faws Grove.’
‘Not actually in the wood, true.
But there's water not too far away, on my land.’
As though Christian had not spoken, Boz said, ‘There's also a road running across Handley Plain, alongside the copse.
We'd have to cross it to get water.’
‘That's so, but it shouldn't be too much trouble for you if you really want to stay in the area.’
‘It would be no trouble for us, maybe, but it'd trouble those gorgios who pass along the road and they'd start complaining about us.
When we're out of sight we can get by.
If your people have to see us their imagination runs riot, and we get trouble.’
Boz's fellow gipsies nodded their unanimous agreement, but Christian pleaded, ‘Give it a try, Boz.
It's better than nothing and between us we can make it work.’
‘You have nothing to lose if it doesn't work, Mr Timms.
We have everything to lose.
I expect some of us will be moving off soon, going to the places where summer work's to be found.
The rest of us intend staying right where we are — and Meredith Putt will find he'll not move us on without a fight.’
Boz's defiant statement was greeted with applause and cheering from the gipsies.
As Christian continued to argue, Seb moved away.
He walked first of all towards the place where he and Christian had tied their horses, but then changed direction to where he had noticed Anna seated on the steps of a caravan.
Edging to within hearing, he called softly, ‘Hello, Anna.
I haven't seen you in a long time.
How are you?’
Seb thought she looked thinner and seemed to have lost much of the air of confidence that had always been  so much a part of her.
It hurt him to see such changes in her.
However, her face lit up in a smile when she heard his voice.
‘Hello, Seb.
Boz said you were coming.
When you didn't speak to me straightaway I thought you'd go off again without a word to me.’
‘It might be better if I did, but I couldn't do it, not once I'd seen you sitting here.
You're looking tired, Anna.
Are you unhappy?’
Instead of replying, Anna countered with a question of her own.
‘Is it true what I just heard the women saying?
That the forest is being cut down?’
‘Much of it is, but Christian has been given fifty acres of forest land.
He's offering to let Boz and the rest of your people stay there, but I don't think Boz is going to accept.’
‘He won't.
A year ago, perhaps — or he might have considered it as recently as six months since.
But now?’
She shrugged unhappily.
‘What's happened to change him?
He's made a good marriage.
He should be a very happy man.’
At that moment the caravan door behind Anna opened and Alamena came out.
When she saw Anna and Seb talking together, she said sharply, ‘Anna!
What do you think you're doing?’
The remainder of her conversation was in fast Romany and Anna replied with a note of anger in her voice.
Alamena's voice rose a full octave and increased so much in volume that many of the men seated about Christian looked their way.
Suddenly, Boz sprang to his feet and strode towards the group outside the caravan, his face screwed up in fury.
Seb realised immediately that Boz was seeking trouble as a means of purging himself of the anger and frustration that was bubbling inside him.
When Alamena saw her husband coming towards them she raised her voice still more.
Anna interjected with her own heated views, but when Boz reached them, he confronted Seb.
‘What are you doing talking to my sister?
Don't you know she's betrothed to Nahum Plunkett?
Do you want to get her talked about?’
Thoroughly bewildered, Seb said, ‘Boz, this is me you're talking to, Seb Quilter.
I rescued Anna from a crowd at Charwelton and brought her back here to you and your people — remember?’
‘I remember — and it's lucky for you no one asked any awkward questions about what happened along the way when you and Anna spent a night together.’
‘Stop it, Boz.
Stop it this instant.’
Anna's voice shouted at her brother, but his words had angered Seb beyond reason.
‘What ‘awkward’ questions?
You're singing a different tune now from the one you sang after you'd left her behind and got yourself arrested.
Nothing ‘happened’— but that wasn't my fault and I don't think much of a man who's foul-mouthed enough to insinuate things about his own sister!’
Boz took a quick step forward and before Seb could raise his guard the gipsy swung a wild punch.
It caught Seb high on his left cheekbone.
The blow stung and Seb retaliated immediately, moving in with arms flailing.
As both young men threw punches the encampment erupted in a noisy outcry.
Anna was screaming for  someone to stop them, while the gipsies were urging them to fight to a finish.
Christian stepped in and called on both Seb and Boz to cease fighting.
When he was ignored, the farmer reached out and grabbed both men by their hair.
Drawing them apart he suddenly cracked their heads together.
Boz went to the ground like a felled tree and Seb dropped to his knees, thoroughly dazed.
Before he had fully recovered, Christian hauled him to his feet and dragged him away from his groaning adversary.
As Boz rose unsteadily to hands and knees, Christian said to the watching gipsies, ‘When Boz has calmed down a little, tell him my offer still stands.
All of you are welcome to stay on in Faws Grove for as long as you wish.
If you need to see me you know where I'm to be found.
You're all welcome at Handley Farm, or in Swinbrook chapel at any time.
Remember it.’
‘Cor!
That's a beautiful black eye you've got, Seb — but the one Boz has got is better.
He can't see out of his.’
Melody expressed her admiration the following morning as she stood watching Seb currying one of the horses.
He worked as though he was trying to remove every hair from the horse's hide.
‘I don't care if Boz is as blind as Anna.
He had no right to say what he did.’
‘About you and Anna, you mean?
Oh, I don't know.
You two say you did nothing — and I believe you — but think how it must look to Boz.
I doubt if any gorgio woman would still be a virgin the morning after spending a whole night with a Romany man.’
‘You've not got a particularly delicate way of putting  things, Melody, but I take your point…
Ouch!’
Seb turned a little too quickly and discovered yet another badly bruised part of his anatomy.
That same evening, after dark, Seb was sitting at the table in Fern Cottage, working by the light of a lamp.
He was laboriously attempting to sort out the financial details of the scheme he had put to Christian.
A double-furrow plough would take a great chunk of the money in his possession, and he had worked out it would need at least four great horses, not three, to carry out the intended task.
On good soil he could probably plough two or three acres in a day, but on the more difficult land that had until recently been forest he would be lucky to manage half of this.
At two pounds and ten shillings an acre it would take only ten working days to pay for the plough, but he had promised Christian half his earnings.
This meant he would need to double the time to twenty days.
If he was working for only two days every week it would be ten weeks before he began to make a profit.
His mind reeling with the difficult mathematical equations, he suddenly heard a soft knocking at the door.
He was only half-way across the room when the sound came again, louder this time.
‘All right, I'm coming.’
He spoke irritably, his mind filled with figures that still needed to be written down.
Who could it be calling on him at this time of night?
He could think of no one who would knock.
Seb opened the door to find Melody standing outside in the darkness.
Surprised, and not a little alarmed to see her there, he opened his mouth to speak but Melody was quicker.
‘I've brought someone who wants to talk to you.
I'll wait outside.’
Moving away from the door, Melody pushed Anna from the darkness to the light of the doorway.
‘Anna!
What are you doing here?
Is something wrong?’
He took the hand she held out to him and guided her inside the cottage.
Before closing the door he looked outside but could not see Melody, or anyone else.
Seb guided Anna to a chair and sat her down, but instead of releasing his hand immediately she pulled him to her and her hand went up to his face, her finger-tips gently assessing his injuries.
‘Poor Seb.
You didn't deserve that, but Boz was upset.
All the men were upset.’
‘So was I — at what Boz said about us…about you…
Er, would you like a cup of tea?’
It was a totally inappropriate thing to say, but she was a visitor, and the first since he had been staying at Fern Cottage on his own.
‘No, I can't stay long.
I was only able to come because all the men have gone off to a meeting with Romanies from other camps.
It's the only good thing to come from this threat to cut down the forest.
Old feuds have been forgotten for the time being.
With Boz out of the caravan I was able to get away for a while.
Alamena knows we can't stay in each other 's company for longer than a minute or two without quarrelling.’
‘Poor Anna.
Life isn't treating you very kindly lately.’
‘I didn't come here so you could feel sorry for me.
I wanted to see how you are.
I had a big row with Boz about what happened.
It's the first time we've ever  quarrelled like that.
It's this business about the forest.
It's going to change life for everyone.
There are really two types of Romany, the forest Romany and those who spend the whole of their lives on the road.
We've always been forest Romanies, but if Wychwood is to be chopped down Boz and the rest of us will have to take to the road.’
‘That isn't really necessary, Anna.
You're welcome to camp in the fifty acres of forest belonging to Christian — and there will be a lot more forest left around here.
Enough to make your people feel at home, at least.’
‘Few landowners are like Christian.
We won't be welcome by many of them.
If all the Romanies in the forest try to squeeze into fifty acres we'll be falling over each other all the time and there'll be fighting like no one 's ever seen.
It won't affect me, but Boz and the others will suffer.’
‘It won't affect you?’
Seb suddenly realised the full import of her words, ‘You mean…you're going ahead and marrying Nahum?’
‘Of course.
It's been arranged for a very long time.’
‘Do you love him?’
‘He's very kind.’
‘That doesn't answer my question.
Does he love you?’
‘He'll take care of me.’
‘I'd take care of you and I'd love you.
I do love you.’
‘Don't say that, Seb.
Don't make me sorry I came here to say ‘Goodbye’.’
‘Goodbye?
You mean…when is this marriage to take place?’
‘In two months’ time, but it's two weeks' journey and 
I'll need to get to know Nahum's family.
We're leaving in a week and I might not get another chance to come and speak to you.
I shouldn't have come tonight.
I must go now.’
Anna stood up facing him, with no more than a hand's breadth between them.
Reaching out he pulled her to him and kissed her.
‘No, Seb!’
She moved her head away from him, but he moved with her and his mouth closed on hers once more.
For a few moments more she struggled, but he felt her resistance weakening.
Then her arms went about him and there was a heat in her that for a moment matched his own.
This was the moment when Melody chose to knock at the door and Anna's head jerked back, away from him.
‘I must go now, Seb.’
‘Don't go, Anna.
Stay here.
Stay with me.’
‘I can't.
Let me go, Seb.’
Anna attempted to break away, but he held her tight and tried to kiss her again.
‘Don't, Seb.
Please let me go.’
Suddenly she stopped struggling, and as the knocking came again she began to cry.
‘I shouldn't have come.
I knew it was wrong…but I wanted to.
I couldn't leave without speaking to you, just once more.’
Seeing tears spring from Anna's sightless eyes made Seb feel thoroughly ashamed.
Releasing her, he said, ‘I'm sorry, Anna.’
Her finger came up and stopped the flow of his words.
‘Don't say that, Seb.
I'm not sorry, but I ought not have met you again.
It makes everything so much more difficult.’
‘You'll not still marry Nahum, Anna?
Not now.
You can't…’
‘Nothing's changed, Seb.
We've both known for a long time how we feel about each other and all the reasons why nothing can ever come of it.
A kiss doesn't change the world around us.’
The knocking was repeated yet again, and it was more insistent now.
Melody called softly, ‘Come on, Anna, or I'll have to come in.’
As Anna stretched out her hand and moved slowly towards the sound, Seb made another plea.
‘It would work for us, Anna.
I'd make it work.’
Anna reached the door and as she fumbled for the latch, Melody opened it from the other side.
‘Goodbye, Seb.
Take care of yourself.
You should marry Carrie.
She'd make you a good wife — and she loves you too.’
With this revelation, Anna stepped from the cottage and was gone.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
Seb spent the next few days wrestling with very tangled emotions.
He felt he wanted to go to the gipsy encampment and tell Boz that Anna could not marry Nahum.
Seb believed she loved him.
Was certain she did.
He was equally certain they could cross the barrier between gorgio and Romany together.
Seb realised his mother would be bitterly opposed to such a marriage.
Despite this, he felt she would love Anna as a daughter when she knew her better.
Yet common sense — and Melody — constantly told Seb it would be not only futile but foolhardy to go to the encampment just now.
Feelings were running high among the gipsies because of the imminent disafforestation of Wychwood.
In addition, Seb's fight with Boz had made him a temporary focus for their anger.
As Melody put it to Seb when they were discussing the matter for the umpteenth time at the farm, ‘You go up there and try to tell 'em Anna shouldn't be marrying Nahum Plunkett and they'll tear you to pieces and feed you to the dogs.’
‘I know what you say is true, Melody, but I can't stand by and allow this wedding to go ahead.
It's just not right for Anna.’
‘You can't stop it now, Seb — and you mustn't even  try.
It will be a very happy marriage, Nahum isn't like his sister.
The knowledge that he was helpless to do anything about the forthcoming wedding made things no easier for Seb, and proof that the end of the gipsies’ way of life in Wychwood was near at hand.
The road-builders, moving ahead of the woodcutters, approached Swinbrook from the direction of Leafield.
Huge gangs of navvies, dealing with their new task in the same manner with which they had extended the railway lines the length and breadth of the land.
Toppling trees and clearing the undergrowth as they moved inexorably forward, they carved a thirty-feet-wide gash through the forest.
Behind the road-builders trundled wagons laden with graded stone to be pounded and pulverised into place to make a road which was intended to last for centuries to come.
Horse-hoeing a field above part of the forest that would soon come down to form an additional hundred acres of pasture for Handley Farm, Seb listened to the growing hubbub.
It was the sound of more than a hundred working men and it rose above the sounds of the countryside that had become familiar to Seb's ears.
There would be even more noise when the navvies moved to their next camp closer to Swinbrook and beside a stream that flowed through the village and on to the river Windrush.
Christian told Seb where the camp was to be.
The farmer had taken his Bible beneath his arm and visited the navvies earlier in the week.
It was doubtful whether his preaching saved many souls, but enough of the  navvies gave him a polite hearing to satisfy his missionary urges.
Later that evening, when darkness was falling, Seb was working in the stables by lamplight.
The next day he was due to take some of the big farmhorses to the blacksmith for shoeing.
This meant he had to bring forward some of his morning chores.
Seb was forking hay from the loft above the stables when he heard his name being called from outside.
At first he failed to recognise the voice and shouted, ‘I'm here.
In the stables.’
Then the door was flung open and Boz stood in the doorway, wild-eyed and angry.
Looking around the stable he at first failed to see Seb, until he looked upwards.
Then he started towards him, crying, ‘I want you, gorgio.
Where is she?
What you done with her?
I'll wring your bloody gorgio neck when I get hold of you!’
‘You come a step farther up that ladder and I'll run you through with this fork.’
Seb backed up his threat with a two-pronged pitchfork, jabbing it to within inches of Boz's face as the gipsy placed his foot on the first rung.
Behind him, three more gipsies crowded in through the doorway.
‘Who are you talking about?’
Sudden fear gripped Seb.
It could only be…
‘Has something happened to Anna?’
‘Don't try to make out you know nothing.’
Boz's manner was still threatening, but Seb's response had taken him by surprise.
He had been convinced Anna was with Seb.
When he found Fern Cottage in darkness and Seb missing he had been doubly sure.
Now a doubt  was creeping into his mind for the first time.
‘Don't do anything foolish, Boz.
If something's happened to Anna you're going to need help.
Has she gone missing?’
Finally convinced Seb knew nothing, Boz stepped back from the ladder.
‘She went out before noon today with some trinkets to sell.
She said she was going to take them to the men working on the road.’
‘Have you been to their camp yet?’
‘No.
They don't like Romanies at the best of times.
At this time of the evening they'd have been drinking for an hour.
I'd get no help there.’
‘I'll go to the camp.
They know me.
Meanwhile you begin searching in the forest.
How many men can you call on to help you?’
‘No more than eighteen.
The rest have already left Wychwood.’
‘Eighteen men won't be able to do much in the forest, but get torches and search from your camp to the South Lawn road.
If Anna's not with the navvies I'll try to get some of their men to search between your camp and the new road.’
Boz left the stable without another word as Seb flung aside his pitchfork and climbed down from the loft to hurry to the farmhouse.
Leaving Christian pulling on his boots with the intention of going to assist the gipsies, Seb made his way to the camp set up by the road-makers.
The camp was a most as noisy as the point of work had been during the day.
There were a great many men here- and some women too.
Several fires were burning, the green wood being used sending clouds of acrid smoke swirling among the tents and make-shift huts.
Some of the navvies formed noisy groups playing cards, others sat around the fires, singing.
There was some cooking being carried out by the women — and a great deal of drinking.
Seb asked the whereabouts of Jacob Brailey, the Cockney gang-boss, a number of times without receiving any coherent reply, when a voice from inside one of the tents boomed, ‘Who's that asking for me?’
‘It's Seb Quilter…the jockey.’
‘Then come on in, boy.
Come and have a drink and be introduced to Sophie.’
Seb ducked inside the tent and saw Jacob Brailey leaning back against a heavy, wooden chest, his arm about a well-rounded girl.
On the box were a couple of well-filled tankards.
‘Here, take this.’
Without changing his position, Jacob reached between himself and the woman and picked up one of the tankards, holding it out to Seb.
From the woman's protests, Seb assumed the drink was hers.
‘I haven't come to drink with you.
I'm here looking for someone.
A gipsy girl…’
‘You'll find no gipsy girls here.
The last one went a week or two ago.
At least, she said she was a gipsy.
My men called her something else when they started going down with the ‘clap’, but she was long gone by the time they found out.’
‘Anna isn't one of those.
She's a decent young girl.’
Seb's statement brought a chorus of derision from a couple of navvies who had entered the tent behind him and were listening to the conversation.
Jacob waved them into silence.
‘Let the lad speak.
Go on, Seb.’
‘You might have seen the girl at the Wychwood Forest Fair, last year.
She's the sister of the man who owned Grye — the horse I rode in the race.
She's about my age, and blind.
She's the girl I hope to marry.’
Now Seb had the men's attention he said, more hopefully, ‘She left her own camp in the forest to come down here hoping to sell a few trinkets to your men.
That was before noon today.
Her brother just came to Handley Farm to say she hasn't gone back.’
‘There's been no blind girl here.
She probably got herself lost in the forest.’
‘No, Anna's more at home in the forest than most sighted men.
Something must have happened to her.’
‘What do you want us to do about it?’
‘You once said if there was anything you could do to help me I had only to come to you and ask.
I need your help now, Jacob.
I want your men to search the forest for Anna.’
One of the men behind Seb began to protest, but Jacob cut him short.
‘A walk in the forest will be better for the men than what they're doing right now.
We might even get a decent day's work out of‘em.’
The gang-boss rose to his feet, allowing the woman to drop back heavily against the box.
She swore, but lay where she had fallen.
Jacob ducked outside the tent and began shouting for his men to gather around.
Many of them grumbled, but other gang-bosses got their men on their feet and soon all the navvies in the camp were gathered about the tent.
Jacob wasted no time giving detailed explanations.
‘A friend of mine — a good friend — has got trouble.
The girl he's going to marry-a young blind girl — is lost  somewhere in the forest.
I've told him we'll help search for her.
Some of you collect all the lanterns we can muster.
The rest of you can light torches from the fire.’
Turning to Seb, he said, ‘Where do you suggest we start?’
‘Form a long line along the piece of road you've been making and search the forest to the north.’
‘You heard what the lad said.
Don't stray from the line and shout if you find anything at all.
Right, off you go.’
Some of the men grumbled as they moved away, but all found some form of light and took a place in the line to join in the search.
For many it was something to break up the monotony of camp-life.
Soon they were calling and shouting to each other as they moved off into the forest.
They cursed the trailing brambles that caught at their ankles and set up shouts as rabbits and pheasants fled into the darkness before them.
Once a stag caused a great hullabaloo by breaking from cover and bounding away noisily.
Seb thought that if Anna was anywhere within this part of the forest she could not fail to hear the searchers.
The navvies beat their way through the Wychwood Forest for almost three hours by which time the initial enthusiasm had long since waned.
Indeed, a number of men had already made their way back to camp, ostensibly to re-kindle their torches, but in reality to resume drinking.
Suddenly a cry went up along the line.
‘Here!
Come here!
We've found her.’
Relief surged through Seb as he stumbled his way through the undergrowth towards the direction of the  shouts.
As he drew nearer his relief gave way to apprehension.
Seb could see the growing knot of men and the light of their torches, but now the shouting had ceased and had been replaced by a low, angry murmur.
Seb pushed his way through the circle of men and in the dancing light of breeze-blown torches he saw Jacob kneeling on the ground.
The still form of Anna was lying beside him.
As one of the torches suddenly flared he saw blood on her face, hair and shoulders.
She had been badly battered about the head.
Fearfully, Seb drew closer and could see her dress had been ripped down from the neck to waist.
Jacob's jacket had been used to cover Anna's body from the waist down and this act told its own silent and ominous tale.
‘Is she still alive?’
Jacob nodded.
‘Only just.’
Trying to control the fierce anger he was feeling, the navvy, asked, ‘What shall we do with her?’
Seb thought quickly.
The gipsy encampment was probably closer, but he decided against taking her there.
‘Bring her to my mother's cottage.
It's just along the Swinbrook road.’
‘I'll send someone for a blanket and we'll get her there in no time at all.’
Standing up, Jacob laid an arm sympathetically across Seb's shoulders.
‘I'm sorry we've found her in this state, boy.
I only wish the man who did it had still been with her.’
‘Who would do something like this?’
Seb did not want to look, but his gaze kept returning to Anna's battered face.
‘I don't believe this is the work of my navvies, Seb.
They take their women as they come — good, bad or  indifferent — but not like this.
All the same, I'll check.
If I learn that any man went missing today he'll need to satisfy me where he was.’
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT
On the way back to the Hankses' cottage with Anna, Seb and the navvies met one of the gipsy women who had been enquiring after the missing girl in the village.
After a brief glance at Anna, the gipsy hurried off to find Boz and tell him where she was being taken.
Dolly, Tom and Carrie had all gone to bed, but Seb's knocking brought Tom to the bedroom window complaining about being disturbed at such a late hour.
Seb shouted up to tell him what had happened and it took Dolly no more than a couple of minutes to hurry downstairs and throw open the cottage door.
Anna was carried upstairs to Carrie's bedroom.
Shooing the men from the room, the two women undressed her, examined the injuries she had sustained and began the task of cleaning her up.
Waiting outside the room, Seb could hear the occasional moan of distress from his mother and he wondered what else they had discovered.
Dolly and Carrie were still working on Anna in the bedroom when Seb heard Boz at the door of the cottage.
The gipsy was loudly demanding to be allowed in to see his sister.
Tom escorted the gipsy up the stairs to the bedroom, his face registering disapproval.
‘He says he's here to take Anna back to the gipsy camp.’
‘No one 's taking the poor girl anywhere,’ declared  Dolly firmly as she emerged from the room to confront Boz.
‘You can come in to see her, young man, but she needs the attentions of a doctor — and that's what she's going to get.
In the meantime she stays here.’
Boz made no reply but pushed rudely past Dolly and entered the room.
He was inside for only a few minutes and emerged very badly shaken.
‘Does anyone know who might have done this to her?’
Seb shook his head.
‘Jacob Brailey's promised to question all his men, but he's pretty sure it wasn't any of them.
I believe him.
His men are as tough as they come, but they don't do things like this to women.’
‘We'll find out who it was.
When we do…’
Boz left the fate of Anna's attacker to the imagination of his listeners.
‘A doctor can see her.
I'll be back again tomorrow.’
There was no thanks, no expression of sympathy for what Anna had suffered.
Seb had grown used to gipsy ways by now— especially Boz's ways — but Dolly muttered angrily about ‘gipsy ingratitude’ and returned with Carrie to the room where the badly injured girl lay.
Seb left the house and made his way to Handley Farm to fetch a horse.
He would ride to Burford to get a doctor.
Not until he galloped Grye into Burford did Seb realise he had no idea where the doctor lived.
Much of the town was in darkness, but there was noise coming from one of the inns in the High Street and he decided to make enquiries there.
As he passed through the light spilling into the inn-yard from one of the windows, a voice from a deep, shadowed doorway called, ‘Hello, Seb.
You've come a  long way for a late-night drink.’
It was Superintending Constable Giles Aplin, accompanied by another of the town's constables.
‘I've not come for a drink.
I was going inside to ask the way to the doctor's house.
We need him urgently at Swinbrook.’
‘You'll never make yourself heard above the din in there,’ commented the Burford constable.
‘It's the inn-keeper's birthday.
Come with me, I'll show you where Doctor Cheatle lives.
On the way you can tell me what's happened to make you lather up that great horse of yours in such a fashion.’
Grateful for the Burford man's help, Seb told him of finding Anna in the Wychwood Forest, adding, ‘It's lucky she didn't die before we found her.
If the navvies hadn't been there to help she'd not have been found for days.’
Doctor Cheatle was preparing for bed, but he agreed to accompany Seb immediately.
Giles Aplin decided he would go too.
‘The gipsies won't appreciate my help and they'll do nothing to assist me, but this sounds as though it's a very serious assault.
If the girl dies it will be murder and it's happened in my area.’
Seb was silent for much of the ride.
He had not faced the possibility that Anna might die.
When they reached the house there was not a gipsy or navvy to be seen, but Dolly and Carrie were still sitting beside Anna's bed.
The presence of Giles Aplin took Dolly by surprise, but she said, ‘I'm glad you've decided to come along.
I have something here that might help you find the man who attacked the poor girl.
I found it clutched in Anna's hand when we  cleaned her up.
She was holding it so tight the hook was embedded in her flesh.
If it hadn't been she would probably have dropped it on the way here.
It looks as though it might be the fastening from a man's cape.’
Dolly handed the constable a piece of black chain on which was a hook, made to resemble a swan's neck and head.
Giles Aplin examined it with some interest before consigning it to a buttoned pocket without comment.
When Doctor Cheatle left the room where Anna lay, his face was grim.
‘The girl's been badly beaten.
She was probably left for dead by her attacker after he had violated her.
I suspect she has a fractured skull and her cheekbone is also broken.
It's an appalling crime to happen anywhere, but it's unheard of in a peaceful village like Swinbrook.’
‘Will she live?’
Seb asked the question anxiously.
‘I will do all within my sadly limited power to ensure she does.
Unfortunately, in cases like this, God alone has the power of healing.
I suggest you ask Him to do everything He can.’
Giles Aplin left Swinbrook for Burford with the doctor.
Both men promised to return the next day.
Boz called at the Hankses' cottage early the next morning.
He was mounted on a gipsy pony and had make-shift saddle-bags slung on either side.
He looked in briefly at the unconscious girl.
Outside the room, standing at the top of the stairs, he was told exactly what the doctor had said.
Boz nodded grimly.
‘I thought as much.
All right, I'll leave her here until she comes to, then we'll take her back to the camp.’
‘Oh, no, you won't,’ said Dolly, positively.
‘She'll leave here when the doctor says she's fit to go, and not a moment earlier.’
As Dolly followed Boz down the stairs from the bedroom, she said, ‘Seb met Constable Aplin in Burford and brought him back here with the doctor last night.
He'll no doubt come to the forest to see you today.’
‘He won't find me in the forest.
I'm on my way to tell Nahum Plunkett and his family what's happened here.
They have a right to know.’
Boz made the announcement as though expecting Dolly to argue with him, but she merely nodded acknowledgement of his statement.
She would argue about moving Anna before she had fully recovered — if she recovered — but she would put nothing in the way of Anna's marriage to Nahum Plunkett.
‘When the constable comes ask Seb to tell him we don't need his help.
We'll find out who did this, and deal with it in our own way.’
‘If you have any messages like that you can pass them on yourself — but I'd advise against it.
Giles Aplin's a great believer in justice — but only within the law.’
‘Romany law is as ancient as yours — and our justice is seen to be done.’
Anna was unconscious for a full week.
During this time Doctor Cheatle came from Burford every day and Giles Aplin every second day.
When Anna eventually opened her eyes Carrie was with her.
Holding the gipsy girl's hand, Carrie answered as many of the questions that crowded Anna's confused mind as she could.
When Dolly arrived at Handley Farm and informed  Seb that Anna had regained consciousness he left his work and hurried to the cottage to speak to her.
He found Carrie seated by the bedside, but was distressed to find that Anna would not talk to him.
Following the despondent Seb outside the room when he eventually left, Carrie said, ‘You mustn't take it too much to heart, Seb.
It's only natural that she shouldn't want to speak to you.’
‘Why?
I don't understand.’
‘Think about it, Seb.
Think of what some man's done to her.
It's something a girl dreams she'll one day do with the man she loves.
Now that dream's destroyed for ever for her.
She doesn't want to talk to any man just now-you especially, I suspect.’
Seb remembered what Anna had said to him when they shared a haystack bed on the road back from Charwelton.
She had told him then that her body was all she had to offer a man.
‘I'd better go and tell someone up at the camp that she's come round.’
As a result of Seb's visit to the encampment a gipsy woman called to speak to Anna later that same day.
She remained in the room for a long while but although Carrie went there twice with tea for them, she found them talking in the Romany language and did not understand anything they said.
When the woman had gone Anna was left in a very distressed state but she declined to say what had passed between her and the visitor.
Later that evening, Anna had another caller.
Giles Aplin rode from Burford and was delighted to learn of the improvement in her condition.
He too wanted to  talk to her about the attack, but found her far less ready to talk to him than she had been to the woman from the gipsy encampment.
Giles Aplin remained at the Hankses' cottage until Tom returned from his work at the manor.
Although the ostler's evening meal was almost ready to be served, the Burford constable asked him to accompany him to Handley Farm, where he was going to talk to Seb, and the two men walked along the road deep in conversation.
Standing in the farmyard, Giles Aplin also spoke to Seb at some length.
He asked if Anna had mentioned anything at all about her attacker that might prove useful to him.
‘Anna hasn't spoken to me at all,’ confessed Seb unhappily.
‘If I enter the room when she's talking to Carrie or my ma, she'll simply dry up and say nothing until I've left.
She might have said something to them.’
‘No, I've asked them already.
It's made doubly difficult because of her blindness.
Even if she did claim to know who it was we'd find it difficult to convince a judge, without far more proof than I have at the moment.’
‘I hope you find the proof soon.
Anna and the gipsy woman spoke together for a very long time.
If Boz believes he knows who did it he won't wait to find the sort of proof that a judge would need.
Revenge is a matter of honour for a gipsy.’
‘Then I'll need to work at it even harder than I am at the moment.’
As Superintending Constable Giles Aplin mounted his horse he looked down at Tom and Seb.
‘I have no doubt we'll be meeting again in the course of the next  week or two.
In the meantime, take care of Anna.
That poor girl has been through a terrible ordeal, and if I know anything of gipsies, it's not over for her yet.’
‘She's in good hands with Ma and Carrie to take care of her,’ said Seb.
‘I wish you luck with your inquiries and hope you find out who did it.’
‘I believe I already know who did it,’ came the Burford constable's astonishing reply.
‘The difficulty I have is proving it.’
As the constable rode away, Seb turned an incredulous look upon Tom.
‘Do you think he really does know who attacked Anna?’
‘I don't know.’
Tom Hanks was not a man who jumped to hasty conclusions.
‘All I do know is that when we were on the way here he was asking me a great many questions about what went on in the village.
He even asked me about them up at the manor.
Wanted to know if I could remember whether Mr Meredith went off riding on the day Anna was attacked.’
‘And did he?’
‘I couldn't tell him for sure, but he's been taking Vulcan out most days.
Wrote it all down, did Constable Aplin.
Said that in future he'd be obliged if I kept careful note of when Mr Meredith took out a horse.
He seemed especially interested in the times he had Vulcan out at night, as he did so often last year.
Last thing he asked me was where he might find Florrie Shaw.
Said he wanted to have a chat to her about her son's murder.
I wouldn't think there's any connection between the attack on Anna and the killings of Sir Vincent, Lady Hammond and Will Shaw, would you?
And what would any of this have to do with Mr Meredith?’
‘I've no idea, Tom, but I wouldn't put such a question to anyone else, if I was you.
Not if you value your job at the manor.
Just do as Giles Aplin's asked you, and keep quiet about it.
All I hope is that he gets whoever attacked Anna- and gets him quickly.’
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
Seb learned that Boz had returned to the Wychwood Forest when Melody came to the farm one afternoon to say goodbye to him and to Christian.
‘What do you mean, ‘Goodbye’?
Where are you going?’
‘I don't know.
Up north somewhere.
Boz is taking us.’
Is Boz back here in the forest?’
‘He's been back for two days.’
‘But…he hasn't been to the cottage to see Anna.’
‘I don't know anything about that.
I can't speak for Boz Buckland.
Nobody can.
If you want to know any more about what he's doing you'd better go up to the camp and ask him yourself.’
Seb entered the gipsy encampment warily, remembering the reception Boz and his friends had given him on an earlier visit.
He wished he had Christian with him, but the farmer had ceased work at Handley Farm early that day.
He was preaching that evening at a chapel a couple of miles beyond Burford.
Everyone here seemed busy and it was apparent that the few gipsies still remaining in this part of the forest were on the move.
Even the tinkers camped nearby were packing up their few belongings and preparing to leave.
Seb found Boz tying some of the bulkier items of his  household to the rear of his caravan.
The gipsy seemed embarrassed at Seb's presence.
‘What's all this about, Boz?
Where are you going?’
‘Up north.
That's all you need know.’
‘But Anna's nowhere near fit enough yet to travel with you!’
‘She won't be coming.’
Seb thought he must have misheard the gipsy.
‘What about…the wedding?
Surely you're coming to the cottage to tell Anna and us what's happening?’
‘There's not going to be a wedding.
Noah Plunkett and his family have come out against it.
He says the Plunketts are having no gorgio's cast-off in their family.’
Seb should have been overjoyed at the news that Anna was not to marry the educated young gipsy, but he knew that unless Boz explained it to her — preferably in a more diplomatic way than the manner with which he had just broken the news to Seb — she would be devastated.
‘Anna's nobody's cast-off, as well you know — and being attacked wasn't her fault.
She was raped, for God's sake!’
‘That isn't the only reason Noah Plunkett's called the wedding off.
When he came here, he didn't realise Anna is blind.
It happened after the betrothal.
Then he began to hear rumours about you and her.
He watched you both and saw how friendly you were.
Far too friendly.
Then someone told him you'd spent a night together on your way back from Charwelton.’
‘Nothing happened between us then — or at any other time.’
‘I believe it — now.
Noah Plunkett doesn't.
What  happened to Anna in the forest was the final excuse he needed to call off the wedding.
Noah said everything — including the attack on her — has been brought about by her departure from Romany ways.
He says Anna isn't the right wife for a Plunkett — especially one who's been given a university education so he can become a spokesman for our people.
These are difficult times, he says.
We need to unite our people and not risk dividing them.’
‘How are you going to explain all this to Anna?’
‘I'm not.’
Seb thought he detected a brief flash of unhappiness in Boz's expression before the gipsy added, ‘Noah wants me to take his daughter and the rest of our people north to a place he's found.
It's best I don't see Anna.
I'll only upset her.
You tell her, gorgio.
You've never made any secret of wanting her.
Now you've got your wish.’
‘She'll be absolutely heartbroken, Boz — and she's a very sick girl.
You and Anna have always been so close.
She thinks the world of you — and you're her brother.
You can't just desert her like this.’
‘You may not understand it, gorgio, but she will.
She's a Romany.’
Although Melody had already said her farewells to Seb, she found time to visit Anna before she left with the others.
She spent almost an hour in the room with Anna.
At one time Carrie thought she heard Anna crying, but she could not be certain and Melody had insisted that she wanted to be alone with Anna for a while.
Seb arrived at the cottage as the half-gipsy girl was leaving and asked her what she had said to Anna.
‘I told her what needed saying, Seb, for your sake as much as anything else.
She's like me, now.
Deserted by her people.
On her own.
An outcast.’
‘That's totally unfair, Melody.
She's done nothing to deserve this.’
‘What did I do — except be born?
I've never been forgiven for that.’
‘She's still a very sick girl, Melody.
This might well prove too much for her.
Go back and tell her everything's going to be all right.’
‘I can't, Seb.
I've been many things in my life, but I'm not a liar.’
For twenty-four hours after Melody's visit Anna neither ate nor drank anything, and never spoke a word to anyone.
Seb was forced to watch her grow steadily weaker.
He felt helpless at being able to do nothing and no matter how many times he tried to convince her everything would be all right, she did not respond.
Seb was in Anna's room the next evening, talking vainly in an effort to get through to her, when his mother came up the stairs and into the room.
Motioning for Seb to come to her, she stood in the doorway and in a low voice, said, ‘There's someone downstairs to see Anna.
He seems a nice enough young man, but I refused to allow him up until I'd spoken to you.’
‘Who is it?’
‘He says his name's Plunkett.
Nathan…no, Nahum Plunkett.’
They had both forgotten Anna's exceptional hearing but suddenly Anna whispered her first agonised words  for more than twenty-four hours.
‘No!
I don't want to speak to him — ever!
Tell him to go away.’
‘I'll speak to him,’ Seb said to his mother.
‘You stay here with Anna.’
Nahum was in the kitchen talking to Carrie.
When Seb entered the gipsy turned and extended a hand in greeting.
He looked tired and travel-weary and his first words confirmed he had been riding hard.
‘I came as quickly as I could.
I would have liked to beat Boz here but I gather he told Anna what my father had said?’
‘Not personally, but I think that's what Melody came to tell Anna yesterday.
She hasn't said a word since and refuses to eat or drink.’
‘I was afraid something like this might happen if I didn't get here first.
She's a very sensitive girl — but I don't need to tell you that, Seb.
I think you probably know her better than anyone else.
I suspect that you love her too.’
Seb felt as though the ground was opening beneath his feet.
‘You mean…you love her?
After what your father said about her?
In spite of everything that's happened?’
‘Anna has suffered a great deal already, yet nothing that's happened has been of her making.
Do you believe you are the only one able to love her, Seb?
As for my father…
He belongs to the past.
He had me educated so I could speak for the Romanies of today — and of the future.
He's a good man who's done much for our people, but he can't quite let go of the life he and our forefathers have always known.
Anna's offended against age-old Romany taboos, but after what's happened to her she needs to be helped, not rejected.’
‘I can help her.’
‘Seb, you've already helped her more than anyone else — more than any of her own people have — but right now she needs someone who understands Romany ways, and someone who cares for her too.
My father thinks she's far too forward for a Romany girl, but that's merely her way of doing things.
She, like so many of our young Romany people, is on the first step of the ladder to a wider, less restrictive world.
But it's a long ladder and Anna isn't ready to go any farther.
She still needs the security and familiarity of the world she's always known.
You care about her, Seb, and I believe that in your heart you know what I'm saying is true.’
Seb did know.
He had known for a long time, but had refused to admit it to himself.
Neither was he ready to admit it to this assured young gipsy who stood before him.
Yet Seb could not find it in his heart to dislike Nahum Plunkett.
‘You'd better go upstairs and see her, Nahum.
Try to persuade her that life is still worth living.
That we all care about what's going to happen to her.’
Nahum was upstairs with Anna for more than two hours.
Meanwhile, Seb waited in the kitchen, growing increasingly depressed.
He knew he had lost Anna.
He had lost her long before Nahum arrived.
The time had come for him to be totally unselfish and think only of Anna.
Seb had hoped that rejection by her family and her people would make her turn to him and accept a gorgio way of life.
He had honestly believed he could take the place of everything she had ever known if only she was  willing to give him the chance.
Now he was forced to admit he had been wrong.
Anna was in danger of dying because he had not enough to offer her to replace what she would be losing.
She felt she had nothing to live for.
His love was not sufficient.
It was a bitter pill to swallow, but he took it and would try to act as a man should.
‘If you move over I'll put some wood on this fire and make us a cup of tea.’
Carrie and Seb were alone in the kitchen.
Tom was at Swinbrook Manor and Dolly had gone to the farm to prepare some bread she intended baking the next day.
The two young people had been sitting in silence for most of the time Nahum had been upstairs, Seb gazing morosely into the fire and Carrie reading at the kitchen table.
‘What?
What was that you said?’
Seb started, as though his mind had suddenly returned from a very long distance.
‘I said, move over.
You've been sitting there for an hour watching the fire almost go out.
I'll put on some wood and then make us a cup of tea.’
‘It's all right, I'll put the wood on.
You get the things ready for the tea.
It might be an idea to make a couple of extra cups.
Nahum would like one, I'm sure, and he might have been able to persuade Anna to drink something.’
‘Nahum Plunkett coming here to see Anna is probably the only chance anyone has of pulling her through this crisis, you know that really, don't you, Seb?’
He nodded.
‘Knowing doesn't make it any easier for me, but I hope he can give her a reason for living.
I can't, yet God knows I've tried hard enough.’
‘Seb, you've given her the opportunity to live, not once but twice.
At Charwelton you saved her life and you did it yet again by organising a search for her after she was attacked.
You've shown everyone how much you care for her and we all admire you for it.
Now you've got to prove it yet again — this time to yourself and it's going to be the hardest thing you've ever done for her.
You have to let her go.’
‘You're not telling me anything I don't already know, Carrie.
I've repeated it to myself a hundred times already.
But, like I said, it isn't easy.’
CHAPTER FORTY
When Nahum came downstairs from Anna's room, Dolly and Tom had returned home and Christian had joined them from Handley Farm.
Nahum's smile swept away the air of apprehensive gloom that had hung over the cottage since Anna's latest decline.
‘Anna's going to be all right, thanks to all of you.
She's complaining of feeling hungry.
If there was something she could eat…’
The whole family and Christian crowded around the young gipsy, congratulating him as though he had just achieved some major feat.
Seb was somewhat less effusive in his acclaim, yet he was far more relieved than anyone else at Nahum's success.
The news even managed to overshadow some of the heartache he felt at knowing he had finally lost Anna.
‘What will you do now?’
Dolly put the practical question to Nahum when the back-slapping and handshaking had come to an end.
‘I'd like to stay in Swinbrook until Anna is fully recovered — that's if you don't mind having her in your home for a while longer?’
The nodding of heads gave Nahum his answer as Dolly said, ‘I'd be deeply offended if you took her off anywhere else.’
‘That's wonderful of you.
When Anna's feeling well  enough I would like us to be married in the same chapel as my sister and Boz.’
Nahum looked at Christian.
‘I believe you could arrange this for us?’
Christian beamed.
‘I'll be delighted — absolutely delighted!’
With everyone in the room so happy, Seb tried hard not to let it show that he was the only one less than ecstatic over the forthcoming wedding.
He had felt he should ask Nahum to stay at Fern Cottage with him, but was relieved when Christian insisted that the gipsy leader's son stay at Handley Farm for the remainder of his time in Swinbrook.
Christian was delighted when the gipsy accepted the offer.
Nahum was a leader of the future.
One of Christian's oft-repeated dreams was to establish a Methodist mission among the country's gipsies and Nahum's status could help him achieve this ambition.
When Tom produced a half-firkin of ale, saved from his own wedding, it became apparent the celebration was going to carry on far into the night.
At the height of the party, when he thought he would not be missed, Seb slipped away to return to Fern Cottage.
His departure did not go unnoticed.
As he reached the gate, Carrie's voice brought him to a halt.
‘Seb!
Wait!’
He stopped by the gate and waited as she limped towards him in the darkness.
When she reached him, she put out a hand to grasp his arm.
‘Where are you going?’
‘Home to Fern Cottage.
I've got a lot of work to do tomorrow and I can't see Christian being up very early to help me.
He'll have Nahum talking until dawn about  his idea of a mission for the gipsies.’
Carrie's hand dropped away from his arm and there was relief in her voice when she said, ‘I saw you leaving and was worried about you.’
‘Worried?
Why?’
‘Well, with everyone congratulating Nahum and chatting about a wedding.
I know how much you were hoping that everything would work out for you and Anna.’
‘Were my feelings so obvious?’
‘No, Seb, you hid them well — but you and I have talked a lot about Anna.
I know how you must have been feeling inside.’
‘The only really important thing is that Anna's going to be fine.’
‘Yes.
We've all been worried about her.
She is going to be all right, Seb.
She'll be happy with Nahum.
He's very nice, and kind.’
Seb let himself out through the gate and Carrie was half-way back to the house when his soft call brought her to a halt.
‘Carrie!’
‘Yes, Seb?’
‘Thanks for caring.’
The three words were not a great deal for Carrie to pin her hopes to, but she had a warm and happy glow deep inside her as she let herself in at the door of the cottage.
Seb's apparent resignation to the fact that Anna was to marry Nahum did nothing to ease the pain he felt whenever he thought about it during the next few days.
He found it was at its worst in the late evenings when  he sat alone in Fern Cottage.
Seb could have gone to the Hankses' cottage and perhaps worked on his learning with Carrie, but that would have meant paying a visit to Anna in her sick room and listening to his mother chatting about the plans for the wedding.
Dolly had taken the young gipsy girl to her heart once it was established she would not be marrying Seb.
She was determined the wedding would be one for the young blind girl to remember, even though it was not likely to be attended by any of the Wychwood gipsies who had been at Boz's marriage to Nahum's sister.
One evening, Seb could put up with his own company no longer.
Setting out from Fern Cottage he bypassed his mother's home and cut through the forest, heading for the navvies' camp.
He knew he would be assured of company there with no talk of weddings, and they would no doubt offer him a drink.
It was growing dark when Seb reached the camp and the evening activities were just warming up.
The camp had acquired a new ‘amenity’ since Seb's last visit: ale and spirits were being dispensed from a wooden-sided enclosed wagon by a leather-aproned vendor.
Jacob Brailey was standing by the wagon and when he saw Seb he called to him and thrust a tankard of ale into his hand, saying, ‘Here, boy.
It's good to see you.
How's that blind gipsy girl of yours?’
Anna was the last subject Seb wished to talk about, but he said, ‘She's recovered consciousness and the doctor says she's well on the road to recovery — thanks to you and your men.’
‘The men will be pleased to learn she's going to be all right.’
Raising his voice, Jacob bellowed, ‘Listen to me, men.
Seb says the young gipsy girl's going to be all right.’
A great cheer went up and Jacob beamed at them.
When he turned back to Seb his expression had changed.
‘Are they any closer to finding out who did it?’
Seb shook his head.
‘No one 's been arrested yet.’
‘It wasn't anyone from here, I can assure you of that.
I've spoken to every one of the men and we had that constable from Burford here asking a lot of questions.
He's nobody's fool, that one.’
At that moment there was a commotion in one of the tents and a young woman emerged pulling down her dress.
At the same time she handed off a man who was trying to prevent her from leaving.
‘Who says Anna's going to be all right?’
The girl stood swaying slightly, but she stared about her in a belligerent manner, as though challenging someone to answer her.
‘Melody!
What are you doing here?
You came and said good-bye.’
At the sound of Seb's voice Melody started guiltily and looked about her as though she might run away.
Instead, she shrugged and said, ‘Hello, Seb.
I didn't expect to meet up with you.’
‘I was about to say the same to you.
I thought you'd gone somewhere up north with the others.’
‘I did, but I came back.’
‘Does your ma know where you are?’
‘She's the reason I came back.
You'll probably find her in the tent over there— or perhaps that one.’
She nonchalantly waved a hand in a direction that might have included any tent in the camp.
‘I didn't know you two knew each other,’ said Jacob.
‘Mind you, it doesn't surprise me.
Both Melody and her ma make friends very easily.
But come over to my tent and bring your drink — bring Melody too, if you like.’
Before Seb could decide whether he wanted to spend the evening in Melody's company she was following close behind the gang-boss.
Seb grimaced, it was all the same to him.
He fell in behind her.
Seb spent the evening drinking steadily, talking generalities, until Jacob was called away to intervene in a fight between two of his navvies.
When he was out of hearing, Melody asked, ‘You going to marry Anna now she's on her own?’
‘No — and she's not on her own.
She'll still be marrying Nahum.
He's here, in Swinbrook.’
‘Nahum Plunkett's still going to marry her, after all that's happened?’
‘I don't think he's got his pa's approval but, yes, he's going to marry her.
They're to be married soon in the same chapel where Boz was married.’
‘Oh, that'll be why Boz has come back to Wychwood.
For the wedding.’
‘Boz back here?
No, Melody, you must be mistaken.
He went north leading the party you should have been with.’
‘He set off with them, but so did I. Now we're both back.
I saw him in the forest a couple of days ago.
It was when I went for a walk to our old camp.
He was there with three of the others.’
‘But he hasn't been anywhere near our place, or tried to see Anna.’
‘Then I wonder what he's up to.’
Melody's eyes  widened suddenly.
‘It must have something to do with the attack on Anna.
Boz told some of the others that he knows who attacked Anna.’
‘How can he?
Anna doesn't know.’
‘Is that what she told you?
But then, I suppose she would.
It's the duty of one of her own to avenge her.
Not an outsider.
Not even a constable.
It has to be a Romany from her own family.’
‘No, Melody, that's not the way.
If Anna were to tell Constable Aplin all she knows he'd make certain that whoever did it is brought to justice and sent to prison.’
‘A gorgio sent to prison for attacking a Romany girl?’
There was no humour in Melody's short laugh.
‘He'd likely walk free and she'd be sent to gaol for being a whore.
Anyway, he wouldn't even be arrested not by any constable in Oxfordshire.’
‘Who is he, Melody?
Who is it who attacked Anna?’
Melody hesitated a moment or two, wondering whether to speak or hold her tongue.
Making up her mind, she said fiercely, ‘It was him up at the manor.
The one who rides that horse of his like a madman.
Meredith Putt.’
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE
Seb tackled Nahum Plunkett the next morning.
He told him Boz had been seen in the area.
After suggesting the reason for his presence was revenge, he asked, ‘Has Anna said anything to you about the man who attacked her?’
Nahum shook his head.
‘She wouldn't.
Boz is the only one she'd tell such a thing to, but she's already told me Boz hasn't been to see her since the attack.’
‘He hasn't, but he sent one of the women from the camp.
She went up to the bedroom to see Anna and they spoke together for a long time.’
‘Anna would have told her who she thought it was if she knew.
If she did then family honour demands that he takes revenge.’
‘You must stop him.
You've said you want to bring your people out of the Dark Ages and into the nineteenth century.
Well, now's your chance to prove you mean it.
Order Boz to go to Constable Aplin and tell him all he knows.
Or do you intend obeying only those laws you agree with?’
‘I'm willing to abide by all laws — and I'll try to persuade other Romanies to do the same, but I'm not likely to succeed until my people can see these laws protecting as well as persecuting them.’
‘If Boz goes ahead with his revenge there'll be no protection for him, or any hiding.
Constable Aplin will  know immediately who's done it.’
‘From what you've told me this constable knows as much as Boz about the man who attacked Anna, but he's made no arrest yet.’
‘There'll be an arrest when Aplin has the proof he needs to put before a court.’
‘There you've touched on the major flaw in your argument about justice in this country.
This so-called ‘one law for all’ means one thing when it's applied to gorgios and something else when Romanies are involved.
The slightest suspicion of having committed an offence is considered reason enough to arrest a Romany.
Proof is sought afterwards — but then only if it's absolutely necessary.
That's what Boz will tell me if I tackle him, Seb.
Unfortunately, he'd be right.
Nevertheless, I'll do what I can.
Where was Boz last seen?’
‘Close to the old camp in the forest.’
‘You won't mention this to Anna?’
‘Of course not.’
Seb would have little difficulty keeping this promise.
He had not seen Anna since Nahum's arrival in Swinbrook and he had no plans to visit the Hankses' cottage in the near future.
As though Seb had spoken his thoughts aloud, Nahum said, ‘Go to see Anna some time soon, Seb.
What's happened to her has injured more than her body.
One of her worst fears is that folk will shun her because of what's happened.
Boz must take much of the blame for that.
If I can find him I'll try to persuade him to visit her too.’
Seb told himself he really did intend calling at the cottage to see Anna, but it was easy to make excuses to put off such a visit.
It would soon be time to commence  hay-making in the Handley Farm pastures.
Once this began all other farm duties would take second place.
Seb and Christian were trying to complete all the tasks about the farm before then.
When the farm chores ended each day, Seb would often make his way to the camp of the road-building navvies.
He enjoyed their company and more recently his ‘relaxation’ at their camp had lasted longer with each successive visit.
At the end of each evening he would stumble home at an hour when most of the villagers were in bed asleep.
On two occasions, Dolly came to the cottage during the evening and left a meal on the table for him.
When she had looked in to clean up the following day the meal was still on the table, untouched.
When Dolly tried to speak to Seb about his drinking, he refused to listen to her.
As a result, she became very worried about him.
She discussed the problem with Tom but he suggested she should bide her time, adding, ‘The navvies will have finished the road by the time Anna's wedding comes around.
Seb'll settle down again once they're gone.’
Dolly would have felt less reassured had she known Melody was staying at the navvies' camp.
However, she took Tom's advice and busied herself preparing for Anna's wedding day.
During one of Seb's evening drinking sessions at the navvies' camp he told Jacob that Anna was to marry someone else.
The gang-boss was suitably sympathetic, but his sympathy was expressed with pints, rather than words.
That night, Seb had so much to drink that when he tried to rise from the ground beside the camp-fire to  return home his legs felt like rubber and he sat down again unexpectedly.
Melody was seated next to him.
‘You've had a skinful tonight, Seb Quilter.
You'd better stay here, with me.’
‘Got to get back.
Work to do on the farm…in the morning.’
Having delivered this barely intelligible reply, Seb made it to his feet with difficulty, and stood swaying over Melody.
‘If you try to get home in that state you'll wind up back in London.
Stay with me, Seb.
What have you got to lose that you haven't already given me?’
Seb shook his head slowly and very deliberately, ‘Going…home.’
Melody sighed.
‘Well, you're not going to make it in that state and that's for sure.
I'd better come with you and help you…steady!’
Melody grabbed Seb as he leaned to one side and began side-stepping towards the blazing wood-fire.
To the accompaniment of a chorus of ribald shouts and cat-calls, Seb weaved his way beyond the lights of the camp.
Melody, her arm about his waist, was having to work hard to keep him upright.
They managed to stagger clear of the forest and emerge on Handley Plain before Seb dropped to his knees and was violently ill.
Melody managed to raise him to his feet once more, but after only another fifty paces, Seb veered from the path and stumbled clumsily across broken ground for some distance before collapsing into a depression in the ground that was half-hidden by undergrowth.
Melody tried to raise him to his feet yet again, but Seb pushed her off.
‘Go away!
Let me sleep.’
As he lay face down on the grass of the hollow, Melody, who had also consumed a considerable amount of drink, sat down heavily beside him and spoke to herself.
‘Your luck's running true to form, Melody.
Here's you thinking you'll be lying the night in a comfortable bed with someone whose fingers aren't as calloused as a piece of old limestone, and what's happened?
You've ended up dossing-down with a man who's as limp as a plucked dandelion and who'll probably snore like a hedgehog.’
Seb stirred irritably, imagining he could hear voices.
When he opened one eye the light was so bright he closed it again hurriedly.
Then he heard the voices once more— and this time he knew it was not his imagination.
He moved and let out a groan as he discovered how stiff his limbs were.
Beside him, Melody murmured in sleepy complaint.
Memory returned to Seb in disjointed snatches and he hastily checked he was wearing his trousers.
Satisfied he was at least decently dressed, Seb raised his head cautiously and peered over the edge of the hollow.
‘What you doing, Seb?
Ain't it enough to keep me awake all night with your snoring?’
‘Shh!’
Seb reached down and put a hand over her mouth.
Silenced for a moment, Melody also heard the sound of voices.
Sitting up, she peered over the edge of the hollow alongside Seb.
Two horsemen were riding past in a leisurely manner, skirting the forest.
On one of the horses was a pair of bulging saddle-bags.
‘It's the pay for the navvies, the contractors and the waggoners.
It's always brought to them first thing in the morning.
After it's been dished out the paymasters ride on to take the pay to the men cutting down the forest.
There's a small fortune in those saddle-bags.’
As they watched, Seb said suddenly, ‘Look!
Over there, under the trees.’
As he pointed, a horse and rider emerged from the shadow of the forest.
The rider had a scarf tied about his face and in his hand he held a double-barrelled pistol.
‘It's the highwayman!’
Melody clutched Seb's arm, squeezing it tight in a combination of fear and excitement.
As though they were seeing actors on a stage, Seb and Melody watched as one of the two riders suddenly kneed his horse forward.
There was a puff of white smoke from the highwayman's gun, and the horse of the man riding towards him reared in the air.
When it came down, its rider slumped in the saddle, clutching his shoulder.
The second man handed over his saddle-bags to the highwayman and both men were immediately waved on their way, the robbed man supporting his companion.
Not until the two men were out of sight did the highwayman turn his horse and put it into a gallop along the track that passed near to the hollow where Seb and Melody were kneeling.
Melody dived to the bottom of the hollow and Seb crouched low until horse and rider passed by.
When he raised his head again he was beside himself with excitement, all thoughts of his hangover and pounding head forgotten.
‘That horse…it's Vulcan!
Meredith Putt's horse!
I'd swear it.’
As Melody stared at him wide-eyed, Seb said, ‘Run to Jacob Brailey's camp.
If the two men haven't gone straight there tell Jacob what's happened.
I'll go to the farm and get a horse, then I'll ride to Burford and find Constable Aplin.
He should know about this right away.’
Seb reached Burford in a state of high excitement only to find that Superintending Constable Aplin was in London.
He was attending a conference which had been called to discuss the formation of a police force in Oxfordshire.
The constable left in charge of Burford was reluctant to take any action, even when Seb reported the highway robbery at Swinbrook.
Shaking his head doubtfully, he said, ‘I'm not at all certain Swinbrook lies within my jurisdiction.
In any case, I've never been called on to deal with anything like this before.
As for this highwayman being the lord of the manor…!’
He looked at Seb suspiciously.
‘Would I be right in thinking you've been drinking, young sir?’
‘That was last night.
It has nothing to do with what I saw this morning.’
‘Ah, so you say.
Drink can play funny tricks on people, especially a young lad like yourself.’
‘Look!
I saw a robbery.
Are you going to come and do something about it or not?’
‘I'll tell you what to do, you go along and speak to Magistrate Peck.
Tell him what you've just told me.
If he says I should ride to Swinbrook, why, that's what I'll do.’
Seb never went to see Magistrate Peck, and he returned to Swinbrook a very worried young man.
If word reached Meredith Putt that there had been witnesses to his crime Seb would be in great danger.
If he was indeed the highwayman who had terrorised the area for the past year he had been responsible for the murders of a number of men and women already.
One more would make little difference to him and Seb had first-hand experience of the man's anger.
Seb did not doubt at all that the man riding Vulcan was Meredith Putt, even though he had been masked.
It all fitted neatly into place.
Constable Aplin would agree, of this Seb had no doubt.
Aplin had been asking many questions about Putt, not only in connection with the robberies but with the rape of Anna too.
It was this that made Seb resolve he would not let the matter drop.
That evening, after a great deal of worried thought, Seb confided in Tom Hanks.
Expressing initial disbelief, Tom confirmed that Putt went out riding on Vulcan most mornings.
He also ventured the opinion that Putt was now dangerously insane.
‘I'm not saying you're right, young Seb, but don't you tell anyone else what you've just told me.
Keep it quiet — and stay out of the forest until Giles Aplin comes back from London.
He'll know what's to be done about Meredith Putt.’
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO
The day did not begin well for the lord of Swinbrook Manor.
The mail arrived early and he opened his letters as he sat at the breakfast table.
Among may other bills was one from his London tailor.
Meredith Putt read the letter enclosed with the bill with increasing fury.
It was not so much a letter, as an ultimatum.
Either Mr Putt settle his long-standing and substantial account, or the tailor would take him to the debtor's court.
It was an almost unheard impertinence for a tradesman of such lowly status to threaten one of his customers in such a fashion.
Putt resolved the man would have no more of his business.
He was still fuming when his mother entered the room.
One glance at the letters heaped untidily beside her son's plate was sufficient to identity them for what they were.
‘More demands for payment, I see.’
‘What if they are?
They're none of your business.’
‘None of my business, you say?
How dare you!
Who do you think has to deal with the tradesmen and tell them there will be no money to pay their accounts this month — even though there was none last month, and it is highly likely there will be none next month either?
None of my business indeed!’
‘Well what do you expect me to do?
I can't make money grow.’
‘If you didn't fritter it all away with your high-living friends up in London you wouldn't need to make it ‘grow’.
The income from the farm and lands are enough for us to live in comparative comfort without going cap-in-hand to common tradesmen.
I wish to God Nelson had put me in charge of the manor's affairs, and not a spendthrift like you.
Another month of this and I'll not be able to put a meal on the table.’
‘If it weren't for your penny-pinching ways I wouldn't be so eager to spend my time in London.
At least my friends don't pass every minute of the day counting the cost of everything I do.’
‘They have no need to count every penny.
We do.’
‘I'm not sitting here listening to your nagging.
I'm going out riding.’
‘That is your answer to every problem.
To run away from it.
I don't know where I've gone wrong in your upbringing.
Perhaps if your uncle had only been home more often…’
The door slammed behind Meredith Putt and, still furious, he headed for the stables.
It seemed to Putt that life was a constant battle against debt.
He had thought the death of his uncle, Sir Nelson, would bring about the end of his monetary problems, but Sir Nelson's wealth was in his land and livestock.
There was very little hard cash.
What little there was had gone to pay off Sir Nelson's own not inconsiderable service debts.
The argument with his mother left Putt in a foul mood.
He worked off some of the anger by berating Tom Hanks for not having Vulcan ready more quickly  when he ordered that the horse be prepared for a ride.
There was still enough ill-temper left in him to startle Vulcan into a gallop when two spurs were simultaneously jabbed into his body as they entered the straight stretch of forest track.
This had long been Meredith Putt's favourite ride.
He used it even though there was now a good straight road running along the edge of the forest.
This was the place where he had almost bowled Anna over many months before and where he enjoyed riding the horse at breakneck speed, disregarding anyone else who might chance to be on the path.
On this occasion, fate in the form of Boz Buckland stepped in before Vulcan had got into full stride.
A limp rope, lying unseen across the track suddenly rose in the air and was pulled tight between two trees.
Putt saw the movement of the rope at the very last moment, but too late to do anything about it.
As he tried in vain to jerk his head away to one side, shouting in fear, the taut rope caught him across the throat, cutting off the sound of his voice and throwing him backwards off his horse.
The force of the impact between rope and throat was such that it ruptured ligament and cartilage in Putt's larynx.
He lay on the ground thrashing around in great pain, strange choked gurgling sounds escaping from his throat.
He struggled even more when four men pounced upon him and pinned him to the ground, but his frantic movements were more an attempt to breathe than to escape.
After the struggles had continued for some minutes it became clear to his ambushers that Putt was not about  to die and they dragged him away through the trees to a spot out of sight of the track, where a small fire was burning low.
Putt was still making choking sounds deep in his throat, but he had recognised his attackers as gipsies and the fear he felt was greater than the pain.
He knew why they had swept him from his horse and he was terrified of what they would do to him.
One of the men stood over him menacingly.
‘D'you know who I am, Meredith Putt?
No?
Then let me tell you, I'm the brother of the girl you attacked in the forest not far from here.
The blind girl.
Remember her?’
Putt tried to reply but the result was a sound such as might escape from the lips of a choking man.
‘I see you do remember.
I'm glad, because now you'll know why we've taken you.
It's for revenge, Putt.
We're going to make quite sure you don't do the same to any other girl, whether she's willing or not.’
The fear in Meredith Putt's eyes became terror and his struggles increased in a frantic attempt to break free, but to no avail.
‘Hold him while I take his trousers down.’
The hoarse noises from Putt's throat resembled the sounds of a broken whistle.
‘Get to work, Isaac — and make a good job of it.
I want him to live.
To remember always…’
The inhuman whistle from the pinioned man's throat reached a new pitch as the sunlight filtering through the trees glinted on a knife blade.
The gipsy put the knife to work and Putt's body arched as a pain unlike anything he had ever known spread from his groin to the whole of his body.
His torso lifted from the ground  for a moment then collapsed into unconsciousness.
‘Get me that iron quickly.’
The gipsy discarded the knife, now discoloured with blood, and took the red-hot iron, fresh from the fire.
As he applied it to Putt's body the sickening stench of burning flesh rose into the air and one of the gipsy men uttered a faint sound of revulsion.
Standing up, the gipsy threw the iron from him and, grim-faced, spoke to the others.
‘It's done, and although I say so me'self, it's one of the neatest jobs I've ever performed.’
‘He'll live?’
Boz asked the question fiercely.
The gipsy nodded.
‘Whether he wants to or no.’
‘Then it's time to go.
Clem, go down to the cottage where Anna's staying.
Wait outside until you see the girl who lives there, the cripple girl.
Give her a message to pass on to Anna.
She's to tell my sister she can be married with honour now.’
Meredith Putt was discovered later that day by one of the forest gamekeepers.
He was crawling painfully through the undergrowth towards the track, his horse nowhere to be seen.
The ugly weal across his throat told its own story of why he was unable to say what had happened, although the gamekeeper believed he must have been swept from his horse by the low-lying branch of a tree.
Blood-stained trousers indicated that Putt had suffered other injuries and he made it clear that he was unable to walk.
The gamekeeper ran to the nearby camp of the navvies and with the aid of a sheep-hurdle Putt was carried through the village to the manor.
Shocked and distressed by the state of her injured son, Amelia Putt went in search of Tom Hanks and sent him to Burford to fetch the doctor.
However, by the time she returned to the house Putt had locked himself inside his room and he refused to open the door to her.
The doctor was no more successful in gaining entry to the room, and he told Mrs Putt that the fall had most probably affected her son's mind.
However, he assured her that the fact Putt was conscious when he was brought back to the manor meant he had probably suffered no permanent damage.
The doctor would return the next day and he had no doubt her son would be much recovered by then.
News of Meredith Putt's ‘accident’ quickly went around the village, together with various versions of his peculiar behaviour.
When Tom Hanks passed on the news that evening on his way home, Seb heaved a sigh of relief.
It meant that Meredith Putt would not be going anywhere before the return of Superintending Constable Giles Aplin — and he would not come seeking Seb because of what he had witnessed on Handley Plain.
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE
On the eve of Anna's wedding to Nahum, Seb returned home to find Nahum lounging on the grass bank outside Fern Cottage, enjoying the late-evening sunshine.
Seb was slightly embarrassed at meeting the gipsy.
He had not yet been to the Hankses' cottage to visit Anna, and it was of this the gipsy first spoke.
‘I told Anna a week or so ago that you'd promised to visit her.
She's disappointed you haven't called.
She was hoping to speak to you before the wedding.’
‘I've been busy, we've started hay-making.’
‘That's what your mother told Anna.
She said you'd call in as soon as you could.
There'll not be time now.
It's our wedding day tomorrow.’
Seb nodded without speaking.
He needed no reminding of when Anna was to be married.
‘Tom Hanks is going to give Anna away and Carrie will be her attendant.
I'd like you to stand with me as my best man.
I know you feel I've taken Anna from you, Seb, but it isn't true.
Our marriage was arranged many years ago.
If anything, I suppose I could complain that you've tried to take her from me — but I don't blame you for that.
Even if our marriage hadn't been arranged I would have wanted to marry Anna.
She's a fine girl, Seb, and she's had a hard time.
I'd like tomorrow to be the happiest day of her life, with  nothing to mar it at all.
If I've read you aright you'll wish the same for her.
Will you stand with me?’
Seb swallowed hard, then nodded.
‘If it's what you really want.’
‘Good man, Seb!’
Nahum sprang to his feet and shook Seb's hand enthusiastically.
‘It will make Anna very happy, I promise you.’
Nahum grinned.
‘What I'd really like to do now is to go for a drink with you.
Christian's a fine man, but I can only take so much religion in a week.
Tonight I feel I'd enjoy a pint of ale more than a text from the New Testament.
Will you come with me?’
‘Why not?’
Nahum's happiness was infectious and his gesture of conciliation had saved Seb from an embarrassing situation.
He had not been clear whether or not he should attend the wedding ceremony.
‘Give me a few minutes to clean up and we'll go to the Swan Inn.’
The Swan Inn was on the far side of the village from Fern Cottage, situated close to the bridge over the river Windrush.
It was a warm evening, the sun was still in the sky and Seb enjoyed chatting to Nahum as they walked.
They had never talked at any length before and Seb found the gipsy stimulating and amusing company.
They were still chatting happily together as they walked inside the inn and Seb called, ‘Two pints of ale please, landlord.’
The inn was crowded and a sudden hush fell on the customers as the landlord said loudly, ‘Gipsies aren't served at my inn.’
Seb was taken completely by surprise at the gruff announcement and he said, foolishly, ‘I'm not a gipsy.’
‘Mebbe not, but he is.’
A thumb was jerked in  Nahum's direction.
‘Like I said, I don't allow gipsies in here.’
Suddenly angry, Seb said, ‘You'd refuse to serve a man who's had a university education, is respected by everyone he's met and whose father is acquainted with the Duke of Marlborough.
Why?
Nahum could buy this inn if he'd a mind.’
The landlord was taken aback by Seb's words, but he remained unmoving.
‘I don't serve no gipsies here.’
‘He's getting married tomorrow.
Would you deny any man a pint of ale on his wedding eve?’
Seb was inclined to argue further, but Nahum had observed the inn's customers pressing closer about them, clearly prepared to take an active interest in the landlord's quarrel.
‘Come on, Seb, let's go.
As you say, it's my wedding day tomorrow, I don't want to arrive at the altar with my face in a mess.’
Seb was still angry as they walked away from the Swan Inn, retracing their footsteps through the village.
‘I would never have believed that a landlord — any landlord — would refuse a man a drink the night before he was wed.’
‘If you were a Romany you'd need to get used to such things, Seb.
It's happened many times to all of us.
I've learned to turn the other cheek in a manner that would make Christian proud.
It's the way we have to be if we're to survive.
If there's any trouble, it isn't the villager who finds himself before the court, but the Romany.’
‘Well I know where we'll get a drink — and enjoy a sight better company than we'd have got back there.’
Only the nucleus of Jacob Brailey's gang remained at  the camp on the fringe of the Wychwood Forest.
The road-building had been completed, but Brailey and his men had stayed to dig stone from a small quarry nearby for the wall-builders who followed them, enclosing the newly cleared land.
The remainder of the navvies had gone.
Some would find work with the foresters cutting down the trees.
Others would move on to wherever their skills were required to construct railways, roads or canals.
When Seb introduced Nahum as the man who would be marrying Anna on the following day, Jacob said, ‘I thought you were hoping to marry the girl at one time?’
‘So I was, but it seems Nahum and Anna were betrothed by their parents when they were still small.
They're to be married in the small church that Christian built, next to my cottage.’
While Jacob was still shaking his head, Nahum said, ‘I believe I owe you and your gang a debt of thanks for finding Anna and bringing her to safety.
I know Anna would be delighted if you'd come to the wedding tomorrow.
In the meantime, can I buy you all a drink if the man who owns the ale-cart doesn't mind serving Romanies?’
As the drinks were being distributed, Seb told Jacob of the attitude of the landlord of the Swan Inn.
‘That man's lucky he's still got an inn to serve drinks from,’ said Jacob.
‘He tried to prevent the ale wagon from coming up here to our camp.
It wasn't until I threatened to bring my men down to discuss it with him at the Swan Inn that he had a change of mind.
Perhaps I should have let them go.
‘That reminds me, another friend came here today with a message for you.
Melody's moved on with some  of my men, but she said she saw Boz again a day or two ago.
He was with some other gipsies.
She said to tell you that one of the men with Boz is Isaac Cribben.’
Nahum drew in his breath sharply and Seb said, ‘Does the name mean something to you?’
‘Yes — but unless I'm mistaken it'll mean a lot more to the man who attacked Anna.
Isaac is known among the country as an expert at gelding ponies.
It's said he can geld and cauterise a pony so expertly and swiftly there's hardly time for blood to spill.’
The two men looked at each other aghast.
It was left to Seb to put their thoughts into words.
‘Meredith Putt!
I'd like to know more about the nature of his ‘accident’!’
It was very late when Seb and Nahum left the navvies' camp.
They had both drunk far too much, yet it had been a very enjoyable evening and on the way home each vowed eternal friendship with the other.
With arms about each other 's shoulders and Seb singing a different song from Nahum, they followed an erratic course from the forest to the newly made road.
They would probably have passed the cottage of Tom and Dolly Hanks without being aware of it had not a window been thrown open unexpectedly.
Dolly's voice brought them to an abrupt halt.
‘Is that you, our Seb?
What on earth are you doing waking the whole world up at this time of night?
Who's that with you?’
‘It's my old pal Nahum.
He's getting married tomorrow so we've been…and had a drink together.’
‘You've had more than one, by the sound of you.’
There was sufficient moonlight for Dolly to see the  two ‘pals’ reeling about the lane as Seb raised his head to speak to her and upset his balance.
‘By the state you're in I'd say you've both drunk the barrel dry!’
‘Nahum's asked me to be his best man…
I've said, it's…an honour.
Isn't that what I said, Nahum?’
‘You said it would be an honour and a privilege.
That's what you said.’
‘If you two don't get to bed soon it'll be a miracle if you're up and about in time for the wedding.
Ml I can say is, I'm glad I'm not the bride tomorrow.
She'll be lucky if she doesn't have to hold both of you up during the service.
I've a mind to come down there, bring you in and dip both of your heads in a bucket of water!’
Beside her, Tom Hanks put an arm about Dolly and hugged her.
‘Leave 'em be, Doll.
It's the best thing that could have happened to the pair of ‘em.
They'll not be as lively as they ought to be come morning, but tonight will have got a whole lot of unhappy things out of Seb's system.
He'll be all the better for it, you'll see.
Come on, back to bed and let these two find their own way home.’
In the other bedroom, Carrie and Anna were listening at the open window, both doing their best to suppress giggles.
When Dolly and Tom returned to bed and Seb and Nahum went on their way, still singing, Anna suddenly and unexpectedly put her arms about Carrie and hugged her happily.
‘You know, Carrie, if Seb and Nahum have become friends tonight it will be the best wedding present I could possibly have.’
‘You do love Seb a little, don't you, Anna?’
‘I love him a lot, Carrie.
I always will.
But it would never have worked for us.
Our ways are far too different.
Mind you, I love Nahum too, but in safer, more real way.
Do you know what I mean?
Do you think it's possible to love two men, in two different ways?’
‘I don't know.’
Carrie spoke truthfully.
She had only ever loved one man — and tomorrow the barrier that stood between them would finally be removed, when Anna married another.
CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR
The marriage of a blind gipsy girl touched the hearts of every woman in Swinbrook and all those who could attended the wedding in Christian Timms's small chapel.
Jacob Brailey and his small gang of navvies were also there.
So too was a small group of half a dozen gipsy men.
They had arrived earlier that morning bringing a brand-new caravan with gleaming paintwork.
It was pulled by a fine horse and there was another tied behind the caravan.
This was Nahum's wedding gift to his bride.
As Seb stood beside Nahum in the chapel, awaiting Anna's arrival, he glanced to where the six gipsies stood in the front pew of the chapel, brightly dressed, but decidedly ill at ease.
‘It's a pity you couldn't persuade your family to be here today.’
Seb spoke softly, as the atmosphere inside the chapel dictated.
‘They are, in a manner of speaking.
Every one of the men who delivered the caravan is a Plunkett.
They're all my cousins.
My father couldn't come because he's publicly declared his opposition to the wedding and my mother wouldn't dare come without him — but she's sent good wishes through one of the cousins.
In a couple of years-sooner if a child is born — I'll be forgiven and Anna will be taken into the family.
It will be easier for my father to change his attitude now that Boz is known to have avenged the family honour.’
‘Where will you and Anna live until then?’
‘In Kent.’
At that moment there was a stir at the rear of the chapel and everyone stood as Anna entered on the arm of Tom Hanks.
The wedding between the two young gipsies was a moving ceremony, although Christian's lengthy sermon had everyone fidgeting on the hard bench seats before it was ended.
Christian spoke of Nahum as belonging to the new generation of his people, an educated man and a future spokesman for them.
He predicted the young gipsy would rise to new and great heights now he had a wife beside him — a wife who had spent most of her life in the Wychwood Forest and whose trials had touched the hearts of all those who knew and loved her.
‘Now her life has changed, as the forest itself is changing, bringing new challenges to the lives of both gipsy and villager.
Nothing will ever be quite the same again.
Gipsies must move towards us, become part of the community, contributing their skills to our daily lives as we offer our knowledge to them.
We must be ready and eager to receive them into our lives.
Welcome and help them…’
Seb and Nahum looked across at each other and both tried not to smile.
The Swan Inn landlord's wife was in the chapel.
She had been present at the incident involving Seb and Nahum the previous evening.
The long sermon eventually came to an end and shortly afterwards the young couple left the chapel as man and wife, to the applause of those who had witnessed the ceremony.
A reception was held at Handley Farm during which Nahum made an emotional speech, thanking everyone who had been so kind to him and Anna during their time among the ‘gorgios’ of Swinbrook.
When it was time for the newly-weds to say goodbye, Anna behaved in a most un-Romany manner by flinging her arms about Seb and kissing him.
‘I'll miss you, Seb.
I've always felt safe when you've been near.
I wish you were a Romany and could come with us.’
‘If I was a Romany I'd have ended up fighting Nahum,’ said Seb, trying not to allow the emotion he felt to show.
‘But he's a fine man, Anna.
He'll take good care of you.’
Giles Aplin did not return to Burford from London until a week after the wedding.
Accompanying him was Constable Gideon Eddy, a detective policeman from the newly formed squad based at Scotland Yard.
Aplin brought Eddy to Swinbrook and introduced him to Seb and Christian as the man ‘who's come here from London to help me solve the problem of our murderous highwayman’.
‘What about the attack on Anna?’ asked Seb, indignantly.
‘Isn't anyone going to investigate that?’
‘From what Superintending Constable Aplin's been telling me along the way, if we can solve one, we're likely to find the perpetrator of the other.
Where is this young gipsy girl now?’
‘Gone,’ said Seb, shortly.
‘She got married a week ago and went off with her husband.’
‘Did she make an official complaint to you about the attack?’
Detective Eddy put the question to Giles Aplin.
‘No.’
Detective Eddy shrugged.
‘Without a complaint we have no felony.
I'd say that leaves the way dear for us to concentrate on the robberies.’
Aplin nodded, but he was looking at Seb.
‘I thought you had ideas of matrimony with the gipsy girl Anna?’
‘She married one of her own people.
Nahum Plunkett.
You'll remember him.’
Seb did not believe any further explanation was necessary.
Nodding his head, Aplin asked, ‘Is that why you'd been drinking, the night before you saw the robbery on Handley Plain?’
‘It had something to do with it, yes.’
‘My constable in Burford is convinced you were still drunk when you rode in to speak to him.’
‘Your constable in Burford was looking for an excuse not to take any action.
I know what I saw.’
Somewhat embarrassed by the presence of Christian, Seb repeated what had occurred.
When Seb's story came to an end, Giles Aplin cast a quizzical glance in the direction of the London detective.
‘What do you think?’
‘I believe Seb's story, and I think you do too — but it wouldn't convince a judge.
The highwayman had a mask over his face during the robbery and kept it up when he rode away — and a horse is a horse.
Whatever colour it is, you'll find a hundred or more with similar markings.
It wouldn't be accepted in a court as conclusive evidence.
The most damning fact of all is that Seb had been drinking.
A defence counsel would tear his evidence to shreds on that fact alone.’
Seb was uncomfortably aware that Christian's  expression was one of censure, but Detective Eddy had more to say.
‘It's like so many things you've told me about these murders, robberies and the rape.
They all point to Meredith Putt — but we've no firm evidence to offer a court.
If we are thinking of taking a lord of the manor to a Court of Assize we need to have a watertight case.’
‘You mean Meredith Putt's going to get away — yet again?’
‘No,’ said the London detective, patiently.
‘It merely means we haven't sufficient grounds for arresting him yet.
The strongest piece of evidence we've found so far is that piece of chain, which ties in with the attack on the gipsy girl.
It wouldn't convict our man, but it gives us an excuse to go and pay a call on the Putts of Swinbrook Manor.’
When they reached the village, the two men paused to speak to Tom Hanks first.
He told them that none of the servants had seen Putt since the forest ‘accident’.
‘They're talking of little else,’ said the head groom.
‘He spends all day in his room and hasn't been heard to say a word to anyone.
The servants say the doctor's been three times but been forced to leave again without seeing him.
They've heard his mother hammering on the door, demanding that he open it to her.
They don't think he ever has, but the trays left outside his door are always taken in.
The only thing I can tell you with certainty is that Master Meredith hasn't been riding since the accident.
I don't know anything about the rights of that, neither.
It was forty-eight hours before we got Vulcan back.
He'd galloped all the way to Leafield and we would have lost him for good if  someone there hadn't recognised him.’
‘Do you mind if I see the horse?’
The London detective asked the question.
‘No, he's over here— and a fine horse he is, too.’
Detective Eddy showed he was a man who appreciated horses as he ran his hands over Vulcan's body.
‘He's a distinctive animal, taller than most.’
‘That's right,’ agreed Tom.
‘And Seb's ridden him a few times.
He wouldn't mistake any other horse for this ‘un, you can be sure of that.’
‘That's pretty much what Christian Timms told us.
Thank you, Mr Hanks.
I think the time has come to ask Meredith Putt a few questions.’
When Amelia Putt entered the room into which Constable Aplin and Detective Eddy had been shown by a manor servant, she looked pale and upset and her expression was strained.
But she made it immediately clear that she regarded the two policemen as being of a social order little higher than the servants.
‘I understand you wish to see my son.
I am afraid that is not possible.
He had a nasty accident when riding in the forest — a very nasty accident and is seeing no one.’
‘I'm sorry about that, ma'am.
I hope he soon makes a full recovery.’
Detective Eddy was suitably sympathetic.
‘Perhaps we needn't bother him at all.
You see, we've picked up a thief who had a cape he admits to stealing.
We've been making inquiries and learned that Mr Putt has been seen wearing one rather similar.
It's a cape with a swan-neck fastening chain.
Would you know whether he has had one stolen?’
‘Meredith still has his cape.
I can be quite certain because he broke the chain some time ago and my own  maid replaced it.
So I am afraid your time has been wasted.’
Outside the manor once more, Detective Eddy said to Giles Aplin, ‘I think that Mrs Putt's admission concerning the cape is sufficient for us to obtain a search warrant.’
‘You'll never get one from Magistrate Peck.
He'd be more likely to tell Meredith Putt of our intentions.’
‘A case of gentlemen sticking together, eh?
Well, the cape would do no more than implicate Putt in the rape of the gipsy girl and it seems she's married and gone.
From what I know of gipsies she'd never make an official complaint even if we caught up with her.
So, supposing we did get a search warrant, what would we find?
Certainly not jewellery.
If Putt is in the habit of making frequent journeys to London he'll have already rid himself of such incriminating items there.
No, Giles, we must try another tack.
I think your highwayman is a cunning and resourceful villain.
So we'll need to be twice as cunning and four times as resourceful.
What's more, we'll need more than a fair share of luck.’
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE
By the time hay-making came to an end it was impossible to work in any of the Handley Farm fields without hearing the sound of axes eating their way through Wychwood Forest.
The noise of splintering wood became more commonplace than the singing of birds as saplings and lesser trees were crushed beneath the weight of falling forest giants.
Seb was working with Christian on top of a steadily rising haystack, the last of many.
Around them women and men and children worked in the hayfield, gathering and loading, raking and stacking.
It was a time of year when there was enough employment on the farms of the English countryside for everyone.
Only the very old and infirm were excluded from the activities of the hayfields.
Resting gratefully on his pitchfork as they waited for a slow-moving loaded wagon to reach them from the far end of the field, Seb said, ‘There'll be another hundred acres to work by the spring.
Do you have any new ideas for them, Christian?’
‘Nothing that can't be changed if you have a scheme that's worth thinking about.’
‘It's not so much a scheme…
I'd like to buy half of them from you.’
‘Buy fifty acres!
How would you find the money and what would you do with so much land?’
‘The forest fair isn't too far away, neither are Witney Feast, Burford Fair and a whole lot of other fairs.
There'll be racing at each one.
I'd like to enter Grye.
Then there's the ploughing.
The new plough will be ready any day now and already I've had farmers come and see me about turning over both new and old ground for them.
I'll have money enough to pay you by spring, Christian — that's if you think three pounds ten shillings an acre is a fair price.’
‘It'll do,’ agreed Christian.
‘And mind you, you're not the only one who's looking to the future.
I've got a plan of my own I'd like to discuss with you.
But here's the hay-wagon.
We'll talk about it later.’
Seb and Christian had not found an opportunity to have their promised talk by the time the first of the local fairs came around.
It was at the village of Bampton, and Grye had a comfortable win.
Unfortunately for Seb, it was a small field with a prize to match and the only two bookmakers present made Grye a clear favourite.
It was the turn of the Witney Feast a week later and here the competition was keener.
Tom Hanks had come to the fair with two ageing horses from the manor he wanted to sell and he brought Carrie with him, riding in a light cart behind which were tied the two horses.
It was a close result and as Seb passed the winning-post no more than a neck ahead of his nearest rival, he could hear Carrie's shrill voice above the noise of the crowd, urging him on.
The odds and the prize money here were considerably higher than at Bampton and as Seb was walking  away from the race officials with his winnings, a voice in his ear said, ‘Put that money somewhere safe, Seb.
There are at least ten known pick-pockets here today — and probably as many more who aren't known to us.’
Seb turned to see Giles Aplin.
A few paces away, Detective Eddy stood gazing out over the heads of the crowd.
‘What are you doing here?
Witney isn't part of your parish.’
‘Detective Eddy has received word from London that someone he wants to see is expected to be here today.
We haven't found him yet, but thanks to you and your horse we'll be going away from Witney richer than when we arrived.
That's a good horse, Seb.’
‘It's a gipsy horse — and I have a mare in foal to him.’
Seb was still in high spirits after winning the race.
‘In a couple of years I'll have an even better horse than Grye.’
‘Giles.
Over there— the weasel-faced man in a green coat!’
Before the Burford constable could reply, Detective Eddy was pushing his way through the crowd and Constable Aplin hurried after him.
‘Seb, that was a wonderful ride.’
Carrie, her face red and flushed as a result of the shouting she had done, hugged him enthusiastically.
Behind her, Tom Hanks's happy face showed that he too had backed Grye to win.
‘You've done me proud again, Seb.
As a result of your win I can buy something special for your ma.
Some really nice material for a dress, perhaps.
Will you take care of Carrie for a while?
I'll meet you back at the cart in an hour or so.’
‘Dad's very fond of your ma, Seb.
I'm so happy for them both.’
‘So am 1.
In fact, life's been good to both of us since we came to Swinbrook.’
‘Even though you didn't get the girl you hoped to marry?’
‘Are you trying to spoil my day, Carrie?’
Even as he asked the question, Seb realised that it no longer hurt in the way it had for a long time.
‘I'm sorry, Seb, I shouldn't have said that.’
Carrie could have kicked herself, even though she would have dearly liked to hear Seb say it no longer mattered.
‘It's all right.
Anna would never have settled down to marriage with a gorgio, I realise that now.
Besides, she's got a good husband and I hope she'll be very happy with him.
Life's been pretty hard for her up to now.’
Carrie felt a sudden surge of happiness.
‘You're a good man, Seb.
Because I'm specially pleased with you I'll let you buy me something to eat from your winnings and you can tell me what Constable Aplin was saying to you just before I came along.’
‘Just a minute, Charlie.
I want to have a talk with you.’
Detective Policeman Gideon Eddy put a hand on the shoulder of the green-coated man.
Hurrying to catch up with his London colleague, Giles Aplin thought the surprised man was about to slip free of the garment and make a run for it.
‘Gor blimey!
Wot you doing ‘ere, Mr Eddy?
You ain't come all this way just to collar me, ‘ave you?
I ain't done nuffing, honest I ain't.’
‘Be careful how you use words like ‘honest’, Charlie.
They're likely to stick in your throat and choke you as surely as will a hangman's rope one day.’
‘Now wot sort of talk's that, Mr Eddy?
I've ‘elped you in the past, you know I ‘ave.
I've been good to you.’
‘You're going to help me again now, Charlie.
Me and Mr Aplin here, who's the Superintending Constable for a large parish around the Burford area.
Giles, meet Charlie Smith.
He knows more ways to earn a dishonest living than any other villain I know.’
Charlie Smith began to protest, but Gideon Eddy brought his protestations to an abrupt halt.
‘I'll do the talking for now, Charlie.
It'll be your turn in a minute.
It came as a very pleasant surprise to me when I learned that you were in the habit of spending some time in this part of the world.
As I said to Mr Aplin, when we find Charlie Smith all our troubles are going to be over.
He'll know exactly what's been going on and will be only too eager to help us.
Isn't that so, Charlie?’
‘Depends on what it is you're wanting to know, Mr Eddy.
You know me, if it's possible I'll ‘elp any way I can, but there's one or two things even I daren't open me mouth about.’
‘You'll open it for this one, Charlie, because it's important to Mr Aplin — and that means it's important to me.
A matter of murder-more than one murder, highway robbery and probably the rape of a young girl too.
All committed by a man who has to be caught.
You understand how important it is now?’
‘You talking about them robberies and murders around the Wychwood Forest, Mr Eddy?
Yes, course you are.
That's why you're ‘ere wiv ‘im.
It's about time  they brought someone like yourself in to sort it out — no offence meant to you, Mr Aplin, but Mr Eddy ‘ere's the best detective they've got up at Scotland Yard, make no mistake about that.’
‘Less of the soft sawdering, Charlie.
What do you know about what's going on?’
Charlie's face reminded Giles Aplin of a weasel as his eyes darted here and there before replying.
‘Ave you paid a visit to the ale-house up at Dore's Lodge yet, Mr Eddy?’
Detective Eddy looked questioningly at Giles Aplin and the Burford constable said, ‘It's a notorious alehouse in the forest.
I can take you there.’
‘You ought to go there and ‘ave a word with the guv'nor.’
Once again the small, weasel-faced man's eyes searched the crowd moving about them.
‘The highwayman who got ‘topped’ and the other one who was murdered in the forest used to meet there…with this nob.’
‘Do you know who he is, this ‘nob’?’
Aplin asked the question.
Charlie Smith shook his head.
‘I never ‘eard ‘is name mentioned, but there's something crazy about ‘im, I can tell you that.
I don't frighten easy, but that geezer frightened me.
Scared the landlord, too.
One night ‘e wanted money and ‘e made the landlord buy a gold ticker orf ‘im.
Threatened to shoot ‘im if ‘e didn't.’
‘This man was armed?’
‘That's right.
A two-shot pistol — and keen to use it, or so I've ‘eard.
Go and ask the landlord about the watch, guv.
He'll still ‘ave it stashed away somewhere.
It's far too ‘ot to try to sell, that much I'm sure of.’
Detective Gideon Eddy laid an arm across the shoulders of Charlie Smith in mock affection.
‘I knew you'd be happy to help me, Charlie.
Off you go now — and behave yourself, or I might feel obliged to tell a certain Whitechapel widow-woman where she can put her none-too-gentle hands on you.’
When the small, green-coated man had disappeared in the crowd, Giles Aplin asked, ‘Can we believe what he just told us?’
‘As though it were sworn in a court-room,’ confirmed the detective.
‘Charlie Smith knows better than to lie to me.
Let's pay this Dore's Lodge a visit.’
The landlord of the Dore's Lodge ale-house was less eager to be helpful than Charlie Smith had been.
When he learned the identity of his two customers, he said, ‘I run a respectable ale-house here, even though many of my customers would be shown the door if they went to one of your big city taverns.
If they learn who you are I'll lose more business than I can afford.
So I'll be obliged if you two gents would drink up and leave.’
‘Did you hear that, Giles?’
Gideon Eddy gave the Burford constable a look of mock-horror.
‘We're being thrown out of an ale-house, no less.’
‘Not ‘thrown out’,’ said the landlord, looking decidedly uncomfortable.
‘I'm just saying I'd like you to leave when you've supped your ale.’
‘I'm sure you would, landlord, but I've taken rather a fancy to this ale-house of yours.
I don't know what it is about it, but I find I have the urge to sit here and enjoy it.
Perhaps it's the furniture that would send a splinter into a man if he didn't sit as still as a rock.
Or the aroma from the half of a poached deer that's hanging behind your scullery door.
Then again it might be the company  you have here.
Shall I ask their names, Constable Aplin, or would you like to do it?’
‘Now, gentlemen,’ the landlord had perspiration on his forehead and upper lip, ‘I'm merely trying to earn an honest living…’
‘I doubt that, landlord.
I doubt that very much.’
The glance that Gideon Eddy turned upon the perspiring landlord had struck fear into a whole generation of London criminals.
‘Constable Aplin and I came here to ask you a few questions about a certain matter.
Since you seem reluctant to help us in our inquiries it might be as well if I stayed here to keep an eye on you while Constable Aplin rides to Burford to swear out a search warrant.’
‘What is it you want to know?’
The landlord's voice was as faint as he felt.
If a thorough search was made of the ale-house and its out-buildings he would go to prison for a great many years.
‘That's better.
Now, we're interested in a watch.
A gold watch.
It was given to you by a certain gentleman, as security against a loan.’
The landlord capitulated.
Disappearing into a back room, he emerged carrying a gold watch and chain which he handed to the two policemen.
A crude attempt had been made to erase three initials, but they were still plainly visible.
‘V.G.H.’ The London detective read them out to Giles Aplin.
‘They mean anything to you?’
Giles Aplin nodded.
‘Vincent Garland Hammond.
Sir Vincent Hammond.
He and Lady Sybil were murdered by the highwayman just outside Swinbrook.’
Turning back to the landlord, Giles Aplin said, ‘I already know the name of the man who gave you this  watch — but I want to hear it from your lips — and I want the truth.’
The landlord gave a half-hearted gesture of resignation.
‘If you've got this far with your investigation, you'll know already.
The watch was given to me as a surety by Meredith Putt, lord of Swinbrook Manor.’
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX
Tom, Carrie and Seb returned late from the Witney Feast.
They had stopped at an inn close to Minster Lovell to buy a grand meal and sup a few tankards of ale.
They had enjoyed a happy day and it seemed to Carrie that Seb had noticed her, really noticed her, as a young woman for the very first time.
She was still feeling pleased with life when they crossed the bridge over the river Windrush and entered Swinbrook village.
Lamps were burning inside the Swan Inn, but any drinkers still there were quiet as the trio made their way along the winding lane through the village.
Seb was riding Grye beside the light wagon, discussing with Carrie the next race in which he intended running the horse.
They were talking as the horses climbed the low hill on which church and manor stood facing each other, when Carrie suddenly exclaimed, ‘What's that light in the window of the manor, Seb?’
Seb looked up towards the manor house and saw a dancing orange light flickering erratically at one of the upstairs windows.
‘It looks almost as though it might be a fire.’
Even as he spoke, a similar glow appeared at a window farther along on the same floor.
This time there was no doubt what it was.
As they watched in  horror, they saw flames eating their way up one of the heavy curtains.
They had hardly digested the import of what they had seen when still more flames appeared at a third window.
‘Someone's inside setting fire to the manor.
Get across there and try to wake the Putts, Seb.
I'll rouse some of the villagers.’
Tom handed the reins to Carrie and leaped from the light cart, heading for a nearby cottage.
Meanwhile, Seb tied the reins of his horse to the back of the cart before sprinting towards the manor house.
By the time he reached the front door there were flames at a fourth window and he could hear an ominous crackling sound from inside the house.
Seb hammered at the door and tugged at the bell-pull but without anyone answering.
A few more attempts convinced him that nobody was going to put in an appearance.
By now villagers in various states of dress were arriving on the scene, and each had his or her own idea of what should be done.
A few of the burlier men put their shoulders to the door, but it was built of ancient oak, heavily reinforced with iron and their combined weights failed so much as to cause the door to tremble on its massive hinges.
‘Try a window,’ shouted someone, and within a matter of minutes two men had stout stakes and were breaking in the ground-floor windows.
At first, all attempts to gain access in this manner were as unsuccessful as those through the door.
There were shutters inside each window and they too resisted all efforts to break them down.
However, they were made of lesser wood than the door.
When two men used one of the  stakes as a battering ram, the shutter suddenly split apart — only to reveal an inferno raging inside.
‘What about the servants?’
One of the men voiced his somewhat belated fear and it was immediately taken up by others.
Moments later a shower of stones was hurled at the attic-room windows of the servants' quarters.
It seemed an age before one of the windows was thrown open and a woman's head appeared, rag-curlers showing beneath a sleeping-cap.
‘Wake the others and get out!
The manor's on fire!
Hurry!
Quick!’
Advice was hurled up at her, but smoke began seeping from the window behind the servant and she needed no urging.
‘They'll come down the servants’ stairs and out at the back door.
It'll give us a way in.
Hurry, form a chain to the pond with as many buckets as you can lay hands on, and keep the water coming.
I think we're going to prove too late, but we'll have to do what we can.’
Tom issued the orders to the watching villagers and, as they scurried to do as they had been told, he said to Seb, ‘Go around to the stables.
Take the horses out and lead them over to the tithe barn.
They should be safe enough in there.
Be quick now, Seb.
It only needs a spark from here to land in the stable hay and we'll lose them all.’
As Seb reached the stables screams from the back of the house indicated that some of the servants, at least, had found their way to safety.
Suddenly there was someone beside him.
‘I'll give you a hand.’
It was Carrie.
Seb protested that it was no work for a girl, realising  that the horses might panic when they saw the manor burning, but Carrie said, ‘I know the stalls even better than you.
I've been here often enough with my dad.
You take the hunters.
I can manage the cart-horses.’
As it happened, Seb had far more problems with the highly strung animals than did Carrie with the steady, patient cart-horses.
One or two of the gentle, giant horses snorted in fear, but they allowed her to lead them to the safety of the barn, while Seb was struggling to maintain control of the hunters.
When the stalls were empty, Seb took Carrie's hand and, with a brief ‘Well done!’, led her back to where the villagers were fighting a losing battle against the manor fire.
The chain of helpers worked hard swinging buckets of water from hand to hand between the village pond, fed by a small stream, and the burning manor, but their efforts were having little effect upon the fire.
Efforts to enter the building and find Meredith and Amelia Putt also proved futile and the would-be rescuers were driven out by the heat and flames.
When part of the roof collapsed and flames rose half as high again as the manor house, the firefighters drew back and restricted their efforts to keeping the outbuildings of the farm damped down.
It was about now that an ugly story began to circulate, originating with the manor's servants.
It seemed that soon after dark a rough-looking man wearing ragged clothes had appeared at the manor house, demanding to speak to Meredith Putt.
Amelia Putt was called by the servants and told the man that her son was sick and seeing no one.
However, so insistent was the man, saying his message was a matter of life or death, that Meredith's mother finally agreed to go to his room to see if he would emerge and listen to what the messenger had to say.
He must have followed her upstairs, for when she knocked at Meredith's door the man pushed past her and hammered with his fist on the door, crying, ‘It's the pot-man from Dore's Lodge, Mr Meredith.
I've a very urgent message for you from Mr Norris.
He says the game's up, sir.
You're to get away, as far as you can.’
The door was flung open and Meredith Putt stood in the doorway, unshaven, unwashed and wild-eyed, his condition startling the messenger.
Ignoring his mother, Putt tried to speak to the pot-man, but could only utter unintelligible noises.
Gathering his wits, the pot-man said, ‘The constable and a man from Scotland Yard in London came to Dore's Lodge today.
They knew all about the watch…and they took it away with them.’
Putt's face contorted with an expression of such mad rage that the frightened pot-man fled.
His mother rounded on him.
‘What was that man talking about?
Why should someone from Scotland Yard be making inquiries about you?
Meredith, what have you been up to?
I demand to know.
Does this refusal to speak to anyone have something to do with it?
Have you really lost your voice?’
Putt turned to go inside his room, but when he tried to close the door, his mother's foot prevented it and she pushed past him.
‘Oh no, there's been quite enough of this nonsense.
If you really cannot talk then you can write your replies, but I am not leaving this room until I have  them.
It feels as though my whole world is collapsing about my ears — and I intend to know why!’
The servant who passed the story on to the firefighters had been standing nearby taking in all that was being said until a glance from Meredith Putt through the partly open door sent her scuttling upstairs to complete her work, filled with apprehension by what she had just heard.
When the maid returned upstairs Mrs Putt was berating her son in a near-hysterical voice, the predominant words being, ‘Why?
For God's sake, Meredith, why?’
The maid fled to her room but could still hear Mrs Putt's shrill voice until there was a brief, muffled scream, followed by a whole series of sounds that might have been a fight.
When the servant had gone to investigate she came face to face with Meredith Putt in the corridor outside his room.
Pointing upstairs, he left her in no doubt that she was being ordered back to her room.
Too frightened to tell the other servants what she had seen and heard, the girl went to bed and cried herself to sleep.
The next thing she remembered was being woken up and told the house was on fire.
The villagers were still talking about the servant-girl's revelations when dawn broke on a grim picture.
Windowless, roofless and with blackened walls, the manor house was still smoking and nobody dared go inside just yet.
Dolly was one of the assembled crowd.
Indeed, she had been one of those in the chain passing water to the house from the pond.
She had been in her cottage waiting for the return of Tom and Carrie when a  villager ran past shouting news of the fire and she had turned out to help.
Everyone was black-faced and weary, and numbed as they contemplated their own futures.
The manor was the heart of the village.
The lords of the manor owned almost all the lands about the village and now nobody was sure what they should do.
When Constable Giles Aplin and Detective Policeman Gideon Eddy reached the smouldering remains of Swinbrook Manor, the villagers had discovered two charred and unidentifiable bodies among the ruins of the house.
The two policemen took statements from the servants about the last known moments of the occupants of the manor, and from Seb, Tom and Carrie, who described what they had seen as they approached the manor house the previous night.
‘I think that should satisfy the coroner.’
Giles Aplin patted the papers into order and placed them inside a leather document-holder.
‘I would say it also closes the file on your outstanding murders and highway robberies,’ suggested Gideon Eddy.
‘It means I have no reason to remain here any longer.
It'll be back to London for me tomorrow.’
‘Do you really believe all those murders and robberies were committed by Meredith Putt?’
The two policemen were sitting in the kitchen of Handley Farm when Seb put the question to them.
‘There was sufficient evidence for a magistrate to issue this.’
Giles Aplin drew a carefully folded document from a pocket.
‘It's a warrant ordering the arrest of Meredith Putt to answer to a charge of murder.
Well, he'll be tried by a higher court than we have in this life.
I only wish there was some way we might learn the verdict.’
‘Why should he, the lord of Swinbrook Manor, resort to robbery?
He had everything a man could possibly want.’
This time the questioner was Christian.
‘As you know, Putt was a spendthrift and a heavy gambler.
He owed money to numerous tradesmen, here and in London.
He's not the first gentleman to turn to crime to pay off his debts, but I suspect that had we brought him before a court he would have been declared insane.’
‘It's tragic that he and his mother should meet their end in such a fashion.
Tragic for them, the manor and, more especially, for the village.’
Later in the day, James Price rode to Swinbrook.
The office of the Burford solicitor was responsible for the affairs of the Fettiplace family and Price informed the numbed and bewildered villagers that the solicitors had still not heard from Sir Nelson Fettiplace's next-of-kin.
Unfortunately, the new baronet lived in India and no instructions from him were expected for many months.
In the meantime, the solicitor intended administering the estate on behalf of the family.
He asked Tom Hanks to take charge of the day-to-day running of the farm, and hoped everyone else would continue to work as before.
The solicitor guaranteed they would receive payment for their labours as though the Putts were still alive.
James Price's words eased the immediate worries of the villagers but for many of the older ones the world they had always known had come to an end.
Not only was the great forest of Wychwood being felled, but they had lost their manor and the family who had governed their lives from time immemorial.
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN
On the Sunday following the manor fire, as Tom, Seb, Dolly and Carrie left Swinbrook chapel after the morning service, Christian asked them to come to the farmhouse.
There was something of importance he wished to say that would affect them all.
The four gathered in the farmhouse kitchen apprehensively.
They had discussed the possible reasons for such a meeting as they made their way to the farm, and all feared the worst.
Perhaps Christian's ownership of the farm depended in some way upon the manor, or the Fettiplace family, and Christian had called them together to break the bad news to them.
But Christian soon made it clear that his plans had nothing to do with the fire at the manor, although he admitted that Tom being placed in charge of the manor farm did affect what he had in mind.
Quite unaware of the alarm his summons had provoked, Christian beamed at the four people assembled in the kitchen of his farmhouse.
‘I have reached a momentous decision, a joyous decision, and I've brought you here to tell you about it.’
Apprehension became puzzlement.
Christian was too happy to be the bearer of bad news, and yet he had told them earlier he had something to say that would affect them all.
It had to involve the farm.
‘I have decided to answer the Lord's call and become  a minister of the Methodist Church.’
Three of the people in the room looked at Seb.
The unexpected news affected them all in some way, but it would have the greatest impact upon Seb's life.
As though unaware of the many doubts in the minds of each of his listeners, Christian went on to explain the reasons behind his momentous decision.
‘Becoming a Methodist minister has been my ambition for many years.
When Seb came to the village, it was as though the Lord had said, ‘Here you are, Christian.
I've sent you a young man who loves horses as you do, and who can continue your work with them.
Now you can come and work for Me.’
I applied for a place at the Methodist Institution training college in London — and have heard I have been accepted.’
As Christian beamed at his small audience, Seb asked, ‘How long will you be away from Swinbrook?’
‘My training will last for two years.
When it's done I hope to interest the Church in a mission to the gipsies.’
‘But…what will happen to Handley Farm?’
Seb could contain the burning question no longer.
‘What about me?’
‘I must confess the fire at the manor has caused me some problems,’ admitted Christian.
‘It had been my intention to ask Tom to help manage Handley Farm, but I realise he cannot possibly take on such a task now he has been asked to perform similar duties on behalf of the manor.’
‘So who'll be coming here now?’
Seb asked the question that would decide his future.
‘No one.
I intend leaving you in charge, Seb.’
A fleeting expression of amusement crossed Christian's  face as Seb's mouth dropped open in delighted disbelief.
‘I realise you lack experience, Seb, but you're not lacking in ambition and you're eager to learn.
You can already manage horses better than any man I know — with the possible exception of Tom here — and you've picked up a good general knowledge of farming.
I shall plan out what I propose to do on the farm for the next three years, season by season, and we'll look for a ploughman to help with your new venture.
It might also be necessary to employ a good lad from the village to help.
I know Tom is going to be very busy, but I'm sure he'll agree to meet up with you two or three times a week.
You can tell him what you've done, what you intend doing, and seek his advice.
I will, of course, pay Tom a quarterly sum in acknowledgement of his help.’
Seb's astonishment had been replaced by eagerness as Christian talked, and the farmer added, ‘I've built a reputation for my horses, Seb, and I know you'll not only continue that reputation, but probably enhance it.’
Looking about him at the others, Christian said, ‘There!
Those are my plans for the future, now it's time for you to air your views.’
Seb was the first to speak.
‘It's a wonderful opportunity, Christian, and I'm grateful for your trust in me but you've already agreed to sell me that fifty acres of new land.
Would you object if I were to buy any other land that might be on offer, and work it with the farm?’
Christian smiled.
‘I've already said I admire your ambition.
I can hardly say no.
What are your views, Tom?’
Tom was concerned.
‘Seb's good with horses, Christian.
Better than me — though I might still teach  him a thing or two — but the farm is a big responsibility for any young man, especially one with a London background.’
‘When Seb came here he had only one way to go, Tom.
That way was ‘up’.
Perhaps I see in him something of the son I would like to have had, but never did.
I have every faith in him although I realise he doesn't know everything.
Will you help him?’
‘Of course I will, there was never any doubt of that.’
Tom had seen Seb's expression of eager determination.
‘You're right, Christian.
Young Seb is on his way — and I'll have to work hard if I'm to keep up with him.’
‘Good!
I'm glad that's settled.
You'll need to move to the farmhouse, Seb, and you'll be wanting help about the place.’
‘I can help up here,’ said Carrie, who had caught some of Seb's contagious eagerness.
‘I can clean in the house, look after the chickens, and put in some time with Dolly in the dairy.’
‘Thanks, Carrie.’
Seb's look returned to the farmer.
‘And thanks to you too, Christian.
It's going to work…
I know it is.’
When Christian left for London to begin his new life in the Methodist ministry, Seb took him to the railway station at Shipton-under-Wychwood in the farm's gig and Carrie came with him for the ride.
As the train steamed noisily into the station, Christian said his farewells, adding, ‘I leave Handley Farm in your hands with every confidence, Seb.
I wasn't much more than your age when I took on the farm myself.
Work hard — and pray harder.
It's the formula that succeeded for me, I know it will do the same for you.’
After watching the train steam away with Christian waving from an open carriage window until he was out of sight, Carrie and Seb set off on the return journey in the gig.
‘You must be feeling very proud today, Seb.’
‘Proud?
Yes — and scared too.
Very scared.’
‘I don't believe that, Seb Quilter.
There's not much scares you.
Your mum's fairly bursting with pride for you too, you know.’
Setting the horses to a brisk trot, Seb said, ‘She's very proud of you too, Carrie.
When we first came here you were afraid to go outside your garden — but now look at you.
You do twice as much as any other girl I know.
You're teaching in the chapel most mornings, helping in the dairy and working in the house too.’
‘I owe much of that to Anna — and to you.’
‘Anna I can understand, she's an example to everyone-but why me?’
‘You gave me lots of reasons to get out and about.
To realise that a crippled leg doesn't make me some sort of oddity.
I'll always be grateful to you for doing that, Seb.’
Embarrassed both by her comments and by the expression on her face, Seb squeezed the hand she was resting on the cart in front of her.
‘You're a funny girl, Carrie, and no mistake.’
Carrie was uncertain whether it was what she wanted to hear him say, but she accepted his brief gesture of affection and smiled up at him.
‘My knee is never going to work the way it should, Seb, but the muscles of my leg are working much better, have you noticed?
I can walk for quite long distances now.’
‘Yes.’
Seb already had his mind on other things.
‘I'm  happy for you.
Hold on tight now — I'm going to whip up the horse.
I want to get back to the farm.
There's a whole lot of work to be done.’
That autumn was so busy for Seb he hardly had time to think his own thoughts.
The clearing of Wychwood Forest had almost been completed now and the demand for ploughing increased beyond all his expectations.
Taking a gamble, Seb bought a second plough and took on another ploughman.
Occasionally, he would take the place of one of the men, and he also did much of the ploughing of Handley Farm's own lands.
Seb saw far less of Carrie during these weeks than he would have wished.
As he walked behind the plough he had time to think of the easy relationship that had gradually built up between them.
He felt a contentment when he was in her company that he missed when he did not see her for a while.
But there always seemed to be something else to be done about the farm.
He was so busy for much of the time that on more than one occasion his meetings with Tom had to be conducted with Tom walking beside him as he ploughed a field.
Now Tom was managing the manor farm, Dolly was spending much time at the dairy there.
Carrie had taken over many of Dolly's duties at Handley Farm, with two young girls aged ten and eleven to help her in the dairy.
In exchange for their work, Carrie gave the two girls free lessons.
Harry Agg, the old man who had helped on the farm for very many years, was still employed there, but he did little more than potter, his main duties being to clean out the stables and cowshed.
Seb still contrived to spend a couple of hours with Carrie every Sunday evening to work on the farm's ledgers, carefully noting down each item of expenditure and the profit made.
Sometimes they carried out the work at the Hankses' cottage and occasionally at the farm, but so tired was Seb as a result of the long days he was working that twice he fell asleep while Carrie was writing.
One evening Seb entered the farmhouse at dusk and found Carrie in the kitchen.
‘What are you doing here?
You should have gone home long ago.’
‘You've got men coming tomorrow to do the threshing.
They're renowned as a hungry lot.
I stayed on to do some cooking in readiness for them.
There's plenty here, so if you clean yourself up and sit down at the table I'll put something out for you too.
Your mum is worried about you.
She said when she saw you last you were as thin as a rake — and she's right.
You need a sight more flesh on your bones.’
‘I don't want that, Carrie.
I want to take part in a few more races next year and you'll never hear of a plump jockey winning races.’
‘There's little fear of you ever being plump, Seb Quilter, you're always far too busy.
Neither will you ever make old bones if you don't take more care of yourself.
Hurry up now, there's a small pie here I've made specially for you.
Eat it while it's hot.’
‘I don't know what I'd have done without you these last weeks, Carrie.
You've been a God-send, and no mistake.’
Carrie had her back to him as she busied herself by the fire.
As Seb passed by he placed his hands on her  shoulders and leaned over to kiss her on the cheek.
‘Thank you.’
Carrie did not turn round as Seb went out into the yard to wash.
She was afraid he might see the colour he had brought to her cheeks.
His gratitude — and the kiss — meant more to her than she would ever have admitted to anyone.
Carrie wished it might have been as meaningful to Seb.
Unfortunately, she believed, it was no more than the gesture of a tired and grateful man.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT
As autumn slipped gradually into winter so work on the farm slowed down.
However, although there was less to be done, there were also fewer hours in which it could be accomplished.
Nevertheless, Seb still found time to improve his learning with Carrie.
The last few months had taught him quite clearly that a good knowledge of writing, reading and arithmetic was no longer enough.
Now he had a farm to run he needed to know something of farm bookkeeping.
Seb had always had an instinct for whether or not something was likely to make money, but now he was required to record farm profit and expenditure for Christian it was not enough to leave it all to Carrie.
He took to spending more time than before at the Hankses' cottage and his relationship with Carrie was an uncomplicated, comfortable one.
One cold evening, Seb returned from the cottage to Handley Farm along lanes, the banks of which were already glistening with frost.
It was cold and he thrust his hands deeper inside the pockets of his coat.
Shrugging the collar higher around tingling ears he thought of Carrie.
He had realised some time before that he was becoming more and more attracted to her.
He was also beginning to rely very heavily on her sound judgement on a number of things.
Despite their closeness, Seb was  not at all certain of Carrie's feelings for him.
He thought he would ask his mother.
She would know.
When he reached the farm, Seb carried out his usual evening routine and checked that doors of cow-sheds and stables were securely closed.
The wind got up swiftly here and it was already quite strong tonight.
Having checked the main stable doors, Seb climbed the steps at the side of the stable and pushed the door to the hay-loft.
It was secure.
As he turned to return down the steps he was thinking of Carrie once more and not taking care where he was stepping.
He trod on a patch of ice and slipped, falling down the dozen or so stone steps.
At the bottom of the steps, bruised and breathless, Seb sat up, grateful still to be in one piece.
But when he tried to stand a cry of pain escaped him and he reached for the wall of the stables for support.
He had hurt his right ankle and it was too painful to put to the ground.
He tried once or twice before hopping to the farmhouse, wincing in pain whenever he jolted the injured ankle.
Once inside the house Seb removed his boot and sock from the injured foot.
The ankle was already swollen and painful to the touch.
He thought he had probably broken it, but there was little he could do at this time of night.
He made his way to bed, going backwards up the stairs, making use of his arms and one good leg.
The next morning Seb was sitting in the kitchen minus his boot and sock when Carrie came into the house.
The ankle had swollen more during the night and was extremely discoloured.
‘What have you done?
That looks awful!’
Carrie  dropped to her knees to examine the ankle making sympathetic noises as Seb told her how the accident had occurred.
Carrie was appalled.
‘What would have happened if you'd hit your head instead of your ankle?
You could have been lying out there in the farmyard all night!’
‘It's no good thinking of what I might have done, Carrie.
Can you speak to old Harry?
You'll probably find him over in the cow-shed.
I thought I heard him bring the cows in earlier but he's grown so deaf he didn't hear when I called him.
Ask him to make some sort of crutch for me.
Something I can tuck underneath my arm and use to get about with.’
‘All in good time.
First I'm going down to the village to fetch old Bonnie and get her to have a look at that ankle.
You just sit here until I get back here with her.’
Bonnie Edgington lived in a cottage in the heart of the village.
She was the midwife, nurse and layer-out of bodies.
Her services were also called upon to charm away warts and cure ringworm in cattle.
The old lady was at home but she grumbled incessantly at being called upon to go out on such a chilly morning.
‘That young Londoner up at the farm, you say?
I can't say I'm surprised.
He can't be expected to know how to stay out of trouble here in the country.
From what I've heard he's come up in the world since he went to work for Christian Timms.
I'd ‘a thought he'd at least have the courtesy to send a pony and trap for me instead of expecting an old lady to walk all the way up to Handley Farm on such a frosty morning.’
‘He'd have done it willingly had I stopped to ask him, Bonnie, but I didn't.
I told him I was coming down here to fetch you, and here I am.
I'm sure he'll arrange  something to bring you back.’
‘All right then, but you mind he does — and I hope he's got something more than milk to drink up there.
That's all that Christian offered me when I went up there to lay out that poor young wife of his.
All right, there's no need for that impatient look, young lady.
I may not move as fast as you, but we'll be there in good time.
I haven't heard of anyone dying from a broken ankle — that's if it is broken.’
After an examination, Bonnie declared that Seb's ankle was not broken.
This was her diagnosis after she had pulled his foot this way and that, in a manner that brought Seb out in a sweat and had him groaning in anguish.
‘It's nothing but a nasty sprain, that's all.
You come back to my cottage with me, young Carrie.
I'll give you a jar full of poppy seeds.
Crush them to a powder and boil them, then soak the ankle when the water's cooled enough to bear.
That'll bring the bruising out and the ankle will be as right as rain in a week or two.’
‘I can't afford to be off work for a couple of weeks!
There's too much to be done about the farm.’
‘Then you'll need to go down on your knees in that chapel Christian Timms built and call on someone more highly qualified than either me or Doctor Cheatle.
You'd better be quick too.
We're going to have snow and you won't be able to do much work when it arrives.
Now, all that hurrying has given me a thirst.
Do you have something to put the strength back in a poor old woman?’
Bonnie grumbled when Seb offered her ale, complaining that him ‘being from London’ she thought he'd at least have a bottle of Holland's in the house.
Despite  her complaint, Bonnie managed to down three pints of strong ale before being taken home in the light cart, driven by the young stable-lad.
Seb was not the best of patients.
When a stick was cut for him to use as a crutch he hobbled about the yard, complaining that nothing was being done properly in his absence.
Seb also took Bonnie Edgington's snow warning seriously.
When one of the men he had employed as a ploughman in the autumn came to the farm, more in hope than the expectation of finding any work, Seb was able to offer him a day's pay.
After bringing the horses in from the fields and putting feed in the stables for them, his next task was to bring all the sheep in close to the farm.
The cows would be dealt with by Carrie, but the bullocks too were brought in and penned securely with both shelter and fodder at hand.
True to Bonnie's prediction it began snowing that night.
It was a heavy snowfall and by morning even the most prominent landmark was disguised beneath a thick covering of snow.
The cows were in the cow-shed but they needed milking.
When Seb was beginning to worry about the task, Carrie arrived at the farm, carried there on the back of a horse ridden by her father.
Tom was on his way to the manor farm to ensure all was well there.
‘I've got a good man living in that old place of yours above the stables,’ said Tom, enjoying a warm at the kitchen fire before riding on.
‘But I want to satisfy myself that all's well.
This is the worst snowfall we've had for years.
I should complete all that needs to be  done by late afternoon and I'll come back to collect Carrie on my way home.’
‘All right, but don't you try to come up here if the weather's too bad.’
Carrie pulled her father's coat across his chest and tucked the end of his scarf inside it.
‘There's plenty of room up here for me to stay quite comfortably and there ought to be someone on hand to milk the cows, however bad the weather.’
By noon the weather had worsened and it was snowing once more.
Watching through the kitchen window as the snow fell from a leaden sky, Seb suggested that Carrie ought to try to make her way home before it deteriorated even further.
‘And leave you and Christian's cows to fend for yourselves?
No, Seb.
You build up the fire while I go out to milk the cows.
It's a bit early, but that'll be one thing less for you to worry about.’
By the time Carrie had completed her task the wind had increased in strength from the north and a fierce blizzard was setting in.
It soon became so bad that Seb was concerned lest Carrie was unable to cross the farmyard from the cow-shed.
It was a great relief to him when she stumbled in through the door in a flurry of snow and he set to and made a cup of tea to warm her.
When Carrie had some feeling back in her cold limbs she began bustling around to cook them a meal while Seb sat using part of the kitchen table to work on the farm accounts in the pool of yellow light cast by the lamp.
Long before the meal was ready the kitchen was hazy with smoke, blown back down the chimney by the wind  that was howling around the farmhouse.
In spite of the difficulties caused by the weather, Carrie produced a meal of baked rabbit, potatoes, swede and carrots and put it in front of Seb while the wind rattled the door and windows and an occasional gust seemed to shake the very house itself.
‘I can't see your dad reaching us in this weather, even riding a horse.’
‘I hope he doesn't try, there must be three- or four-foot drifts out there and it'll be worse across Handley Plain.’
They both ate, trying not to think about being in the house together, cut off from the rest of the world.
When he had finished eating, Seb hopped to the back door and opened it slightly, having great difficulty preventing the wind from blowing it open further.
‘Look out here, it must be at least three feet deep outside — and this is the sheltered side!
If it's drifting on the far side it will be up to the roof.
I hope the stock will be all right.’
‘There's nothing can be done about it now, if it's not.
Close that door and keep the warmth in, Seb.
Would you like more to eat?’
In the Hankses' cottage, Tom rubbed the steam from the window and peered outside, able to see nothing but heavy snowflakes melting against the windows.
‘I really ought to try to get up to the farm to fetch our Carrie down.’
‘Don't talk ridiculous, Tom.
You couldn't make it up there even on a horse.
You said so yourself when you came in — and that was some hours ago.’
‘I should have gone before coming home here.
At least, I ought to have tried, but I didn't think we'd end up with a blizzard like this.
I can't remember when I've ever seen the like of it.’
‘You just forget about our two up at the farm and sit down here with me, by the fire.’
‘But we can't just leave them up there on their own, Dolly.
It ain't right.’
‘Oh and what's not right about it?
Tell me, Tom Hanks, what's the worst thing they could get up to between the pair of ‘em?’
‘You don't need me to tell you that, Dolly.
You know as well as I do.’
‘Perhaps I do.
All right then, what hopes do you have for the future of both Seb and Carrie?’
‘The same as you.
I'd like to see the pair of them wed.
They're made for each other.
You know it, I know it and Carrie knows it, I only wish Seb did.’
‘Well, can you think of a better opportunity for them to find out what's best for the both of ‘em?’
‘You think so?
I don't know, Dolly, it still don't seem right.’
‘You forget about them two, Tom Hanks.
Just be thankful they're safely in away from this weather and with a roof over their heads.
We should be grateful for that too, there's many in this world who haven't.
Come on, let's go to bed, and if they've got any sense that's what Seb and Carrie will be doing, up at the farm.’
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE
Seb knew it was well past the time he and Carrie should have retired to their respective bedrooms, but he found the thought of mentioning bed vaguely embarrassing.
Yet it was late and when the hands of the grandfather clock in the kitchen pointed to eleven-thirty he cleared his throat unnecessarily noisily and said, ‘I doubt if the weather's going to clear up enough tonight for your dad to even try to get here.
Anyway, he knows you're safe enough.
You'll have to stay.
There's a bed made up in the room across the landing from mine.
But you know that already, you clean the farmhouse for me…’
‘Yes.
I think perhaps we ought to go up now and hope the weather's better in the morning.’
Carrie found it as difficult to discuss bedtime as did Seb.
They both stood up, each reluctant to be the first to make a move.
Eventually, Seb said, ‘You'd better go upstairs first, Carrie.
I'm a bit slow with this leg of mine.’
‘Well, I'm not a lot faster going upstairs with mine.’
Laughter seemed to break down some of the barrier of embarrassment that had built up between them and when Carrie lit two candles she handed one to Seb and said, ‘Good night, Seb.
I hope your ankle doesn't keep you awake.’
‘You sleep well too, Carrie.’
They stood looking at each other uncertainly, then  Carrie made her way to the door and he heard her going upstairs, with considerably more skill than he would be able to muster.
Seb made his way up the stairs in the same fashion as on the previous evening.
Backwards, raising himself from step to step on his backside.
It was cold in the bedroom and the wind was extremely noisy.
It howled around the house, whistled through cracks in the window-frames and rattled slates on the roof.
Seb undressed and prepared for bed and had just blown out his candle when he heard a noise from the landing just outside his room.
Hopping awkwardly to the door he looked out and caught a glimpse of Carrie standing there dressed only in a linen slip, with one arm clutching a bundle of bedclothes, the other holding a candle.
He was able to see no more because a draught caused by the opening of his door blew out the candle she was holding.
‘I'm sorry I brought you out, Seb.’
Carrie's voice came to him in the darkness.
‘But it's my bedding.
I don't know how long it's been on the bed, but it's far too damp to sleep in.
I'll just go downstairs and air it in front of the fire for a while.
You go on back to bed.’
‘I'm sorry, Carrie.
I should have thought of that.
Here, let me help.’
‘No, Seb.
Your ankle…’
For a moment Seb had forgotten his sprained ankle but it reminded him in no uncertain fashion when he tried to put his full weight on it.
‘Ouch!’
His ankle gave way and he stumbled against Carrie.
Dropping the bedding in her arms she held on to him  and probably prevented him falling from the narrow landing down the stairway.
‘Seb, are you all right?’
‘Yes, I'm fine.’
Gritting his teeth against the pain, he held on to Carrie until he regained his balance.
‘I just feel so damned silly and helpless.
Here, let me help you pick up the bedding and we'll take it downstairs.
Perhaps we can think of some way to go down together, using our two good legs.’
They both laughed and it was a pleasant feeling of togetherness.
‘I dropped the candle too, Seb, and I can't seem to find it.’
‘It doesn't matter.
We can get downstairs all right and there'll be firelight in the kitchen.’
Seb did not want a light to show Carrie how he got down the stairs.
In the kitchen the fire was burning low but there was light enough to see the steam rising from the bedclothes as they held them out to air.
‘It's a good job you didn't try to sleep in these, you'd have caught your death of cold.’
‘Yes…but I'm sorry I disturbed you, Seb.’
It was warm in the kitchen and the fire cast a soft light on Carrie who was kneeling in front of the fire, folding the blanket she had been airing.
She had taken off the ribbon that kept back her hair and it hung about her shoulders, much longer than Seb had realised.
‘I'm not.’
Something in Seb's voice made Carrie look up at him sharply.
What she saw brought her slowly to her feet.
In the few moments they stood looking at each other, both were acutely aware they were cut off from the rest  of the world.
It was just the two of them, in the warmth and near-darkness of the farmhouse kitchen.
Neither spoke, nor was there need of words, and afterwards Carrie could not recall whether Seb came to her, or she went to him.
As they kissed each could feel the flimsiness of the clothing that divided their bodies, but for Carrie it did not matter.
Nothing mattered now except that Seb was holding her.
Kissing her.
The touch of his hand on her body made her tremble, but she did not want him to stop.
Would not allow him to stop.
‘Carrie…let's go upstairs.’
‘No, Seb.
Here…by the fire.
It's warmer.’
They lay on the aired bedding in front of the fire and made love as Carrie had always hoped it might be.
With a gentleness that lasted until the moment the primitive needs of their bodies demanded to be satisfied.
Afterwards, Seb lay with his head cradled against Carrie's breast for a long time.
He thought she was asleep, but when he put a hand to her face he felt warm tears on her cheek.
Starting up he said, ‘I'm sorry, Carrie.’
‘No, Seb.
I don't want you to be sorry.
Not now, or ever.’
The fire had died down and Carrie said, ‘Let's go upstairs now, Seb.
Go to bed…’
Seb awoke suddenly in the morning in the belief that he could hear someone speaking.
Remembering the snow, he lay back beside Carrie — and then he heard the sound again.
It was someone calling!
Leaping from the bed, Seb put his bad foot to the  floor and cried out in agony, but he continued hopping towards the window.
Rubbing away a thin film of ice, he peered through a small frame of snow — and saw Tom Hanks entering the farmyard, plodding doggedly behind a horse that was struggling to pull an improvised wooden snow-plough!
‘What is it?’
Carrie's voice called from the bed.
‘It's your dad!
He's rigged up some sort of snowplough behind a horse.’
Before he completed the sentence Carrie had tumbled from the bed and was limping rapidly from the room, in a state of total nakedness.
By the time Tom reached the house and shovelled his way to the door, Seb and Carrie were both fully dressed and Carrie was bending over the fire, coaxing life from the embers as she prepared breakfast.
‘I never expected to see you — or anyone else — up here this morning,’ Seb admitted honestly as he sat down at the kitchen table.
‘I don't suppose you did.
I said to Dolly that if I didn't do something you'd be cut off from the world for a week or more.
Then I remembered this old snowplough.
I made it years and years ago, when Carrie was a small girl.
I don't suppose she even remembers it.’
Carrie agreed it was an item that had completely slipped her memory, but Tom was already speaking again.
‘Everything all right up here?
No problems in the night?’
Seb assured the older man there had been no problems during the night, but added, ‘I am worried about the stock, especially the sheep in the pen behind the barn.’
‘Right, you save me some of that breakfast, young  Carrie, and I'll go out now and check on things about the farm.’
When Tom had gone from the house, carrying a broad-bladed, long-handled shovel, Seb asked, ‘You all right, Carrie?’
‘Yes.’
Carrie flashed Seb a shy smile that, had he been looking at her, would have conveyed to him all the love she was feeling.
But Seb was struggling up from the table.
Limping awkwardly to the window, he watched Tom fight his way through the snow in the farmyard, and he thought of how close he and Carrie had come to being caught in bed together.
After Tom had returned to his cottage taking Carrie with him it snowed heavily once more, and this time the drifts in the lane to the farm defied all the efforts of Tom and his improvised horse-drawn snow-plough.
For seven days Seb was isolated at the farm, yet despite the handicap of a crutch tucked beneath one arm he managed to dig a narrow path linking the house, dairy, hen-house, stables and cow-shed.
He spent a great deal of time inexpertly milking complaining cows, only to feed most of the milk to the pigs.
By the time the snow began to thaw he could walk gingerly on his injured ankle and when aid arrived at the farm in the form of Tom's snow-plough, with Tom guiding the plough and Carrie riding the horse, Seb was standing in the farmyard to greet them.
Carrie floundered excitedly through the snow to greet him and it seemed she was about to throw her arms about him.
Seb stepped back quickly, embarrassed by the expression he thought he saw on Tom's face.
Carrie's arms dropped to her side and Seb immediately regretted his own bashfulness.
‘You all right, Seb?’
‘Fine, Carrie.
Has everything been all right for you and my ma, down at the cottage?’
Carrie nodded, her eyes searching his face for something.
Evidently failing to find what she sought, she turned away and entered the farmhouse.
‘It's good to see you, Seb.
It's been hell shut up in that cottage with two women who would both have braved the weather to come up here to see how you were if I hadn't been on hand to stop them.’
Tom spoke as he stamped snow from his boots in the doorway of the farmhouse kitchen.
‘I was worried about him…having that bad ankle and all.’
Carrie looked about her at the crackling fire and a fair semblance of tidiness in the kitchen.
‘But he seems to have been doing well enough by himself.
I think he must have been putting on all that business with his ankle, just to gain sympathy.’
Carrie flashed a glance in his direction and Seb blushed, believing Tom was capable of reading the same meaning into the look as he did.
Tom had noticed nothing untoward.
‘How have you managed?’
‘I just did what I could around the place, milking the cows and making sure everything had enough to eat.
The only animals I haven't been able to check on are the sheep.’
‘They looked well able to survive a week when I last looked at them, but I'll go and check again now.
While I feed them Carrie can be feeding you.
She and your ma have spent this last week making cakes and pies to  bring up here as soon as the weather allowed.’
‘Don't take any notice of him, but I have got a nice meat pie here for you.
I'll build the fire up a bit more and heat it for you now.
There's a couple more to be brought in from the pack on the horse.
You'd best put them by in case the weather closes in again.’
Inside the kitchen, while Carrie busied herself at the range, Seb hovered behind her, wanting to touch her, but not daring to, in case she objected.
Then he hesitated because he had left it too late and he was concerned that Tom would walk in through the door again at any minute.
Carrie suddenly said, ‘Your mum and I were worried about you, Seb, but all my dad could keep saying was, ‘It's a good job I managed to reach you when I did, or you'd have been up at that farmhouse for another week.’’
‘It's something I kept thinking about, too.
If I'd known what it was I would have chopped up that snow-plough before the snows arrived.’
Carrie rounded on him, her face alight with pleasure.
‘Would you really, Seb?’
‘Yes.
Mind you, spending a week snowed-in with me would have done nothing for your reputation.
When your dad eventually reached you he would have insisted that I marry you.’
Carrie lost some of her effervescence.
‘No, Seb.
No one 's ever going to have to marry me, I promise you that.’
Seb realised he had inadvertently said the wrong thing, but Carrie had gone to the scullery that opened off the farmhouse kitchen.
By the time he limped to the scullery door she was back again, broom in hand, and  had begun attacking mud that had been tramped inside the kitchen during the past week.
‘Look at this!
You can see there hasn't been a woman in this house for more than a week.
Never mind, we'll have it clean by the time the pie's ready.’
Carrie was still sweeping when her father returned.
‘You don't have to worry about those sheep, Seb, they're as snug as bugs in a rug out there, but I've given them some more hay, just in case.
This snow will have cost you a small fortune in wasted hay by the time it thaws, but it was the right thing to do, it's saved your stock.’
Tom settled himself down at the table and said, ‘Now, let's have a chat about what we're going to do when this snow clears.
You won't be able to do much in the fields, it'll be far too wet for a week or two.
I suggest you whitewash out the pigsties and the cowsheds.
Get that ploughman to help you if he comes back up here.
By the way, your ma will be able to help out at your dairy for a month or two as I'm cutting down on the number of cows at the manor.
It means that Carrie won't need to work on the farm quite so often…’
CHAPTER FIFTY
After the floods caused by the thaw, Oxfordshire enjoyed a long dry spell of weather, with strong, drying winds.
It was good news for Seb.
There was still a great deal of work to be done ploughing fields reclaimed from the forests.
One of his two ploughmen had left the district and Seb found himself performing a lot of the work himself.
Other work was being offered too.
No sooner had the late ploughing been completed than he began accepting contracts for harrowing.
During these weeks Seb rarely saw Carrie, except for a few hours each Sunday when they worked on the farm ledgers together at the Hankses' cottage, and even here they were rarely alone.
One Sunday, when Tom had gone into the garden to look at some flowers that Dolly had planted, Seb's pen paused over the sum on which he was toiling.
‘We don't seem to have seen much of each other since…since the snows, Carrie.’
‘I thought that was probably the way you wanted it to be.’
‘It isn't.
Look, I know you've said it doesn't matter, but I am sorry about what happened up at Handley Farm.’
‘Sorry for what, that you made love to a cripple?
Or sorry because it embarrasses you to be with me because of it?’
‘It's neither of those things, Carrie.’
Seb knew he had failed yet again to break through the barrier of embarrassment that lay between them, and he did not know what to do about it.
He was having enough difficulty understanding his own feelings, without trying to fathom out Carrie's.
Seb felt happy and comfortable when he was with Carrie — at least, he had before the night they had spent snowed-in together at the farm.
During that night their love-making had been something wonderful.
At the time he had believed she felt the same.
Since then they had been awkward in each other 's company and everything seemed to have gone wrong.
When Tom and Dolly returned inside the cottage all chance of speaking privately to Carrie disappeared.
Seb determined he would find time to have a long talk with her when his present hectic spell of work came to an end.
He needed to speak to her- and to Tom, her father.
Four days after Seb had reached his decision about Carrie, Anna and Nahum paid a surprise visit to Handley Farm.
The weather was giving promise of an early spring and they were on their way northwards, to Nahum's father.
Anna was very happy and the shape of her body broadcast the reason, even before Nahum began his explanation.
Noah Plunkett had forgiven his son and offered the marriage his blessing now that Anna was pregnant.
He had asked Nahum to bring his wife home.
The gipsy leader wanted his grandchild to be born in northern England, surrounded by the Plunkett family and friends.
Anna kissed and hugged Seb, but now it was in a more mature, inhibited manner than she had when they last said farewell.
There were four other caravans travelling with the young couple, but these gipsies were on their way to the old camp in the Wychwood Forest.
News had reached them of the happenings at the manor and they rightly assumed that with Tom in charge of the manor farm they were not likely to be evicted from their forest camp.
The gipsies were still in the area when Christian Timms made a surprise visit to Handley Farm.
He was accompanied by James Price, the Burford lawyer.
Seb was out harrowing one of his own fields when the young stable-hand came and told him of Christian's arrival.
Christian wanted to see Seb at the farm immediately.
Seb arrived at the farmhouse and feared the worst when he saw the meeting was taking place in the ‘best’ sitting room and not in the kitchen.
His fears were fuelled when he saw the others gathered there.
James Price, Tom, Dolly and Carrie were seated around the room.
Surprisingly, so too were Nahum and Anna.
When it came, there was nothing at all ominous in the reason for Christian's unexpected visit…but it was none the less a bombshell.
Clearing his throat noisily, Price perched a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles on his nose and announced he had received a letter from India.
‘I must confess, the news it contained was not at all what I had been expecting.
It has caused me a great deal of work, but it has resulted in an extraordinary discovery, one that I hope may prove satisfactory to you all.’
He peered over the rim of his spectacles at each of the room's occupants in turn before continuing.
‘I learned that the nearest known relative of the late Sir Nelson Fettiplace was dead.
Indeed, he predeceased Sir Nelson, which made my task a little easier, inasmuch as it was not necessary for me to carry out complicated inquiries in India.
However, it has been necessary for me to consult Fettiplace family records, going back very many years.
To Sir Nelson's father, in fact.’
The solicitor's gaze moved around the room once more as Price warmed to his task.
‘I learned, quite by chance, that when Sir Nelson's father willed this farm to Mr Timms, he also officially recognised Christian as his natural son.
Something he never did with other, er…would-be claimants.
Now, the extraordinary thing is — Mr Timms is the only known claimant to the Fettiplace lands.’
He smiled at the gasp produced by his revelation.
‘All this will need to be verified, of course, but I can assure you my inquiries have been exhaustive.
I have no hesitation whatsoever in presenting Christian Timms to you as the new lord of Swinbrook Manor, and owner of the Fettiplace lands.’
As the babble of excited talk erupted in the room, Christian stood up to speak.
The news, he said, had shocked, bemused and excited him, all at the same time.
He reassured everyone that it would make no difference to the course he had set for himself.
Indeed, it would help to ensure the success of his plans.
He would have a farmhouse built at the manor farm and hoped that Tom would move in, as a tenant farmer.
His terms were generous.
For three years he  would supply funds to run the farm, any profits being split equally between Tom and himself.
At the end of the three years Tom would begin to pay rent — a fair rent — for the lands he farmed and would take over all farm buildings, implements and stock.
‘That's wonderful news, Tom.
I'm so pleased for you — and for Ma,’ said Seb.
‘What about you, Seb?
What shall we do about you?’
Seb's spirits took a dive.
He hadn't thought about himself, but with Tom taking on another farm, a farm that would one day be his own responsibility, it was hardly likely he would have time to take care of Seb too.
‘I'd like you to take Handley Farm on similar terms.
You can have the pick of any of the manor farm horses for breeding, to improve the standard of Handley Farm horses — providing you replace any Tom needs for general farm work.
‘There's one other thing that will affect Nahum and his people — and you too, Tom.
The last remaining section of Wychwood Forest belongs to the manor farm.
I want your assurance that you will always allow genuine gipsies to camp there.
Far too much of the forest has been cut down already, but I think there's enough to enable Nahum and his people to enjoy a traditional way of life.
Is this agreed?’
‘Of course.’
Tom's face was scarlet with pleasure.
‘I don't know how to thank you.
Christian, if you were a drinking man I would say this is an occasion for a celebration.’
‘I only disapprove of drinking to excess, Tom.
On this occasion I think I can find a bottle of something special with which to toast the future.
All our futures — although I suggest you save the main celebration for chapel, on Sunday.’
Seb also managed to stutter his thanks to Christian before following Carrie to the kitchen where she had gone to put the kettle on the hob to make coffee for everyone.
‘This is fantastic news, Carrie.
Who would have expected this to happen?’
‘It's wonderful.’
Her manner belied her words.
‘You must be overjoyed.
Your dad is soon to be a tenant farmer.
He's always been respected by everyone, now he'll become a man of some importance.’
‘Not as important as you, Seb.
You too will be a tenant farmer, as well as ploughing land for everyone; breeding your horses…racing.’
Carried away with his own enthusiasm, Seb said, ‘It's only a beginning.
I'll have some wonderful horses soon, if I get Vulcan from your dad.
I can breed from him and between us, your dad and I will have the finest carthorses and race-horses in the country, Carrie.’
‘I don't doubt it, Seb, you've come a long way from the poor, sickly boy who arrived here from London only a couple of years ago.’
‘We've all come a long way, Carrie, and we're going to go a lot farther…but come inside, I think Christian's found that bottle of brandy that I've been hoping he'd forgotten.’
CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE
The next few days were hectic ones for Seb.
He needed to spend more time in Burford, discussing the terms of his future tenancy with James Price.
Seb was going to be far better off than he had anticipated.
In the event of Christian's death he would not only become the outright owner of Handley Farm, but Christian intended leaving him sufficient money to ensure he did not have to part with the farm in the foreseeable future.
Riding back to Swinbrook Seb became excited at the thought of discussing the future with his mother, with Tom — and with Carrie.
His future was assured now, and he knew with equal certainty that he wanted Carrie to be a part of that future.
When he reached Handley Farm Seb was startled to find Anna seated outside the farmhouse door.
There was no sign of Carrie and although it was milking time the cows were still in the field.
‘What are you doing here, Anna?
Where's Nahum and Carrie?’
‘Nahum's at the camp with the others.
As for Carrie…that's what I've come to see you about, Seb.
She's gone.’
‘Gone where?
She's said nothing to me.’
‘No, she wouldn't.
She swore me to secrecy too, but I think this is far too important — for both of you — to remain a secret.’
‘What are you talking about, Anna?’
Seb was thoroughly bewildered.
‘Where has Carrie gone?’
‘Why do you want to know, Seb?
Give me an honest answer.’
‘I've just been given some great news.
I wanted to share it with her.’
‘Only the news?’
‘Yes…no, that isn't all.
I have a great future here, Anna.
I want her to share it with me.’
‘That's what I wanted to hear.
Oh, Seb, you are a fool.’
Suddenly, Anna was hugging him.
‘Why haven't you told Carrie?
If she'd known she'd never have gone.’
‘I didn't know myself until just now, as I rode home from Burford.
I might have worked it out sooner had she not been so prickly lately.’
‘I'm sure if you thought hard enough about it you'd know the reason for that, Seb.
But we're wasting time.
You must go quickly.
She's on her way to Shipton.’
‘Why should she be going there?’
‘To catch a train.
Nahum told her that a teacher's needed for one of the permanent Romany camps set up in Kent by a preacher.
He said he'd mentioned her name there and promised to ask her if she would go to help them.
She's on her way there now.’
‘But…why hasn't she said anything to Tom, my ma or me about it?’
‘Because she thought you'd try to stop her, and she wanted to do this on her own — that's unless you can think of some other reason.
But all this talk is wasting time.
Go and stop her, Seb, before she reaches Shipton.’
‘How long has she been gone?’
‘An hour, at least.
Probably closer to an hour and a half.’
Seb recognised the disconsolate figure sitting on a milestone at the top of a hill, no more than two and a half miles from Swinbrook.
Beside her was a soft bundle of clothes.
As he slowed Grye she looked up and as quickly looked down again at her feet.
As Seb dismounted beside her, she spoke without looking up at him.
‘What do you want?
Go away.’
Seb thought she looked weary, and very unhappy.
‘I've come to find you and take you home.’
‘I don't want to go home, I'm going away.’
‘No you're not, there's far too much for you to do at the farm.’
‘Damn you, Seb!
Why did you come after me?
Just for once I'd like to be able to do something properly, but I never will.
I'm a cripple.
I can't even run away from home successfully.’
‘Carrie, I shall always love that crippled leg of yours.
If it hadn't been for that you'd have reached Shipton and been on a train by now.’
‘Yes, and you'd have been grateful that I'd gone.
When I tell you the reason I'm going you'll wish you'd let me go.
If you've any sense you'll give me a ride to Shipton and put me on a train, then go back to your farm and forget all about me.’
‘Why?
There are any number of people they can get to teach gipsies.’
‘That's not the reason I'm going away.’
‘But Anna said —’
‘Anna should have said nothing at all.
My leaving  was supposed to be a secret between the two of us.’
Carrie looked up at him and Seb could see she had been crying.
She also looked desperately tired.
‘I've got to go away, Seb.
I…
I'm expecting a baby.’
Seb's expression changed from disbelief to delight in a matter of seconds.
‘But…why didn't you tell me about this before?
Why try to run away?’
‘You were telling me how important you and Dad had become.
I don't want to shame you both, and I don't want you to feel you have to marry me.’
‘Carrie, I don't need a baby to give me a reason for marrying you.
I've been hoping to find the right opportunity for weeks.
I want to marry you.’
‘Honest?’
As tears began to run down her cheeks Seb dropped the reins and allowed Grye to crop the grass on the verge as he took Carrie in his arms.
‘Honest.’
‘That isn't what everyone's going to say, Seb.’
‘Who cares what anyone says?
It won't bother me, it shouldn't bother you — and it certainly won't trouble our son.’
‘I hope not.’
Carrie squeezed Seb until he could hardly breathe.
‘But what makes you think it's going to be a son?’
‘It's bound to be a son…sooner or later.
Come on now, we're going home.
We've a wedding to arrange.’
As they returned to Swinbrook on Grye, the gipsy horse, the trees of Wychwood closed in about them and Carrie imagined the sadly diminished yet still proud forest was protecting them from the rest of the world.
She rested her head against Seb's back as, arms clasped tightly about his waist, she listened to him telling her of  what the future held for them and for their family.
The family that would be raised on Handley Farm, in the village of Swinbrook, with Wychwood Forest as its playground.