

OBITUARIES
Mr Fred Fisher
It is with deep regret that we announce the death of one of our first members, Fred Fisher at the age of 79 years.
Mr Fisher worked for several years at the Squilver Quarry as office manager, and in his retirement served for a lengthy period as Hon.
Treasurer of the Oddfellows.
He was by origin a Londoner, but spent more than half his life in Bishop's Castle and will be remembered with affection by many people in the district.
We extend our sympathy to Mrs Gladys Fisher, and to their son and daughter.
A service was held at St. John the Baptist church, Bishop's Castle, on the 29th of September, prior to cremation in Shrewsbury.
Mr Stanley Keyse
Mr Stanley Keyse, who was a founder member of the Welshpool and Llanfair Caereinion Railway Society, died recently following an operation.
He was 73.
Mr Keyse played a prominent part in arranging the purchase of the railway following its closure in 1956.
He subsequently served as its legal adviser, and it is thanks to him that it obtained its Light Railway Order and was enabled to operate under a lease agreement until purchase negotiations were concluded.
He also gave devoted service as a director and vice-president.
In 1987 Mr Keyse was disabled in a road accident while returning home from a day's work at Llanfair Caereinion station.
A funeral service was held in Shrewsbury on the 18th of August.
COMMITTEE MEETING
Your Committee held a further meeting on 17 July 1989, when the following items were discussed.
Shropshire Steam Engine Society Rally
A final decision to stage an exhibition at The Steam Engine Rally at Bishop's Castle on 27/28 August 1989 was taken (see report later).
Museum
There being no progress to report, this matter was adjourned until the next Meeting.
Postcards
It was decided to have 250 sets, each consisting of four postcards, printed.
The cards to show BC Railway scenes and engines and to be on sale at £1.50 per set.
(These sets are available from the Hon.
Sec. now).
It is hoped to issue further sets from time to time.
Winter Programme
A provisional programme presented by the Social Secretary was discussed.
With one or two later modifications the proposed programme is now:—
6 Oct. 1989
Informal discussion on the BC Railway and local agriculture (Main speaker Mr F.J. Bedell).
3 Nov. 1989
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING followed by talk entitled ‘Railway Preservation in Britain to-day’(Mr Ron Davies).
1 Dec. 1989
Train Timetables in War-time Britain (Col. Saville).
5 Jan. 1989
Some Shropshire Railways (Mr Graham Vincent).
2 Feb. 1989
Modern Tram Systems (to be arranged).
2 Mar. 1989
How the Central Wales Line was saved (to be arranged).
6 Apr. 1989
Visit to Shrewsbury signal box.
NOTE:Further details of the times and venue of these meetings will be announced in the local press in due course by the Social Secretary.
MEMBERSHIP OF BCRS
Paid-up membership of the Society now exceeds 70.
Since some of these are family memberships the actual number of members is approaching 100.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
BCRS wish to thank Mr Graham Vincent of Wolverhampton for the donation to the Society of 6 photographs of stations on the BCR, taken in 1942.
The BCRS also wish to thank Mr Martin Davies for the donation of Ordinance Survey Maps, printed in 1920, to the Society, showing all stations on the BCR with the exception of Stretford Bridge Junction.
The Society wish to extend belated congratulations to member Mr Len Davies of Shrewsbury upon his recent investiture with the B.E.M. Len received his medal for long-standing Railway and Public Service.
For many years he has been the Fund Raising Organizer for the British Rail Support Group, Condover Hall School for the Blind, a position he still holds.
BCRS T-SHIRTS/SWEAT SHIRTS NOW AVAILABLE
Mr Kevin John has kindly produced a design incorporating ‘Perseverance’ on T-Shirts and Sweat Shirts for BCRS.
He will also use silhouettes of ‘Bishop's Castle’ and ‘No 1’if requested.
These shirts are most attractive and offered at extremely reasonable prices as follows:
Further information may be obtained from and orders placed with the Hon.
Sec. or direct from Mr Kevin John, Cefn Rhys, 2 Ceulan View, Talybont, SY23 5HE.
COLLECTORS' PAGE
RAILWAY TICKETS
Railway tickets have been collected since they were first produced.
There are thousands of colour combinations printed on railway tickets — too many to mention here.
For those interested in the development and collection of railway tickets, I suggest you read ‘Railway Tickets, Time-Tables and Hand Bills’ by Maurice I. Bray, published by Moorland Publishing Co Ltd, 1986.
The BCR ticket number 7400 has quite a history.
It was purchased on 4 August 1928 by a Mrs Green of Sydney, Australia, going back from a visit to Bishop's Castle.
It remained in Australia until 1986, when it was sent to her niece, Mrs Rita Coxall of Bishop's Castle, for showing at the first Bishop's Castle Railway Exhibition held at the High School on 18 April 1986.
Mrs Coxall has kindly presented the ticket on permanent loan to the Society, to be exhibited in the Museum which is planned.
WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact Mr P. Lucas — Tel.
No 0588 638 446.
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contact Mr M. Lawson- Finch, ‘St Cyres’, 20 Downs View Rd, Seaford, E. Sussex BN25 4PT.
TREASURER'S REPORT
The Treasurer reports that the Society has a credit balance of over £200.
The precise figure will not be available until receipts and expenses in connection with the Steam Engine Rally are all in.
STEAM ON THE SHREWSBURY-HEREFORD LINE
Due to cancellation of several tours by flying Scotsman services, steam on this line is rather thin on the ground.
The November 11th ‘West Mercian’ is the latest to be cancelled and the only one extra to the list published in Journal 1 is on October 21st, ‘The Welsh Marches Express’, Hereford-Shrewsbury-Newport, hauled by 6998.
S.W. SHROPSHIRE HISTORICAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
As stated in our first Journal, we expect to work together with this society and we are therefore pleased to include the following announcements:—
SWSHAS will hold its A.G.M. at the Community College, Bishop's Castle, on Wednesday, 11th October 1989.
The A.G.M. starts at 7.30 p.m. and will be followed at 8.00 p.m. by a talk entitled ‘The Archives of the Bishop's Castle Area’ by Mrs Marian Halford of the County Records Office.
The Society is arranging a lecture on the war-time Aircraft Recovery Group, details to be announced later.
BCRS record their sincere thanks to Mrs J. Preshous for the spare photo-copies of material relating to the BCR.
Our Hon Secretary has offered to index and catalogue the rest of the SWSHAS material for both Societies to use.
FROM THE HON SECRETARY'S COLLECTION OF QUOTES
Extract from ‘This Unknown Island’ by S. P. B. Mais, first published by Pitman, September 1932:
‘Below us lay the winding valley of the Onny, with the dense woods of Plowden rising on the other side.
At the tiny station of Plowden an angry old woman asked whether we had permission to park our car in the yard, so I didn't add to her troubles by asking for a ticket to Ludlow, as I had intended, but drove on to Marshbrook where the porter was more kindly.’
It is worthwhile, in this connection, pointing out that the railway between Bishop's Castle and Craven Arms is privately owned.
The railway at Marshbrook is on the LMS Railway and GWR systems.
This book was the result of a suggestion by the BBC that S. P. B. Mais describe seventeen haphazard excursions for the purpose of stimulating in listeners a desire to explore and rediscover their own island.
The above extract was taken out of the ‘Welsh Marches’ section.
Note The ‘Angry Old Woman’ was my Aunt Fanny, wife of Will Lucas, Station Master at Plowden.
ARTEFACTS
The Society gratefully acknowledges receipt of the following items:
BCR Defence Trust Certificate, donated by Mr P. Greenhous, All Stretton.
BCR ticket, donated by the family of the late Mrs T. Jones, Brockton.
Fish Plate donated by Mr E. Cope, Bishop's Castle.
Fireman's Shovel, donated by Mrs Marpole, Bishop's Castle.
Boiler Tube ex No 1, donated, during his lifetime, by the late Mr F. Sinclair of Bishop's Castle.
Various documents and a brass milk churn plate, donated by Mr and Mrs B. Phillips, Bishop's Castle.
Cast Iron Waggon Plate (Gloucester Waggon Co), donated by Mr A. Edwards, Bishop's Castle.
Length of tramway rail ex Squilver Quarry, donated by the late Mr F. Fisher, Bishop's Castle.
Metal Chair Key ex Manchester & Milford Railway, donated by Mr K. W. Lucas, Aberystwyth.
Members are asked to consider donating any suitable material they have to the Society.
Details to the Hon Secretary please.
TRIP TO SEVERN VALLEY RAILWAY
This most enjoyable outing took place on Saturday, 15 July 1989 when some 28 members and friends joined the coach to Bridgnorth.
The train to Kidderminster left at 11.25 am, arriving at Kidderminster at 12.35 pm.
Most people had brought a packed lunch and this was eaten in the sun on Kidderminster Station platform.
Some members opted to look round Kidderminster, while others took the 2.40 pm train back.
Some of this party went to a talk on the restoration of goods waggons at the Bewdley Depot, while others viewed the delights of Bridgnorth.
SVR are to be congratulated on the recently opened station buildings at Kidderminster and indeed on the whole of their operation.
Before re-joining the coach there was time to explore the station and sheds at Bridgnorth.
STAND AT SHROPSHIRE STEAM ENGINE SHOW ON 27/28 AUGUST 1989
The BCRS had a stand at the Show as planned.
It took the form of a mini exhibition, including the name-plate ‘Carlisle’, a train staff, buttons, tickets and various photographs and documents.
The main item on sale was Set No 1, consisting of 4 photographs of the BCR (sets still available from the Hon Secretary at £1.50 per set).
As a publicity exercise, we were very encouraged by the number of people showing an interest in the BCR.
Many application forms for membership were handed out and it is hoped that our numbers will grow as a result.
The Society also gained some interesting new facts regarding the BCR, together with the promise of some more photographic material.
When this material is to hand, further details will be given in this Journal.
The Society would like to thank all who helped in any way with the Stand and in particular Mr and Mrs J. Lawley for being custodians of Material on site.
A TRIP TO THE WEST SOMERSET RAILWAY
On the 29th May, Bank Holiday Monday, the Craven Arms Model Railway society arranged a trip to the West Somerset Railway.
It had been announced that members of the BCRS were welcome.
Since our silver wedding anniversary was the following day it seemed an ideal way to celebrate, so my wife and I decided to go.
The coach departed from Clun at 8 a.m. for the four-hour journey to Minehead, the terminus of the West Somerset and indeed of the original branch line whose closure in 1971 led to the formation of the preserved railway which is so successful today.
We had over three hours before our train's timetabled departure at 4 p.m., which gave us a chance to look round Minehead, get a meal and try to find a place where we could taste a famous local product — scrumpy.
It is surprisingly hard to find, only a few places sell it — I presume because of quality controls — and we were unsuccessful.
Towards 4 o'clock we returned to the station to catch our train, which was to be hauled by a famous locomotive —‘Evening Star’.
It is normally kept on static display at the National Railway Museum in York, but is on hire to the West Somerset this year This was the last steam locomotive built for British Railways before the completion of the changeover to diesel and electric traction.
It was designed for heavy goods haulage and was built as late as 1960.
I will not add any further details, since this is not intended to be a technical article, and in any case loco fans will know the details very well already.
Before getting on board some of us walked down the platform to take photographs of Evening Star running round its train.
We had a long wait, because it was necessary to fill up the tank with water, this locomotive takes 5000 gallons and there was a problem with low water supply pressure.
We were nearly half an hour late in leaving — the branch line spirit lives on!
The ride is a very pleasant one of about twenty miles through rural scenery and past well-maintained stations, with all the right traditional railway sounds such as‘chuff chuff chuff chuff’, which has disappeared from British Rail, and my favourite, ‘clackety clack’, which is much reduced on BR due to the use of continuous welded rail on all busy lines, though the older sectioned rail survives on the lines around South Shropshire such as the Central Wales Line and the Cambrian.
Some members who had not taken a journey by train and particularly by steam train for years came on one or both of our trips on the 22nd of June (Central Wales Line) and the 15th of July (Severn Valley), to recapture the atmosphere.
THE VAN RAILWAY
The Bishop's Castle Railway was not in Wales, but just over the border, not so far from it, was another fascinating rural railway.
The Van Railway, like the BCR, was built from plans drawn by Robert and Benjamin Piercy, who were both born in Trefeglwys, where one of the stations was built.
The Van Railway was opened for freight in 1871 and for passengers in 1873.
In 1879, however, the line was closed to passengers and then totally closed in 1893.
Re-opening of the Van Railway came in 1896 and it was then worked by the Cambrian Railways Company until absorbed by the GWR in 1923.
Finally, in 1940, freight traffic ceased and the track was removed in 1941.
What is interesting to the railway enthusiast is that the connection of the Van Railway with the main Cambrian Line at Caersws Station, now part of the BR system, is still clearly visible.
The former Van Railway Station buildings now serve as offices for the Bridge Department of BR Western Region.
It is worthy of notice that one of the owners of the Van Lead Mines, which gave rise to the railway, was William Lefaux, who later became a director of the BCR.
Readers who are interested in a detailed history of the Van Railway should turn to the Oakwood Press Vol No 32 —‘The Mawddwy, Van and Kerry Railways’.
RESEARCH INTO THE BCR
Many members will recall the excellent talk and slide show given by Mr Martin Davies of Harrogate last May.
Mr Davies has now written to me in connection with his research on BCR, saying —‘if anyone would like to help I can certainly suggest ways in which they might do so.
Quite apart from the help to me, I think it would be of benefit to the Society to encourage research, which would inevitably lead to a better understanding of the BCR's difficulties and the important part it played in the district's life.
I would not want to mislead anyone into thinking that research is easy: it is hard and very time consuming work.
Should anyone be interested, I would gladly co-ordinate their efforts — one of the few ways in which I might be able to help the Society from this distance’.
Please contact Mr Davies at 5, Woodside, Harrogate, N. Yorks, HG1 5NG if you are able to help in any way.
AN EARLY ACCIDENT ON THE BCR
Historical research brings to light many items that are interesting in themselves, but usually the full story about any incident is not revealed — if it ever is — without further work.
Sometimes there is not opportunity to do that work immediately, even though one knows where to look for more information.
An example is the following official accident report, quoted in full:
11 December 1871
Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway A mixed passenger and goods train belonging to the Bishop's Castle Railway Company ran into a coal train belonging to the Great Western Company as it was passing Stretford Junction, owing to the driver of the passenger train being unable to bring it to a standstill on seeing the signals against him.
No one was injured.
The engine of the passenger train and six wagons in the coal train were considerably damaged.
It would be very interesting to know more, and a look at the ‘Shrewsbury Chronicle’ for late 1871 and early 1872 might answer some of the questions that the report raises.
For instance, why was the BCR train unable to stop; did the driver have no advance warning that the junction signal was against him?
There was a signal — presumably a distant — about a quarter of a mile in advance of the junction signals, and that should have indicated that the junction signal was against the BCR train.
The suspicion must be that it was a combination of excessive speed and the failure of the driver or guard to apply the brakes early enough that caused the accident.
It will be some time before I can check the newspaper files; if anyone else does so, I would be very pleased to hear what they find.
I do have a little more information.
The locomotive was ‘Perseverance’, and the damage to her may have included boiler damage, as old tubes were sold and new ones bought as a consequence of the accident.
The Midland Wagon Company were the owners of ‘Perseverance’ and the BCR was buying her from them on hire purchase.
The Midland Wagon Company was one of the BCR's creditors and hired rolling stock to the line, in addition to the locomotive.
The Midland Wagon Company's influence on the BCR in its early years was very strong.
It had been behind the purchase of some of the BCR's rolling stock in 1867, when the available property of the line was sold in order to try and satisfy the claims of its creditors.
Later in the same year the MWCo was instrumental in having a receiver appointed to run the railway — a move which may well have helped to keep the BCR alive for so many years.
DAVID DAVIES OF LLANDINAM
The recent exhibition in the Village Hall, Llandinam, Powys on the life and time of David Davies, the renowned Welsh civil engineer, gave an excellent opportunity to learn more of this relatively unsung genius.
The display, which ran from 29 July to 28 August 1989, was planned as the fourth in a continuing series of demonstrations of Welsh life and its origins.
David Davies, born in Llandinam (midway between Llanidloes and Newtown) in 1818, began his working life as a sawyer, which seems to have little relevance to civil engineering but was responsible for his excellent local reputation prior to his first engineering contract.
Davies was also skilled at constructing local earthworks to prevent flooding by the Severn and his earned him his first big contract from the Montgomeryshire Public Works Engineer, Thomas Penson (presumably the same Penson of Oswestry who worked with the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway and was responsible for the design of stations including the recently refurbished Gobowen station and Shrewsbury's joint station).
Penson gave David Davies the job of preparing the foundations, embankment and approach road for the iron bridge over the Severn in the ‘top sawyer's’ home town of Llandinam and was so pleased with his work that he recommended payment of an additional £15 over and above the contract price agreed.
As well as this Llandinam Bridge, built in 1846, Penson gave Davies other work such as the cattle market in Oswestry (1850) and a number of bridges to replace those swept away during flooding.
His move towards contracting led to his being awarded the contract for the Llanidloes and Newtown Railway in 1855, reaching his home village a year later and passing within a few yards of his first contract, the iron bridge.
After the opening of the Llanidloes and Newtown Railway in 1859, Davies constructed more railways including many which came to form the 1864 alliance of the Cambrian Railways, namely the Oswestry and Newtown Railway and the Newtown and Machynlleth Railway.
The building of the latter included the famous Talerddig cutting which, at the time, was the deepest cutting in the world and earned Davies recognition from his fellow civil engineers, who might have by-passed Welsh happenings in their field but for that.
In partnership with others, David Davies moved into other fields when, in 1864, he leased land in the Rhondda Valley for the sinking of mine shafts.
His coal pits, famed even outside Britain as the ‘Ocean Collieries’, produced millions of tons of high quality coal.
The demand for this, coupled with the inability of existing railways and docks to deal with their output in addition to that already existing, led Davies to build his own port at Barry in 1884 with a railway to serve it, The Barry Docks and Railway Company in 1889.
One of David Davies's last works was to represent Llandinam on the newly formed Montgomeryshire Country Council in 1889.
However his health failed him a year later and he died in that summer aged 71.
Public subscriptions provided a replica of Davies's statue in Barry Docks and his now stands at the end of Llandinam Bridge, in sight of his former home.
Happily we have much to remember him by — Barry Docks are quieter nowadays, but Talerddig cutting still looks impressive however many times we have seen it.
SILVER WEDDING CELEBRATION
Having done a railway trip together to the West Somerset Railway to celebrate our Silver Wedding anniversary, at a time when we couldn't have a party, my wife and I recently held a belated one at the Gwili Railway, ably assisted by family, friends and some members of the BCRS committee.
The Gwili's Llwyfan Cerrig station has an excellent picnic site near the river which gives the railway its name, but there is no road access to this station.
A train service conveyed guests from the Bronwydd Arms station to Llwyfan Cerrig, where refreshments were provided.
It is alleged that I am unpunctual sometimes, so certain members of the party arranged with the driver and the guard to make me run for the train.
I was informed by a normally respectable member of the Gwili Board that I was wanted on the telephone in the shop.
No sooner was I off the train than the guard blew the whistle and the train started and I had to run for it.
After this humorous start the party went from strength to strength.
We are indebted all the Gwili members for making it such a wonderful day, and particularly to driver Dave and fireman Roger who, apart from running three trains each way, spent the whole day admitting children of all ages to the footplate, firstly to explain the controls, and later to cook sausages on the fireman's shovel in traditional style.
PRESERVATION PROGRAMME
As announced in the Aims of the Society we have a small-scale preservation programme.
Current plans include the Horderley platform, some work on the Glenburrell bridge, and, perhaps next year, some work on a railway vehicle.
It is hoped to arrange an on-site meeting with the owner of the bridge next month, probably on a Saturday.
If you are interested in this aspect of railway work, please contact Paul Lucas, Tel.
No 0588-638-446 or me, Tel. 09743-516.
The members of the preservation group are very keen to improve their engineering expertise, and would be interested in hearing from any member who can offer advice.
If there is sufficient interest then we might try to arrange working days at a running railway such as the Severn Valley and the Gwili.
Both of these railways have been most co-operative and we are developing a good relationship with them to mutual advantage.
Another possibility is to fit lessons on specific skills into a future winter programme, for example we could go to some of the Community College courses.
As yet we have nobody actually in charge of preservation, and it is early days yet, but please do come forward if you are interested in running this group.
As we have often said, running trains or restoring locomotives is well beyond what a small society like ours could hope to achieve, but there are several ideas I would like to explore that might be realistic.
Does the following sound an impossible target for the first five years of our society, that we might have a BCR day (week?) on another railway, hiring one of its locomotives and some of its stock, but running good old BCR style mixed trains including at least one goods truck owned and restored by us and painted in BCR livery?
If we had trained for jobs such as guard, signalman or even fireman and driver then we could do at least some of the operating jobs (guard and signalman training is not difficult).
We could, by arrangement, introduce one or two bits of BCR practice e.g. Parliamentary tickets, and of course we would take our exhibition along.