

COMMITTEE MEETINGS
A meeting was held on Monday 11th November 1990.
It was announced that Mrs Ann Lucas has resigned as Minutes Secretary since her new job makes it difficult for her to travel from Aberystwyth for committee meetings.
For the same reason she has, with regret, resigned from the committee.
The Chairman thanked Mrs Lucas for her work in writing very detailed minutes during the Society's first year.
Tim Wallace is appointed to the committee and is to be responsible for the funds allotted to the preservation group.
It has been decided to transfer £75 to the group from the Society's main account.
This means that the group has at its disposal £100 since a generous anonymous donor has already given £25 towards the Glenburrell Bridge restoration.
It was also confirmed that Phil Field, as Membership Secretary, is a committee member.
A meeting was also held on Monday 28th January 1991.
Some concern was expressed about the slow progress on negotiations to set up the museum and it was hoped that a further meeting with Shropshire Leisure Services could be set up soon.
125th ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS
A well attended Anniversary meeting, open to the public, was held at the Community College, Bishop's Castle, on Friday 19th October 1990.
The BCRS staged an exhibition of material pertaining to the Railway which, as usual, generated much interest.
The highlight of the evening was the truly fantastic audio-visual show ‘Rail, Romance and Revolution’ presented by Colin Garratt, using eight electronically controlled slide projectors and a large panoramic screen.
The stereo sound effects were superb, as was the commentary by Colin Garratt.
The show opens in 18th century rural Britain, when stage coaches and canals were the main form of transport, passing over to the industrial revolution, when Britain became the workshop of the world, to the decline of heavy industry and the steam locomotive and the accompanying dereliction through to today's modern rail system and the survival of many steam locomotives, not only in this country, but worldwide.
After the interval the scene moves to the beautiful island of Cuba — the May Day Rally when Cuba is en fete — lovely beaches — tobacco fields and the sugar plantations where classical American engines are still working.
Again a dramatic change of scenery — this time to China and its giant steam engines — still the backbone of their railway system.
Among the places featured were the Great Wall, the Forbidden City, the Harbin Ice Festival, Anshan — the last place on Earth where large scale steam locomotive construction continues and finally to the train spotter's dream location, the Sankong Bridge.
Many thanks to Colin Garratt for a superb show, and the BCRS wish him continuing success in his work documenting the world's surviving steam heritage.
Colin Garrett Publications have available an excellent range of books and prints.
Full details are available from them at The Square, Newton Harcourt, Leicestershire, LE8 0FQ (Tel. 053759-2068)
COMING TALKS
We have had to make some changes to our programme.
For March we have decided to have a members' evening.
This meets a long-standing request from various members and will take the form of a variety of short talks and discussions aided by slides, photographs, segments of cine film, videos — whatever members bring along.
I am grateful to our member Vic Smith for stepping in to fill a vacant gap in April.
He will show some slides and talk about the railways of an entirely different part of the country — the changing scene in East Anglia.
I am pleased to announce that the Craven Arms Model Railway Society have invited us to their headquarters for a demonstration of the modelling side of railways.
This will take place in May.
These talks will all be at the usual time, date and place — 7.30 p.m. on the first Friday of the month, at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
People who work late might like to note that we usually spend up to twenty minutes chatting before the talk gets under way.
FUTURE TRIPS
Please do not forget to let the Social Secretary have your suggestions for future trips/meetings.
We have already had some ideas from Committee members.
A popular suggestion was to do the whole of the Central Wales Line this year.
It might not be very long now before the DMU's, with their excellent visibility, will be replaced by Sprinters, so this could well be our last chance for some time to see the views along the line really well.
We would have about three and a half hours in Swansea, an excellent shopping centre.
Other ideas are the rapidly developing Llangollen Railway, Telford or Ironbridge, or a steam trip on the Cambrian, if, as rumoured, BR runs these again this year.
We shall probably arrange an evening trip of some description, possibly along the Shrewsbury-Chester line, with its magnificent viaducts.
Finally there is much interest in walking part of the BCR again.
It might be worth booking a coach to carry us between access points.
PRESERVATION NEWS
Over the winter, since the work on our current project, Glenburrell bridge, is out of doors, our activities have been reduced drastically.
Small teams of volunteers have spent an occasional afternoon continuing the work of clearing trees near the bridge, cutting up the timber and burning the brash.
We have agreed that we will follow the practice established last year and start work in earnest around the middle of February.
Volunteers are always welcome.
No special skills are required at present, just people.
OBITUARY
Roger Lote
Those BCRS members who attended our Silver Wedding party at the Gwili Railway will be sorry to hear that Roger Lote, who was the fireman that day, died suddenly on Friday 18th January.
He was 38.
Because of the visits to the footplate to see the controls, and also the food cooked traditional style on the shovel, most of the people at the party will have exchanged a few words with Roger and gained an impression of the sort of cheerful, obliging chap he was.
One or two of us knew him quite well.
He joined the Gwili Railway shortly after I did and on the very same day as my cousin Paul Lucas, but since then Roger has contributed more to the railway than either of us.
He became an ever-present volunteer, had passed as a fireman and was training to be a driver.
I will end with a quote from one of the volunteers at the Gwili Railway, made the day after Roger died.
‘When you needed an extra pair of hands in a hurry so that you could get on with a job, Roger was always the first to drop what he was doing and help you.’
Which of us can hope for anything better than that to be said about us?
FIVE YEARS OF RAILWAY SLIDES
For our December meeting Col R. A. Savill gave a talk a slide show.
He dealt with the period 1966-1970, showing many slides illustrating long since vanished features, e.g. level crossing gates, signals, and even station buildings at locations mainly in eastern areas.
How fortunate it is that enthusiasts such as Col. Savill have accumulated a wealth of material illustrating the railway scene.
For the January meeting we had Russell Mulford in fine form, showing cine film of the Cambrian in steam days, and slides of sundry industrial scenes in our part of the world.
He recounted how it was his standard lunch time practice in the 60's to rush to places such as Ifton Colliery, St. Martin's, near Oswestry to photograph their railways and to chat to some of the characters who operated them.
The high spot of the evening was a photograph of Russell's office wall with all its railway memorabilia.
He might just about find room for a ticket on it if pressed!
RAILWAY HAPPENINGS IN MID-WALES
The Vale of Rheidol Railway
An article in the January Railway World is well worth reading and the editor who interviewed Mr Tony Hills saw the Vale of Rheidol through rose-coloured glasses.
The rosy view expressed contrasted sharply with customer and enthusiast reaction to the Hills era.
The 1991 season will see catering at Devil's Bridge again in the hands of the Jenkins family from the nearby cabin, and No. 9 back on the line with new brakes fitted.
Narrow Gauge Lines in General With the exception of the Talyllyn and Fairbourne, 1990 was a poor season.
The Talyllyn had special events and the Fairbourne is ideally situated for beach weather.
The Ffestiniog Railway sacked about four permanent staff before the end of the season.
British Rail in Mid-Wales
The biggest event in recent months has been full sectorisation and the change of name from Provincial to Regional Railways.
As is usual with this type of exercise, chaos and confusion breaks out — who owns what /who does what /who pays for it!
The small fleet of 37's used on the Cambrian is being dispersed to Petroleum and other sectors.
At the beginning of January only 37430 was available for the Cambrian Coast Express and is in poor shape.
Frequent substitutions of Sprinters west of Salop keep occurring.
The 1515 ex Euston on the 13th of January consisted of a three coach Sprinter and a two coach Sprinter coupled together.
This was caused by a previous cancellation due to flooding.
37426 was recently overhauled in Glasgow Eastfield and has been with Petroleum and Regional Railways.
It disgraced itself on the Cambrian Coast Express some weeks ago and was hauled back ignominiously to the works where a tremendous flap occurred as to who paid for the necessary.
One of the 37's on certain Liverpool Cardiff services will come to an end with the increasing arrival of the 158's.
The Cambrian itself will lose the Cambrian Coast Express from March with the withdrawal of the Intercity from the arrangements to pay for the train west of Salop.
One 158 unit has been allocated for the Cambrian.
This will work the following diagram
0620
Machynlleth to Aberystwyth
0707
Aberystwyth to Salop
1040
Salop to Aberystwyth
1330
Aberystwyth to Birmingham
1850
Salop to Aberystwyth
2105
Empty coaching stock or revenue earning Aberystwyth to Machynlleth
To compensate for the lack of seats two new Sprinter services are being proposed, at 0930 ex Aberystwyth, and at 1130.
Level crossings continue to be barriered.
Ynyslas and the adjacent caravan site crossing have just been done.
Llanbadarn crossing has continued to give problems and necessitated local operating by train crew for quite long periods.
The Stanlow to Aberystwyth Wednesdays only 0100 ex Stanlow is the only freight west of Salop and keeps odd times some weeks.
Last week the full thirteen tanks were in Aberystwyth all weekend.
Normal return is 1520 on Wednesday ex Aberystwyth to Stanlow.
Talk is of household refuse trains going back to the moth-balled Gobowen to Nanbrynmawr line — from Manchester.
The Central Wales Line will see several loco-hauled prestigious trains this year.
Details are in the January or February Railway World.
Occasional forays are made by Class 31's on Shrewsbury to Swansea trains hauling failing or failed DMU's.
In the Cambrian area Red Star parcels are at a premium — there have been very few delivered around the Aberystwyth area by Roberts Taxis/coaches.
Now a Red Star van is based on Newtown and covers a huge area.
Recently a parcel for delivery next morning from London to Aberystwyth was put on the Down Cambrian and arrived in Aberystwyth at 2100.
It was sent back to Machynlleth on the empty coaching stock, 0620 back to Aberystwyth, 0707 left Aberystwyth on the train.
It was put off at Newtown and delivered by road.
Flooding in December and January has caused a lot of problems on the Cambrian Coast and at Dovey Junction.
Following the Glanrhyd tragedy BR is safety conscious and a firm of divers is on national contract to BR to inspect affected bridges.
The Conway Valley line as a result has been shut for days.
Postscript
a
Members will recall Mr M. Parker's excellent talk on the Birmingham light rail system.
The Centro logo seen so prominently in that talk can be seen on the Cambrian system nowadays, due to stock being run from Birmingham.
The livery is green.
b
A bus link between Welshpool and Shrewsbury was in operation over the weekend of 26th-27th January due to construction work on the A5/A49 Shrewsbury bypass.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY — DOCUMENTS DEPOSITED AT COUNTY RECORDS OFFICE, SHIREHALL, SHREWSBURY
This is Part 3 of a list of documents deposited at the County Records Office, Shirehall, Shrewsbury.
442
Dep. 30 Nov 1864
Bishop's Castle Railway, Wenlock extensions, plans and sections (from the third extension of the plan to an end-on junction with the Wenlock Railway near Presthope in P. [parish]Much Wenlock).
Engineer:
B. Piercy, Great George St.
Solicitors for the Bill:
Thomas Griffiths, Bishop's CastleWilliam Wilding, Montgomery
1 title page, 1 published map — 7 sheets, plans and sections, 1 book of reference containing notice.
443
Dep. 30 Nov 1864
Bishop's Castle Railway, deviations and additional works, plans and sections (all minor deviations of the eastern part of the original main line proposal with an additional junction spur at Lydham Heath to make a double junction there to allow direct running between Craven Arms and Bishop's Castle.
The main line was not built beyond Lydham Heath, neither was this proposed second junction, so that for the whole of its feeble existence the railway retained the wrong junction here and every train in each direction had to make a highly inconvenient reversal at this point.
Engineer:
B. Piercy
Solicitors for the Bill:
Thomas Griffiths, Bishop's CastleWilliam Wilding, Montgomery
Parliamentary Agent:
Dodds & Henry, 18, Abingdon Street, Westminster
1 title page, 1 OS map, 1’— 10 sheets, plans and sections.
Bound.
1 book of reference containing notice.
456b
Dep. 30 Nov 1865
Presteign, Clun & Bishop's Castle Railway, plans and sections (from Clun and from Craven Arms (junction with Shrewsbury & Hereford Railway) to Presteign, short spur from Clun line to Craven Arms line at north-facing junction at Hopton Heath.
Engineer:
James Brunless
Solicitors for the Bill:
Stephens & Bellamy, PresteignThomas Griffiths, Bishop's Castle
1 title page, 1 published map, 10 sheets, plans and sections.
Bound.
1 book of reference containing notice.
450
Dep. 30 Nov 1865
Shrewsbury and Potteries Junction Railway, Minsterley and Bishop's Castle extensions.
Plans and sections (from an end-on junction with the Moat Hall Railway at Little Hanwood to the Bishop's Castle Railway near Lydham by an east-facing junction from the first at Pontesbury to join the proposed Chirbury and Minsterley line at Minsterley and continue also northwards to Asterley).
Engineer:
J. Ashdown.
Solicitor for the Bill:
S. F. Noyes, 1 Broadway Sanctuary, Westminster
1 title page, 1 OS map 1’(loose), 15 sheets, plans and sections.
Bound.
1 book of reference containing notice.
484
Dep. 30 Nov 1877
Bishop's Castle and Montgomery Railway, plans and sections.
(From an end-on junction with the reversing leg of the Bishop's Castle Railway at Lydham Heath to a junction with Oswestry and Newtown Railway at Montgomery station.
These proposals are basically for the completion of the earlier main line proposals of the Bishop's Castle Railway.)
Engineers:
C. Douglas Fox T. E. Minshall, Westminster.
Solicitor for the Bill:
William Wilding, Montgomery.
Parliamentary Agents:
Dyson & Co., 24, Parliament Street, Westminster
1 book of reference containing galley proof of gazette notice.
1 titled cover page, 1 OS map 1’, 7 sheets, plans and sections.
All bound together.
LIST OF BCR DEBENTURE HOLDERS
Some time ago Lt. Col. A. P. Sykes presented the Society with a photocopy of an article which was published in ‘The Bishop's Castle Advertiser and Clun News’, Issue No. 33, on the 17th May 1901.
The Bishop's Castle Railway List of Debenture Holders (Specially Contributed to the ‘Advertiser’.)
We have now received a list of debenture holders of this line, which we feel sure sure will interest our readers.
This list shows that more than £90,000 was subscribed in debentures besides £15,000 paid in the locality for shares, and £20,000 paid on promissory notes by the early directors.
We wish we could publish an account of what was done with the money.
Mr Wilding of Montgomery and Mr Thomas Griffiths of Bishop's Castle were local solicitors of the company.
The list shows how easy it was at the time (1860) to raise money for a line intended to run from Craven Arms to Montgomery, and what a number of persons, sufficiently well-disposed to the district to advance such large sums would be deprived of all chance of recouping themselves by completing the line, if the policy of closing it was adopted.
There seems at present, however, a better prospect of completing the line than for many years.
The number before each name is the serial number of each claim, and amounts are those due to each creditor.
Schedule I First Mortgage Debentures
1
Rowland Lockyer Cox, 20, Kilnaster Road, London N. £6,500
2
James Francis Fraser, George Whitham & George Thorp Golding, 31 Copthill Avenue, London E.C.
£31,750
3
George Thorp Golding, 170 Fenchurch Street, London E.C.
£5,000
4
Joseph Scrivener Keep & Leonard Brierley, Edgbaston, Birmingham.
£6,250
5
Mary Ann Schofield, widow, Harry Norton Schofield & Walter Whitehead (executors of the will of Christopher James Schofield deceased).
Care of Messrs. Tipton & Biscoe, solicitors, 22 Surrey Street, Victoria Embankment, London W.C. £10,500
Total amount due on first mortgage debentures: £60,000
Schedule II
Second Mortgage Debentures
Part I
6
C. T. Arnold, 20 Whitehall Place, London S.W. £350
7
Mary Ann Breeze (Administratrix of Thomas Breeze deceased), Weex Llanonig, Montgomery.
£500
8
William Davies, Colyn Caergoorle, Wrexham.
£500
9
George Farmer, Montgomery.
£1,000
10
Ernest Griffiths & Maria Sarah Green widow (legal personal representatives of John Beddoes), Bishop's Castle.
£500
11
Mary Wilding spinster (executrix of William Wilding deceased), Glangedden, Montgomery.
£400
12
Owen Jerman (executor of Thomas Jerman deceased), Glangedden, Montgomery.
£400
13
Thomas Jones, Evan Jones & Thomas Griffiths Jones (executors of John Jones deceased), Kenblas, Caersws, Montgomery.
£300
14
Joseph Scrivener Keep & Leonard Brierley, Edgbaston, Birmingham.
£1,000
15
Edward Morris, Gwerngue, Kerry, Montgomery.
£300
16
Robert Morris, 8 Regent Street, London & H. E. Sangeveneth, 16 Old Bond Street, London.
£4,000
17
North & South Wales Bank Ltd., Liverpool.
£1,000
18
Sophia Nuttall (widow & administratrix of Anthony Nuttall deceased).
£1,750
19
Sir R. D. Green-Price, The Poplars, Shrewsbury.
£400
20
Mary Ann Schofield, widow, Harry Norton Schofield & Walter Whitehead (executors of the will of Christopher James Schofield deceased).
Care of Messrs. Tipton & Biscoe, solicitors, 22 Surrey Street, Victoria Embankmant, London W.C. £4,500
21
A. J. Vernie, 35 Nicholas Lane, London.
£2,700
22
Francis George Whitwham, 8 Draper's Gardens, London E.C.; Edward Bower, Bernard Snakeman, Botley, Hants; Sarah Piercey widow, Marckill Hall, Denbigh & Henry Egerton Piercey (legal personal representatives of Benjamin Piercey deceased) £3,400
Total amount due to second debenture holders: £23,600
MORE GEMS FROM THE G.S.
HEARSE TICKET COLLECTION
The Bishop's Castle Railway catered for local dogs by issuing two buff tickets at 3d and 11d.
Doubtless all ‘foreign’ tickets were returned to the Railway Clearing House when the line closed.
Policeman On Duty tickets may have been unique to the line, as I have not seen examples from any other railway.
I have examples from Craven Arms to Eaton, Horderley and Plowden, also Bishop's Castle to Craven Arms.
The fare seems to have been about half the Third Class rate.
The green Parliamentary tickets I have are from Bishop's Castle to Eaton and Lydham Heath, and from Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle, Eaton, Horderley, Lydham Heath and Plowden, and a Child example from Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle.
The serial numbers suggest that a large number had been issued at some time, the rate from Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle was ¼d as against 1/11d for an ordinary Third Class ticket.
I am not sure if they were in fact in use at the end.
Another ticket perhaps unique to the Bishop's Castle Railway may have been the Golf returns from Craven Arms to Plowden issued in First Class at 1/6d, Second Class 1/- and Third Class 9d.
The rate seems to have been about half that of an ordinary return and was perhaps a day ticket, although no mention of that condition is made.
Perhaps a bag of golf clubs was also a requirement.
Third Class golfers must have been few and far between as my ticket example is only number 16!
Price alterations to tickets are often found, in some instances this has been done twice, perhaps due to fare increases during World War I and subsequent reductions afterwards.
Two examples are illustrated here.
THE CLUN RAILWAY
The story of the BCR is quite well known, both locally and amongst railway enthusiasts everywhere.
How many people have heard of the Clun Railway?
My original thought was to submit this article for publication in the Shropshire Star on April Fools' Day, the joke being that a railway to Clun was in fact planned, though on the 1st of April nobody would believe it!
The scheme was a perfectly serious one, though like many railway ventures at the time it was rather ambitious.
A company was set up, a detailed survey was done, and a bill drawn up for presentation to Parliament — the usual procedure.
The year was 1866, just after the BCR commenced operations.
Unfortunately I have been unable to trace any documents after the survey, and so do not know exactly why the scheme fell through or even whether the bill was ever presented.
However it is well known that a financial crisis in 1866 seriously affected several minor railways throughout the country.
In particular it caused the bankruptcy of the BCR, which meant that for the rest of its life it was in the hands of the Receiver.
Probably this same crisis led to the failure of the Clun Railway before building commenced or even before the Act was passed.
Actually the railway should be more correctly named the ‘Presteign [sic], Clun and BCR’, for that was the name used in drawing up the Act.
For brevity we can refer to it as the PCBCR.
It was a separate company from the BCR, though some of the directors seem to have belonged to both.
Bishop's Castle appeared in the name because it was planned that the two should connect, as we shall see.
Presteigne (the modern spelling) had a railway connection, completed in 1875 but planned some years earlier (see below), which lasted right up till Dr Beeching's Axe.
It was intended that the PCBCR would connect with this to the east of the town.
I am not quite sure from the map where Presteigne station was, but it looks as if the PCBCR would not have run into it directly, merely to a junction outside the town.
To complete the picture of railways in this area one should add that the quite successful Leominster & Kington Railway was opened in 1862 and eventually had various extensions and branches, some of which were already under discussion when Kington was reached.
Apparently at this time Kington was also a popular starting point for tourists to Aberystwyth, with a daily stage coach for the sixty mile journey over the mountains.
(At the end of the century Parliamentary Bills for a direct rail connection from Kington to Aberystwyth were prepared but the scheme fell through.)
It is interesting in view of the above dates that the PCBCR scheme did not undertake the task of bridging the gap to the Leominster & Kington Railway.
The reason is quite clear — desire outran performance by eleven years.
In 1864 the ‘Kington and Eardisley (extension to Presteign) Act’ was passed,(i.e. this line was planned before the PCBCR) but as mentioned above, Presteigne was not reached until 1875.
Let us return to the PCBCR with a direct quote from the first Parliamentary Bill drawn up.
‘A Railway to commence in the parish of Presteign…by a Junction with Railway No. 1, authorised by the Kington and Eardisley (extension to Presteign) Act…terminating in the parish of Clun, near the town of Clun, to the north-east of the turnpike gate on the turnpike road leading from Clun to Craven Arms, in a field known as the Pool Meadow…pass through the parishes…following…or some of them, viz. Presteign (Radnor), Combe, Lower Kinsham, Upper Kinsham, Kinsham, Byton, Over Lye and Yatton, Amestrey, Wigmore, Lingen, Marlow Heath and Jay, Walford and Letton, Newton, Adforton and Paytoe Stanway, The Grange, Brakes, Kinton Whitton and Trippleton, Leintwardine, Upper and Lower Pedwardine, Boresford, Brampton Bryan, Buckton and Coxhall,…
Bedstone, Hopton Castle, Hopton Heath and Clungunford, Clunton, Coston Clunbury and Coston Abcott, Beckjay, Broadward, Shelderton, Purslow, Hundred House, Little Brampton, Twitchen and the Borough of Clun…
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication as from June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE JOURNAL
Articles/letters for inclusion in the Journal are urgently required.
Please submit material dealing with the BCR and railways in general, but with particular emphasis on the border counties — without your help the Journal is going to become rather thin!