

DERBYSHIRE DOUBLE
Your Scribe had not seen Bishop's Castle at the unlikely hour of 8.15 on a Saturday (or any other) morning.
It was quiet, very quiet!
What was I going to do with a 50 seater coach?
Gradually, a few familiar faces turned the corner by The Boar's Head.
In fact 31 of us turned up to support our annual ‘big day out’ and enabled me to realise that I had done the correct thing in cancelling the previously booked 20 seater coach.
Adrian, our Long Mynd Coaches driver, conveyed us smoothly to our first stop at the National Tram Museum, Crich.
On the way we managed to catch sight of the Matlock Branch and the Midland Main Line in typical Derbyshire settings.
We purchased our combined Crich/Midland Railway Centre ticket and began our trip into nostalgia, or at least the older members did!
Whilst the weather could have been kinder for the photographers wishing to capture the splendid liveries of the trams, both in the sheds and on the extensive outdoor system, we managed to dodge the couple of showers and visited the considerable number of preserved vehicles and small exhibits.
A recently opened Exhibition Hall enhanced the already commendable offerings.
Some members certainly had their Penny's Worth of tram rides!
After lunch, either from members' own nosebags or from the Museum café, we reboarded our coach and set off on a magical mystery tour in search of Butterley and the M.R.C. It is quite fun ‘turning round’ on a fairly busy main road in a large coach!
Unfortunately, we had just missed the 1400 steam departure from Butterley but most of us took the footpath to Swanwick Junction, the main museum site, to view the many and varied locomotives and other items that spanned a large period of railway history.
The completeness of the infrastructure, particularly at Butterley, was favourably commented upon.
I am sure there was a different topic of conversation the following Monday morning at certain South Shropshire hairdressing establishments!
Even the Clunbury Coach was forgotten for a while whilst the gems of Midland heritage were admired.
Steam and diesel haulage were eventually enjoyed by most of us, the latter represented by a very smart Class 20.
Reality was thrust upon us by a passing Midland H.S.T., as our loco ran round at Riddings.
By this time the day was warm and sunny, giving a chance for the final photographs or video recordings before a pleasant drive home.
It was interesting to receive several comments that a day long visit to one or other of the sites might have been preferred.
If there is sufficient interest for a return visit to either or both the nI will be pleased to arrange the day.
Finally, thanks to all who supported the event.
You made it all worth while.
NOTE: I will slot in a slide/video item on this outing during the forthcoming season.
Will contributors please contact me with an indication of their offerings.
PLENTY MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION
The pre-Society Talyllyn Railway tickets are a study in themselves, if you had the time.
However official records seem to be almost non-existent.
The Talyllyn Railway was built to connect the slate quarries above Abergynolwyn with the Cambrian Railway at Towyn.
The distance from the Wharf Station at Towyn to Abergynolwyn is just under seven miles.
The line continued beyond there for another two miles, up three self-acting inclines to the quarries.
There was also a short incline down to Abergynolwyn village.
Construction seems to have been completed in September 1866 and a passenger service to Abergynolwyn started in the December of that year.
Intermediate stations were opened at Rhydyronen (1867), Brynglas (1873) and Dolgoch (1873).
There are also no fewer than five halts.
The railway and the quarries were the property of two brothers called McConnel, who were mill owners from Lancashire.
In 1911 both came into the hands of Henry Haydn Jones (1863-1950), for over 30 years the Liberal Member of Parliament for Merionethshire (later Sir Haydn Jones).
Haydn Jones also had an ironmonger's shop in the main street at Towyn, where the far from tidy office of the Talyllyn Railway was situated.
A typical Victorian martinet, he wore a tall hat all his life.
It is said that a deputation of quarrymen came to see him with a view to getting a trade union recognised.
He said ‘Yes, but the quarry closes on Friday’.
It remained closed until the idea of a union was forgotten.
Haydn Jones M.P.
travelled to Westminster using the Cambrian Railway, joining the 10.25 Aberystwyth-Manchester express, always travelling in the tea car in the company of others of his ilk.
Just outside Abermule Station on the 26th January 1921, this train met another head-on, resulting in the deaths of fourteen passengers including Lord Herbert Vane Tempest and Capt. Harold Owen, both directors of the Cambrian Railway and in whose company Haydn Jones should have been in the tea car that morning, had he not been in bed with a chill!
At one time tickets were issued at Wharf, Pendre and Abergynolwyn, and perhaps other stations as well, but in later years tickets were issued from a mobile booking office in the guard's van.
Edward Thomas, the manager, often travelled with the train, which ran on three days a week, from 1947, in the summer only.
First Class tickets are very rare, there being no First Class after 1930.
I have only one in my collection.
The T.R. may have been unique in having tickets priced in farthings.
This was not just a ‘one-off’ mistake as I have two examples, both half fare, and in case the type is too small to see, they are the two bottom examples of the single tickets illustrated.
Prices vary quite a lot.
Perhaps a new issue of tickets was ordered rather than an alteration to the printed price, although I do have one example of an altered price.
I have no idea who the printer was but the work was rather rough, suggesting that a local one was employed.
There was no print on the backs of the tickets at all.
Colour was generally white, a few are blue, green, salmon and purple and a few were in two colours.
Sir Haydn died on the 3rd June 1950.
It had been his wish that the railway should run for the remainder of his life.
The quarries had been closed in April 1947.
Sir Haydn's family intended to seek an Abandonment Order for the line and sell it for scrap.
However, a preservation society had been formed in the mean time to come to am arrangement with the Company to secure its future operation.
Thanks to their operation the Talyllyn Railway is still with us.
For the first year of Society operation the existing style of ticket was used, but as time went on a superior style was adopted, and these included a range of Member's tickets as well as Complimentary and Supplementary ones.
Today the trains run beyond Abergynolwyn to a new terminus at Nant Gwernol.
Towyn has been renamed Tywyn, but the railway still retains its charm and is well worth a visit.
A NEW STATION IN LIFE
It was during a short stay in December 1986 with friends at their cottage near the village of Carno in beautiful Mid Wales that first learnt of a nearby former railway station coming up for sale.
Fate dealt its hand when both Carole, my wife, and I went shopping separately to nearby towns and on returning to the cottage we proudly presented each other with same piece of estate agent's literature — FORMER RAILWAY STATION FOR SALE -LLANBRYNMAIR!
We made the necessary arrangements with the owner and viewed it the next day.
The weather was foul and despite all attempts by the owner to make the property look nice and homely she couldn't quite hide the rainwater dripping through ceilings, black mould on walls with associated smells, or its generally poor condition.
She lived in just four rooms including the bathroom and kitchen, which left six rooms disused and very run down.
To make matters worse any chance of ventilation had been stopped with the use of many pairs of tights or balls of newspaper stuffed into every hole, nook or cranny.
Also there was no adequate heating.
Window casements had been nailed shut and some were covered with clear polythene — an attempt at double glazing?
Polythene had also been laid between carpets and solid, tiled, flooring which of course led to sweating and dampness and more black mould.
Despite all this and more we decided that the asking price of £28,000 was about right and six months later the purchase was completed and we moved in.
We had left behind in Kent two well paid jobs and a nice semi ‘d’ with brand new kitchen extension, full rewiring and replastering and new central heating but the thought of living in our very own railway station was enough to put at least my mind at rest.
I could also see the potential that Llanbrynmair had to offer (it took Carole a little longer to see te potential) and was very eager to start renovation.
Externally the building (a Station Master's two storey house and single storey station building attached) still had some original features: bargeboards, some finials and also quite a bit of original brown and cream BR(W) paintwork, particularly on the platform side of the house, but most of the wood under the paint had rotted.
The roof over the station extends beyond the rear wall to help support this.
There should have been a large timber column but this had been removed for some reason many years ago and led to the roof sagging some 4’.
The rainwater goods, a mixture of plastic, asbestos and cast iron were fit for the scrap heap.
The original double entrance doors to the booking hall had been replace by an utterly incongruous picture window as had adjacent booking hall and waiting room windows.
The roof slates were long past their best (hence the leaks mentioned earlier) and much of the leadwork was defective.
Much rubbish, mostly lengths of steel angle iron and sheet steel was lying around the building and sadly all traces of railway embellishments, fencing, paving lighting and signs had long been swept away, leaving just mud, weeds and scrub.
We had decided very early that a useful little earner would be to provide B & B facilities catering mainly for railway enthusiasts and the building and grounds should therefore be returned to something like their original appearance.
Much to my shame I knew nothing of the Cambrian Railways as most of my interest up to then had been in the Southern Railways and to a greater extent industrial railways, and so decided that much research was necessary, which along with the commencement of renovations will form part of our next episode:-‘A NEW STATION IN LIFE’.
PHOTO-COPIES FROM N.R.M. YORK
Continuing with the photo-copies that our Chairman, Richard Newcombe and I secured on our visit to the National Railway Museum at York, in this issue of the Journal I wish to concentrate on the correspondence between S. H. Pearce-Higgins and W. Roberts, who was the Receiver/Manager of the Bishop's Castle Railway.
In all we traced five letters between these parties and one between Simm-Lewis (Machinery) and Pearce-Higgins concerning parts of ‘Carlisle’.
when she was cut up at Craven Arms.
Simm-Lewis was the firm that cut ‘Carlisle’ up for scrap.
The letters between Pearce-Higgins and W. Roberts concerned Pearce-Higgins's wish to preserve items of the railway, mainly tickets and one of the signals.
The correspondence also refers to the name plates off ‘Carlisle’.
The signal chosen for preservation was the one situated at Horderley, which has now been found at the N.R.M. York and the Society is awaiting confirmation of our application of a loan period together with artefacts of the line, to be placed on display at the Society's museum at Bishop's Castle.
Going back to the correspondence, the first letter, dated 21st April 1933, deals with Bishop's Castle Railway tickets.
The next, dated 21st June 1935, again requests tickets and is followed by one dated 25th August 1936 dealing with the signal and the first mention of the engine name plates and the final letter, dated 24th November 1936, enclosing a receipt for pounds; 2-0-0, the scrap price of the signal.
In the next Journal I hope to deal with the correspondence relating to the great flood, which closed the Railway on the 13th & 14th May 1886.
RAILWAYS IN MID WALES
The Cambrian Lines
On the former Cambrian lines, the trend towards a solely passenger carrying railway has continued relentlessly.
The end of April saw the withdrawal of the last remaining freight, the weekly Wednesdays only Stanlow to Aberystwyth oil tanks.
There were protests throughout the area but all to no avail.
The road lobby once again reigns supreme with rail freight raising prices to meet absurd Government targets.
The summer timetable saw very little change at the Western end of the Cambrian but a notable addition was an 07:00 Newtown to Birmingham service each weekday using stock and crews brought out a a passenger service from Salop.
The development would appear to have been a success and for the winter timetable an early morning Aberystwyth to Birmingham train will run daily.
Two hour timings have been slipping and the 21:14 arrival at Aberystwyth has over 15 minutes waiting at Talerddig for an up train to come through.
Loadings seem to be good this summer.
With unit shortages there are reports of some overcrowding but more 158's and 156's and even some green Centro 150's can be seen.
Loco workings have now slumped to nearly zero and the only locos seen are on civil engineers' trains.
The end of June saw the Saturdays only Birmingham -Pwllheli replaced by Sprinter units due to technical problems — the stock failed its annual carriage MOT — and poor loadings.
IN July two 31's visited Aberystwyth with the Royal Train, bringing in HRH Prince Charles for a degree ceremony at the University of Wales Aberystwyth.
Arrival was just before 10:00 on the old Platform 3.
This necessitated special arrangements with the train traversing the Plas Crug ground frame to the run round loop and thence to the old Platform 3.
After the necessary shunting the train returned eastwards around midday.
Of note with the visit had been the laborious hand weeding of the platform by a group of men and some cosmetic painting of pillars.
However Aberystwyth, like Borth, Newtown and many Cambrian Coast stations, is a mess.
At Dovey Junction a new stand-up only passenger shelter has been erected following the demolition of the old buildings.
Track throughout is very weedy and the annual weed control train with the privately operated Class 20's is due for the middle of the second week in August.
Steam is set to return in early October with the two Standard 4 tanks double heading a special from Salop to Aberystwyth.
The following weekend they will be in action on the Central Wales line
The Vale of Rheidol
On the Vale of Rheidol, the high season four train workings utilising the restored loop at Aberffrwd is reduced to Monday to Thursday in August only.
Two train working with up to seven coaches if needed should cater for the traffic on offer.
Loadings in late July and August appear good, but weather on the coast has been appalling.
Welshpool-Llanfair Caereinion
On the Welshpool-Llanfair line a good start to the season was followed by a quiet July, but good progress on this steeply graded line is apparent with the Raven Square developments particularly attractive.
John Wildig, 8 August 1993
CENTRAL WALES LINE STEAM
Though the Central Wales line was built in several sections at various times, its beginning as a through route is usually considered to be the 8th October 1868, the commencement of public trains.
Its 125th anniversary is thus this year.
An imaginative programme of steam trains, listed below, was arranged to commemorate it.
John Wildig travelled on the first down train, we both, with his sons, went on the West Wales train from Carmarthen to Fishguard and return, and we followed the double header from Llandovery to Craven Arms.
The fares on the single headed trains were competitively priced and they were fully booked.
The double header was rather more expensive and had seats to spare that were partly filled by a late special offer.
The steam events were well reported in the Press and it would be difficult to add to those reports in matters of detail.
As to the atmosphere evoked by them, perhaps I can add something.
Some events have a magic all of their own.
You don't have to be an enthusiast to experience it.
You simply have to be there and open your eyes, ears and nostrils.
Some aspects are best appreciated by being on the train.
others by watching it from outside.
You experience nostalgia if you are old, wonder if you are young.
The Central Wales line is very well suited to steam runs, having gradients, viaducts and jointed track to provide the clackety-clack.
If you missed the previous steam trains then read on!
Coming Events
There are to be further events, and steam runs in particular, nearer to the anniversary.
There will be a buffet and dance in Llandovery on the 8th October.
The steam trains will be on the 9th and 16th October.
The former is the day after the anniversary and there will be a ribbon ceremony at Llandovery plus a carnival and fête.
Keith Lucas
TRAIN FARES
I talk to a lot of people about ‘the train option’, i.e. the option of going somewhere by train rather than car.
The usual answer is ‘I would love to go by train, but it costs too much’.
Let's see if we can find out what a reasonable fare would be.
Suppose that you and another person are going to spend a weekend in Pwllheli, about 100 miles from Bishop's Castle.
You won't have much luggage to carry for a weekend.
You have a car, so one way is to drive there and back.
Another way is to catch a bus from Bishop's Castle to Newtown or Shrewsbury (for the sake of the argument, suppose that there is one at a suitable time).
How much would you be prepared to pay for the two of you to go to Pwllheli by bus and train ?
I would actually like to know your answer to this question, since I have been discussing with one or two other people whether one could hope to persuade Regional Railways to introduce a cheap fare for small groups of people, say on winter weekdays on quiet lines like the Central Wales and the Cambrian Coast.
Keith Lucas
Post Script
Rules Conflict
It is no wonder our railways are in a mess when they are burdoned by regulations to a far greater extent than any road operator.
Here is an example of an actual conflict arising from the rule book:—
The weedkiller train was on the Cambrian system on Wednesday 11th and Thursday 12th August.
The duty chargeman at Aberystwyth was on holiday and, because of economies in the use of staff, was not replaced.
However no-one else is authorised to operate the Plas Crug ground frame (Rule A).
Hence the weedkiller train could not be put into the loop and had to remain on the main line, being put right up to the buffer stop because a passenger train was due.
The latter came in to the same platform and so two trains were in the same section, in conflict with Rule B.
On Thursday the weedkiller train went up the Cambrian Coast, thus spending two nights at Machynlleth.
Machynlleth Station
It is nice to be able to end with some good news.
Anyone who has seen Machynlleth station from the town side recently must have been enraged at its condition.
Due to Sir William MacAlpine's much-publicised visit a couple a years ago, some £500,000 is to be spent in repairing and reconstructing it.
The lower floor is to become a Regional Railways office and train crew depot, while the upper floor will be taken over by the Welsh Tourist Board.
This seems good news in every way -as a sign of commitment to the Cambrian lines and also in giving a tourist office based on the railway, in a building shared with railway staff.
An early start is being made, in fact scaffolding is going up already.
The nearby disused Glan Dyfi station is to be demolished.
Keith Lucas, from details given by John Wildig
SOCIAL PROGRAMME
Friday Talks
3rd Sep 93
John Overton — 70's Reminiscences (Cine films)
1st Oct 93
Col. Savill — The Train Services of 1939
5th Nov 93
Richard Morriss — title to be announced
3rd Dec 93
Mr and Mrs Preshous — local history
7th Jan 94
Ron Davies — Rlys. of the Indian subcontinent
4th Feb 94
Members' Evening
All of these meetings commence at 7.30 p.m. and will be held in the Fletcher Room at the Community College on the first Friday of the month, unless announced otherwise.
Reminder, the coming season's meetings start at 7.30 sharp.
Notes
The November and December 1993 talks are intended to be joint meetings with our sister society, SWSHAS, the local history society.
There will be some railway content to both talks.
I personally like the idea of meetings like this, both because of the element of local co-operation and also because we can hear the views of other people, railway sympathisers rather than railway enthusiasts perhaps, on how railways fit into the scene.
I arranged Ron Davies's talk on the Indian sub-continent some time ago and we postponed it because of the African theme.
Only the date has been changed.
If you would like to make any suggestions on the content of the members' evening, please contact Vic Smith or myself as soon as possible.
In either March or April 1994 we hope to welcome our first lady speaker (apart from Janet Preshous, who has already given a joint talk with her husband.
They are also to give our December talk.)
Trip
On Saturday 4th September 1993 we make our annual gesture of support for the Central Wales Line.
The plan is to go to Llandovery and spend a couple of hours meeting members of HOWLTA, to be informed of campaigns to improve services on the line.
We then have a meal and return.
An option is to break the return journey at Llandrindod.
We travel down on the train that leaves Shrewsbury at 09:10.
The suggested meeting place is Knighton at 10:11, since it has a special day return fare, but members may wish to catch the train at their nearest station.
The times are:—
The return train leaves Llandovery at 14:40 and arrives in Knighton at 16:38, Craven Arms at 17:03 and Shrewsbury at 17:30.
Please make every effort to support this trip.
This is now the nearest railway to Bishop's Castle and Clun, but its future cannot be assumed.
Every passenger helps to make it more secure.
DECEMBER MEETING QUIZ
The last few questions were omitted from the last Journal and are given here.
The Questions
What is the gauge of the Talyllyn Railway?
Name two talyllyn stations other the termini.
Name two current BR stations between Dovey Junction and Tywyn.
What was the main reason for building the line?
What do the following abbreviations stand for?
GWR (Juniors)
LMS (Juniors)
S&DR
SDJR
WMCQ
On which railway lines are/were the following stations?
Berwyn (Juniors)
Knighton (Juniors)
Aberangell
Pantydwr
In which two works of fiction did the BCR appear?
Which preserved locomotive played the part of the Titfield Thunderbolt?
What was the name of the railway company in ‘The Railway Children’?
Which preserved line was used to make the film?
In which Victorian play was the hero discovered ‘in the cloakroom of Victoria station…the Brighton line’?
A famous fictional school staged its own Great Train Robbery in a film made in 1966.
A well known railway was used in the filming.
Name the school
Name the railway
Which English poet wrote a poem to protest against the building of the Kendal and Windermere Railway in 1844.
Is there no nook of English ground secure
From rash assault?
What, in railway terms, is a dogfish?
What are the names given to the following wheel configurations?
4-6-2
2-6-2
4-4-2
2-6-0
(Test of how much we use our local lines.)
What is the current approximate journey time by the most direct route (Mon-Sat, without changes):—
from Craven Arms to Llandrindod
from Broome to Shrewsbury
from Craven Arms to Crewe
from Shrewsbury to Birmingham
from Newtown to Machynlleth
The Answers
2′ 3″
Pendre, Rhydyronen, Brynglas, Dolgoch Falls, Abergynolwyn
Penhelig, Aberdovey
To carry slate from Bryn Eglwys Quarry to the Cambrian Coast Railway.
Great Western Railway
London Midland and Scottish (Railway)
Stockton and Darlington Railway
Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway (or Snailbeach and District)
Wrexham, Mold and Connahs Quay Railway.
Llangollen Railway
Central Wales Line
Dinas Mawddwy Railway
Mid-Wales Railway
Seven for a Secret, Wings over Witchend
Lion
The Great Northern and Southern Railway
The Keighley and Worth Valley Railway
St. Trinian's
The Longmoor Military Railway
William Wordsworth
A bulk goods wagon used for grain
Pacific
Prairie
Atlantic
Mogul
Between 1hr 4mins and 1hr 12 mins
Between 28 mins and 38 mins
From 55 mins to 1hr 2mins (Marches Line), and 1hr 18mins — 1 hr 38 mins (Central Wales Line).
The point was given for any answer between 55 mins and 1 hr 38 mins.
1 hr 4 mins — 1 hr 18 mins
38 mins — 49 mins
BCRS JOURNAL
We still need articles for future issues of the Journal.
Just a few jottings on an envelope are better than nothing.
Our very capable editors will tidy it up.