

House of Commons
Friday 29 November 1991
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Employment
Mr. Derek Conway (Shrewsbury and Atcham)
I beg to move, That this House welcomes the great progress that has been made in employment and the reduction of strikes since 1979 and condemns the employment policies of the Labour Party, particularly its proposals to encourage strikes, to accept every aspect of the European Commission's Social Action Programme and to impose a national statutory minimum wage, all of which would significantly increase burdens on British employers, undermine competitiveness and destroy jobs.
There is a saying that one should never explain or apologise in making a speech.
However, I must break that rule this morning and apologise for the fact that I have an extremely heavy cold, which will make the delivery of my speech a long process — and even longer for the House, which has to be detained in listening to it.
I rather foolishly ran round the Staffordshire moors on Saturday with the perhaps to be disbanded 5th Battalion Light Infantry from Shrewsbury and caught a heavy cold.
Perhaps that is a lesson that, at my age, I should stop doing such silly things.
I therefore move the motion with a glass of privatised water ready to hand.
I welcome my hon. Friend the Member for Mid-Worcestershire (Mr. Forth), the Under-Secetary of State for Employment, who will reply to the motion.
I have followed in the national press with great interest my hon. Friend's borough's activities.
Unfairly, Redditch has been described as the most boring town in Britain, which produces the most boring postcards.
That is unfair on that wonderful area.
Anyone who has witnessed my hon. Friend and his especially outstanding and noticeable ties will see that Redditch has many lively things on which it can be commended to the nation.
I hope that the campaign about its postcards will end.
I suspect that during today, when we warm up and wake up, we shall have a fairly broad and lively debate.
The purpose of the motion is to enable the House, with the Chair's permission, to range as widely as possible over the subject of employment and unemployment, over the Government's policies and record, over Labour's record — not least that of the shadow Chancellor — and over the alternative policies that may be offered if the format of the Government changes.
With the permission of the House, I hope that it will be possible to conclude the debate briefly to allow the hon. Member for Edinburgh, East (Mr. Strang) an opportunity to say something about his motion.
The terms of the motion may not be welcome to all hon. Members, but what he has to say deserves to be aired and I hope that the House will ensure that he has an opportunity to make his point today.
I hope that hon. Members will bear with me if I paint a brief picture of my own borough of Shrewsbury and Atcham in Shropshire.
Shropshire is about one quarter of the land mass of the west midlands and it is the most rapidly growing county in that area.
My constituency fills a broad canvas.
Although it is a huge rural area, with 117 villages and the county town, only 3 per cent.
of the work force are employed in agriculture.
Another 4 per cent.
are involved in energy and water industries, and we have a regional headquarters of the electricity board.
Thirteen per cent.
are in manufacturing.
In a town such as Shrewsbury, a high proportion of manufacturing is linked to the defence industry.
The superb main battle tank engine is made by Perkins Engines, one of our larger employers.
Five per cent.
are employed in the construction industry — that may be why the effects of the recession have not hit Shrewsbury as hard as they have hit other parts of the country, although we have felt the cold wind.
A large proportion of people employed in the borough — 23 per cent.
— work in the hotel and catering and associated distribution industries.
Shrewsbury is one of the most attractive county towns in the country, which, because of its historic nature, attracts much tourism.
It also acts as the regional centre for mid-Wales and north Wales, as well as for Shropshire.
A further 16 per cent.
are involved in finance and commerce.
A huge and seemingly ever-growing number of accountants, solicitors and estate agents have made Shrewsbury their professional base.
I am not sure whether we have found a professional group that the Government have as yet failed to offend, but if one exists, it is a growing sector of Shewsbury's business community.
A further 6 per cent.
are employed in public administration in the area.
We have the headquarters of Shropshire county council in the town, as well as the borough council and the district headquarters of the Shropshire health authority.
More recently, on the defence employment front, the’ Options for Change’programme has meant that the unified command for the west midlands, the north-west and Wales has been sited in Shrewsbury, under the command of Major-General Mike Regan, who took over on Monday.
The borough welcomes the presence of the unified command, although it has caused consternation in parts of Wales and the north-west.
We feel that, historically and geographically, Shrewsbury is the right place for it.
Thirty per cent.
of our people work in associated industries.
Across the borough, about 27,000 people are in full time employment and 10,200 in part-time employment — about 37,200 people in all.
That employment pattern is not necessarily reflected in many areas these days.
Shrewsbury is still a traditional market town, so employment patterns, especially for women, are different from those to be found in urban areas.
Perhaps for many people who come to live in the town that is part of its attraction.
My motion centres on the level of employment, because there are 2, 700 more people in employment in Shrewsbury now than there were a decade ago.
We still face unemployment problems, but the fact remains that employment has increased by 2,700.
That is not to say that we can ignore people who are unemployed and seeking a way of earning a living.
In 1983, a total of 3,774 people were seeking work in Shrewsbury.
By 1987, that figure had dropped a little to 3,401.
But this year, the figure was down to 2,558, so since the general election, unemployment has fallen by 28.7 per cent.
Over the five years since the present Administration were returned in 1987, there has been a welcome change in the picture.
We appreciate that, over the past 12 months, unemployment has become an issue again, as the figures have begun to rise.
Nevertheless, the record over five years is a fall of 28.7 per cent.
In the House there is a tendency to think that the experience of unemployment, and care for the unemployed, rest exclusively with Opposition Members.
The election of the Prime Minister has done much to dispel that idea and to show the general public that in my right hon. Friend we have a Prime Minister who is frank about his business background and honest about the employment difficulties that he faced as a young man.
The public know that he understands the difficulties of unemployment, having had personal experience of it, which he has not forgotten.
I left school at 15 under a Labour Government.
I was one of many thousands of unemployed school leavers.
The experience of unemployment has not been exclusive to people who left school under a Conservative Government.
Many of us remember that experience from the days of the Labour Government, many of whose Ministers are now in another place.
One brighter aspect of the unemployment figures in Shrewsbury has been the steady and sustained drop in long-term unemployment.
It would be unfair to the House to spend hours reeling off reams of statistics but, so that the picture of Shrewsbury is fully painted, I must tell the House that in 1983 there were 1,334 long-term unemployed people.
In the four years to 1987, that picture had not changed much; the figure had grown slightly to 1,337.
There had been little movement — really no improvement at all— in long-term unemployment.
However, this year the figure has dropped to 548.
That reflects the emphasis placed by the Department of Employment, both at the centre and among those who represent it in Shropshire, on trying to help the long-term unemployed in particular.
The big drop over the past five years since the 1987 election is welcome news.
Undoubtedly, the problems of long-term unemployment are the most difficult to come to terms with and to solve.
That is probably enough history and geography.
I shall now consider the way ahead, and the way in which unemployment is being tackled by the Government.
Some of those activities will be continued whichever Government are administering the country's affairs in six or seven months' time.
Part of the progress that has been made in our area has been the establishment of the Shropshire training and enterprise council.
Our TEC, which is one of 82 in the country, is chaired by David Houghton, who lives in my constituency in Shrewsbury but is the managing director of GKN Sankey, one of the larger manufacturing employers in the constituency of the hon. Member for The Wrekin (Mr. Grocott).
I pay tribute to the work, energy and effort that David Houghton puts in as chairman of the TEC.
Undoubtedly that takes much time, and the GKN Group is to be congratulated for encouraging its senior executives to play such an important part in an organisation that achieves such excellent work in Shropshire.
It is all too easy for senior executives, especially in times of great pressure on business, to say that they have no time to devote to such activities for the community.
That has not been the attitude of David Houghton or his group, and they are to be congratulated for that.
So are the members of the Shropshire TEC board, who also run demanding businesses yet give much time to developing the TEC and working towards what it is trying to achieve, especially for young people in Shropshire.
As the House will recall, board members have to be in business currently, rather than retired.
That is a matter for debate.
It is arguable that more recently retired business men would have a constructive role to play.
I tend to favour the idea that people who have not been out of business too long could probably play a valuable role, although I accept that, if someone has been out of active business life for two or three years, his contacts and awareness of up-to-date affairs may have changed.
That is why the Government have concentrated on keeping people who are actively involved in business.
My hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for Employment may care to comment on that later.
The chairman of the TEC, David Houghton, and his team are backed up by an able chief executive — Roy Knott.
Although the TEC has been operating only since 1 April this year, Roy Knott and his team have shown that they are dedicated to the employment training future for Shropshire.
They have rapidly pulled the TEC together.
This year, it is operating on a budget of about £14 million.
Shropshire's population is just under half a million.
The youth training element of the budget for 16 and 17-year-olds is £7 million — roughly half the total budget.
Three million pounds is for employment training; for employment action, which is specifically related to longer-term unemployment, there is £500,000.
Shropshire TEC turns its attention to various other schemes, too.
There is £1.5 million for the business enterprise scheme.
Those training activities represent only part of the work in which Roy Knott and his team are involved.
They have a business development programme, an’ investors and people’programme and an education programme for business partnerships, all of which are of particular help to those who are new to their own businesses.
The TEC is also actively pursuing a much closer liaison between the local education authorities, which provide excellent courses for those developing their business life, and with the careers service and the vocational education structure.
One of the initiatives is to encourage more teacher placements in industry, so that those in education who have gone from school to college and back to school as teachers and who have not experienced life in industry or commerce can be exposed to it, the better to assist their pupils in preparing for a working career.
The establishment of TECs was debated and fought in the House, but it is now evident that the TECs are doing good work and that the system needs to be given time to settle down.
Equally, we must have realistic expectations of TECs and realise that those that have not been in existence for very long — as is the case with our own TEC, which has been going only since April — will take time to work themselves up to their most effective point.
The start that has been made in Shrewsbury, however, is extremely encouraging for my constituency and for the people of Shropshire in general.
I have spent quite long enough outlining the picture in my own constituency and I have no doubt that the House will wish to consider the national picture as well.
Mr. Bowis
I agree that the lead should come from the top.
I hope that the people who have awarded themselves excessive pay rises will hear that from me and the hon. Gentleman.
Such increases set a bad example and I hope that managers in the private and public sectors will remember that the setting of pay for those who are high on the ladder affects the willingness of people further down the ladder to respond sensibly.
Over the years, there have been other difficulties, one of which the hon. Gentleman implied in his reference to the increase in the number of part-time workers.
Women, especially married women, have increasingly desired to return to work and remain there by having a break to give birth.
They then return quickly to the jobs for which they have been trained.
That is a good way for women to contribute to society, but, of course, it has implications for the unemployment statistics.
The final factor influencing employment are the changes in the developing world.
When the hon. Member for Newham, North-East and I were buying one or two shirts in Sri Lanka, we must have been conscious that we were supporting the industry of the developing world, and rightly so.
The pattern of raw materials coming from the developing world to this and other developed countries for production and sale of finished goods, often back to the developing world, has changed.
That is a fact of life and it influences unemployment.
The Opposition are always quick to speak about unemployment.
I suspect that Labour has bemoaned unemployment vigorously and at length during every period of opposition.
However, every Labour Government have increased unemployment, as the Library will confirm.
Anyone who examines the Opposition's policies will fear very much for people without jobs and for those who will become unemployed should there ever be a Labour Government implementing the policies to which the Opposition are committed.
Labour is committed to the restoration of the worst of the industrial relations abuses, to allowing flying pickets, unofficial strike action and secondary strike action, which all lost jobs in the past.
It is committed to a high tax policy, high borrowing and high spending, which in the past have led to pain, suffering, misery and job losses.
The IMF had to intervene in the past and in the future it would be the European Monetary Institute.
Such policies cannot work, because cuts have to be made at a difficult time and even more jobs are lost.
I do not have to speak to people on my side of the political and philosophical fence to understand what a minimum wage policy would cost; I need only listen to Gavin Laird of the Amalgamated Engineering Union and read in the Library the works of the Fabian Society and, on Sundays, The People.
All the independent experts — by the hon. Gentleman's lights — say that a national minimum wage on the lines proposed by Labour would lead to the loss of 200,000 to 2 million jobs.
If one is generous and takes an average, 600,000 to 800,000 jobs would be lost, and the country cannot afford that.
A Labour Government would roll over on their back and uncritically accept any proposal from the European Community in order to prove that they are more communautaire than the Conservatives.
They would accept directives such as those calling for fewer part-time workers, and would welcome a 48-hour rule.
Hon. Members might be happy to consider a 48-hour rule, but the farming community, to name but one, would find it extremely difficult at harvest time if they were not allowed to ask their farm workers to work more than 48 hours a week.
That is why we should regard Labour's albeit genuine crocodile tears as extremely salty.
The hon. Member for Newham, North-East asked us to consider a policy of full employment.
That sounds like motherhood and apple pie until we examine what full employment really means.
It would mean that the whole of the potential work force would be employed at any one time.
It would be like having all our soldiers in the front line at the same time.
There would be no reserves to call in as the army started to push the enemy forward and nobody to call in to support a fall-back.
As many people as feasible should be in work, but we should have an unemployment reserve in the economic battle when the economy expands.
Otherwise, there will be no reserves, imports will be sucked in and workers abroad will benefit.
By an unemployment reserve, I do not just mean a register but a reserve of people who are being trained and well paid and who feel part of the economy and of our industrial community.
Only people who decline to join that reserve should be included in an unemployment register.
Mrs. Teresa Gorman (Billericay)
Does my hon. Friend agree that probably the only economy in which full employment was implemented was the Soviet Union, where those who did not have a job were usually found somewhere to go, such as Siberia or the Gulag archipelago?
We have seen the result of that in the Soviet economy.
It is not exactly one of the world's most prosperous economies, although the Opposition used to admire it greatly before it decided to drop its socialist credentials.
Mr. Bowis
My hon. Friend is right, and when one recalls that one of the world's biggest employers was the Red Army, one can read a lot into that country's full employment policy.
Mr. Allen McKay (Barnsley, West and Penistone) rose
Mr. Bowis
I note that the hon. Member for Barnsley, West and Penistone (Mr. McKay) has left the Opposition Front Bench for the Back Benches.
I do not know whether that means that he has changed his policy or is distancing himself from the official line of the Labour party on unemployment issues.
Either way, I happily give way to him.
Mr. McKay
Even though the hon. Gentleman's view of full employment is entirely wrong, his other comments on the subject puzzle me.
Full employment does not mean everybody working.
It could involve, for example, people retiring aged 60 and that could happen now.
In other words, the type of full employment that he envisages is not realistic.
I am puzzled by the hon. Gentleman's perception of a reserve of unemployed, a sort of Dad's Army pool of people waiting to be employed.
He envisages a highly trained, skilled, well-paid pool of unemployed.
How does that equate with his opposition to a minimum wage?
If we are to have a fairly well-paid reserve of unemployed people, why not have a minimum wage?
Mr. Bowis
A minimum wage involves the Government dictating to private employers what they should pay their workers.
I answered that point in an earlier intervention.
I am talking about a public sector reserve, state supported, composed of people without jobs for the time being, who are receiving training.
We now have in power a Government who have produced the biggest-ever package of training in support of people who are out of work.
We should adapt that and perhaps incorporate into it some of the schemes that have been tried and could be improved.
Perhaps the TECs are coming up with new ideas about the sort of training that should be developed.
My hon. Friend the Member for Norfolk, North (Mr. Howell) spoke recently on the radio about his idea of paying, say, £100 a week to people joining a community task force, enabling them to obtain work experience and contribute to society, which does not simply mean filling in holes in the road but involves going in for a range of useful activities, from working on environmental improvements to caring for the vulnerable in society.
The training could be technical or non-technical, enabling people to help, for example, in hospitals and so on .
We should look seriously at such ideas, because, unless we say that everybody should be in work at the same time, we cannot just forget the pool of unemployed.
We must consider how to look after them, train them and give them the self-esteem and confidence they deserve.
They would obtain that more readily if they were involved in some sort of community task force.
The employment reserve of which I spoke would help them to contribute to society and to their personal future and well-being.
Having answered the hon. Gentleman's intervention, I shall understand if he now wishes to return to the Opposition Front Bench.
I have a bid to make for additional assistance, and I suggest that there are three means by which we could help people without work more than has been possible in the past.
The first would be to expand the system of training credits with which the Department has been involved.
I understand that the pilot schemes have proved effective and I was delighted to be told in answer to a parliamentary question this week that other pilot schemes elsewhere in the country will be launched.
The sooner that idea is introduced universally, the sooner individuals will have the right to a credit which they can cash in for training and further education, and we should be talking of both — of further education colleges and training schemes.
Secondly, adult education as a whole — or continuing education, as I prefer to call it — has an important role.
Handing out certificates recently at my adult education college in Wandsworth, I was enormously impressed by the number of special needs students who received one, who never in their lives thought that they would qualify for a certificate.
They and I were proud of what they had achieved.
That shows what adult education can do.
That type of education can also achieve access, which can lead on to other types of training and education.
Often, people who hesitate to come into the world of education — perhaps because English is not their first language, because education has not been highlighted as important in their households or because they missed an opportunity earlier in life — can come into adult education, not necessarily taking vocational courses in the first instance, but going on to take such courses, which provide them with the training and self-assurance they need.
I hope that the Minister will discuss that point with his colleagues in the Department of Education and Science.
Thirdly, we must consider further ways to assist lone parents.
I have particularly in mind community nurseries and similar support.
All too often, when I meet constituents in tower blocks in Battersea, the women — often young women with children, the fathers of whom have disappeared — need opportunities to get out, to become trained, to earn and, in due course perhaps, to start to buy their council flats, building opportunities for themselves and their children.
They are unable to do any of that because they cannot leave their children and start to climb the ladder that the Prime Minister has exemplified.
Because I want that type of development to take place, I urge the Minister to discuss those issues with his colleagues in the Department of Health and in the Treasury.
I again congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham on initiating this debate, particularly since virtually everybody I speak to about employment, especially if they are out of work, tell me,’ It's tough.
We need help, guidance and training.
But we also need Conservative policies because those are our best hope for getting the economy into the sort of condition that will ensure that we have real job opportunities in the future.’
Mr. Richard Livsey (Brecon and Radnor)
Being an MP can be a frustrating experience.
Seventeen minutes ago, in the Queen Elizabeth II conference centre across the way, there began the presentation of training awards by the Prince of Wales.
The Secretary of State is there, as are people from Coleg Powys, in my constituency, to receive awards, and I should be there.
The instructions say that I cannot enter the building after 11 o'clock this morning.
Even so, I hope that the House will forgive me if, after my speech, I am absent from the Chamber for perhaps a quarter of an hour while I go there to congratulate the winners of training awards.
I congratulate the hon. Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham (Mr. Conway) on moving a motion about employment policies.
Although I am not entirely convinced by the contents of the motion, I agree with parts of it.
To point to progress in employment matters seems to be an anachronism when unemployment is today higher than it was in 1979.
We appreciate, as other hon. Members have said, that more people are in employment.
One of our objectives should be to utilise labour resources, which are valuable to this country.
They should be deployed to the maximum, while full employment is an ideal that we shall not reach.
None the less, we should try to get as many people into employment as possible.
The fact that unemployment is now double its 1979 level shows that the Government have failed.
One must look at the other side of the coin.
There has been a good reduction in the number of strikes; we must give the Government credit where it is due.
Their policy on reducing strikes has been successful, partly owing to the introduction of democratic ballots before strike action.
That measure is not considered controversial on either side of the House; my party finds it easy to support ballots.
Therefore, the two aspects of the motion need full consideration.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that the success of the Government's policy is also to do with the banning of secondary picketing, which the Labour party would bring back with open arms?
Mr. Livsey
Having seen some of what went on with secondary picketing in the 1970s, I regard it as the unacceptable face of socialism.
I experienced it on one or two occasions and I feel that it is not the way to proceed.
It did the Labour party a great deal of damage, from which it is still recovering.
Labour Members do not speak about it much now, and may now be moving in a more constructive direction.
Whether we have a successful employment policy, with the maximum number of people employed, depends on the state of the economy.
That, in turn depends on how the economy is managed by the Government of the day and on the quality of management in British industry.
Having worked in ICI, I know a little about the management of industry.
I always felt that there was room for improvement in top management.
Although the standard of management has been variable, it is much better than it was 10 or 15 years ago as a result of fiercer competition and a great deal of fall-out.
The approach to management is not quite so lackadaisical as it once was, but there is still a long way to go, particularly in employment policies within the companies.
The most progressive companies have an excellent record, but others could improve their labour and personnel management.
Yesterday, John Major celebrated his first year as Prime Minister but we know that he was Chancellor in Mrs. Thatcher's Government in the latter part of it —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is breaking with our convention.
We refer to hon. Members not by name but by their constituencies.
Mr. Livsey
I apologise, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
The Prime Minister cannot be proud of his performance in the past year.
GDP has gone into reverse, falling from 2.4 per cent.
growth to minus 3.7 per cent.
That is bound to affect employment, as shown by the number of business failures, which has risen in the past 12 months by 14,000, and the number of mortgage repossessions, which has topped the 100,000 mark.
That is not progress.
Even in the past 12 months, unemployment has risen from 1.66 million to 2.47 million — more than 700,000 in a short period.
Some would say that that is because of the recession, but we are in a slump rather than a recession.
In the part of the world that I help to represent — Wales — unemployment stands at more than 120,000.
The Government cannot be proud of unemployment levels of 7.6 per cent.
and male unemployment of 10.1 per cent.
Unless the Government's employment policies are more effective, unemployment could hit 3 million within the next nine months.
I hope that that will not happen, but it is a possibility.
Inflation has been a problem in the past.
It has stoked catastrophic business failures and contributed to increased unemployment.
High interest rates, which were the order of the day until relatively recently, have undoubtedly contributed to that.
The introduction of a uniform business rate has also had an adverse effect on business, especially small businesses.
Unfortunately, training has been cut by 40 per cent.
since 1988.
By May 1991, 66,000 training jobs had been axed in the voluntary sector alone.
The Secretary of State had quite a struggle last summer in his discussions with the Treasury on the revised community training programme.
He appears to have been capped by the Treasury and to have lost the battle.
If so, training has been downgraded by the Cabinet and has less priority than it once had.
I know about the scourge of unemployment, because my family suffered badly from it.
My father, who was a well-qualified master mariner, was unemployed for four years in the 1930s.
He left me a legacy of letters inquiring about jobs, and the replies.
I have tens of them in a box at home, and they make sad and tragic reading.
They show what happens when an economy goes into a downward spin.
They prove that Conservative policies did not work in the 1930s and are not working in the 1990s.
Sadly, my father had to find work in the Gulf just before the last war and died out there when I was three years old.
He went to find work 3,000 miles from this country, with tragic consequences, and I have lived with that all my life.
It explains in part why I hold the political philosophies I do.
Today, in my constituency of Brecon and Radnor, where my father came from and where I come from, unemployment has doubled in the past 15 months.
Only last week, I spoke to a garage owner who told me that almost every other customer was either losing a job or had just lost one in the past month or so.
Current Government policies seek to tackle the problem, and it would be churlish of me to say that the Government are not trying to come to terms with the unemployment problem.
From the tenor of speeches that have already been made this morning, it is obvious that the work TECs do must be acknowledged.
Their formation has been a good thing.
The only problem is that they were not introduced soon enough.
The Government are now considering skilled training, which is vital.
Without a skilled work force, we cannot compete in world markets.
That problem needs far more attention.
The employment action programme has created more places.
The Government's targets of 30,000 places in 1991-92 and 60,000 in 1992-93 are at least a start in the right direction.
They apply to people who have been out of work for six months or more.
It is welcome that the TECs are administering that scheme and that a minimum reward is at least available in that situation.
None the less, there is a long way to go and parts of the training programme have been cut, which has serious implications for this country's future.
We know less about the official Opposition's policy on the issue than we should, as is the case with many other aspects of their policy.
They appear to rely on temporary work schemes that will be rewarded by a’ proper rate for the job’.
The Labour party rightly emphasises the importance of training, but it has not made any financial commitment to it or identified any sort of financial commitment to the training programme.
We are still involved in a guessing game about the Labour Opposition's commitment.
I shall not turn to the vexed question of the national minimum wage.
I am proud to confess that, in the 1970s, I campaigned for a national minimum wage because I felt that it was the right thing to do then.
With the wisdom of hindsight and the benefit of several years' experience, I now see that analysis, particularly involving econometric models, shows that it brings a reduction in employment.
Mr. Tony Lloyd (Stretford)
Which one?
Mr. Livsey
Labour's own Fabian Society has produced information on the subject.
Mrs. Gorman
Is the hon. Member for Brecon and Radnor (Mr. Livsey) aware of the statistics from the United States, where a national minimum wage was introduced in about 1947 when unemployment among the unskilled black people was lower that among white people, as the black people worked for less?
As the national minimum wage was edged up, so the position altered.
Now, unemployment among unskilled black people is six times higher than among whites, because employers have to pay the same rate to both, and they express their prefence by choosing white employees.
We might deplore that, but it shows that the national minimum wage has harmed the most vulnerable people in that society.
Mr. Livsey
I take note of what the hon. Lady has said.
I do not know of that detailed work, but she has made an interesting comment on the position in the United States.
It would be good to have a national minimum wage, but the practicalities in terms of employment would be dangerous for the management of the British economy.
Wage levels in the United Kingdom are often too low; they are certainly far too low in my constituency, which worries me.
The fact that there are low wage levels in many parts of this country is a result of the stop-go economy and stop-go management of the economy over the years, which have now brought about a recession.
Unfortunately, a minimum wage in Britain at present would create more unemployment among the young and among women, who are both on low wages.
I believe that low wages are an absolute scandal, but in Britain they are a result of the economy running at half-cock, which is regrettable.
It is easy for the Liberal Democrats to do a demolition job on the way that the economy has been managed and the way in which unemployment has crept up, but we must provide some analysis of remedial and positive measures to tackle the problem.
We believe that, to reduce unemployment, there must be a national minimum income — which is different from a national minimum wage.
A national minimum income can be achieved through integrated tax and benefit systems that take into account a person's total net income — taking all factors into account.
We believe that the various circumstances of different people can be calculated, and allowances made for them.
We want reformed and strengthened wages councils to protect workers and employers in traditionally low-paid sectors.
We believe that that is important.
Those improvements depend on a successful macro-economic policy and the way in which that is run by the Government and the European Community with which we are now closely connected.
We need firm anti-inflationary policies, which would be better achieved through an independent central bank.
We need much more investment in education and training and a much more effective competition policy, particularly in those industries that have recently been privatised, such as British Telecom, and the gas and electricity industries, where there should be real competition, not misuse of monopolistic powers.
We need far more effective policies on small businesses to encourage employment and greater economic activity.
The taxation system must be reformed and investment made in infrastructure.
Mr. Bowis
As the hon. Gentleman obviously takes econometric models to bed with him, I wonder whether he would look at the implications of Liberal Democrat policy on one of the small industries to which his party is committed — the armed forces.
The Liberal Democrats are pledged to cutting those forces by 50 per cent.
What effect would that policy have on the unemployment figures?
Mr. Livsey
I do not love econometric models that much; I just take note of them.
Our armed forces policy was to be phased in over 10 years, not introduced at a stroke, as the hon. Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) appears to think.
That policy, like that of the Government and the official Opposition, is at present under review because of the enormous changes that have occurred during the past two years.
It is two years since we were talking in those terms, and the defence policy of every party is now under review.
One need not come to the same conclusions now as one did two years ago.
Tax reforms are important, as is investment in infrastructure, particularly in public transport, such as British Rail and other forms of high-quality public transport, to take cars off the road.
We must encourage investment in the environment and in environmental schemes, as well as investment in research and development, which is currently far too low in the United Kingdom.
Clearly, profit-related pay is extremely important if we are to stimulate higher-quality jobs, greater commitment to employment and more jobs.
That aim must be linked to industrial democracy, profit-sharing and share ownership.
Such is the importance of education and training that we have committed ourselves to a programme of investment of £1.7 billion.
The Liberal Democrats are not frightened to say how they would raise the finances to do that.
We have regularly said that we are prepared to put another 1p on the standard rate of income tax to ensure that people are properly trained and skill-trained, so that we can tackle the problems of the 1990s and try to achieve a much more dynamic and effective economy.
That will be achieved only by putting education and training at the top of the agenda.
Liberal Democrats believe that unemployment is a key issue which must be tackled head on, and I am glad of the opportunity to address the issue presented by this debate.
Our programme’ Just the Job’, announced in July 1991, will create 396,000 jobs and is extremely important.
We believe in local employment initiatives in housing, schools and hospitals.
We also believe in energy initiatives for insulation and draught-proofing — great programmes for housing.
We also want to increase funds for training and enterprise councils and would like an additional £675 million allocated to TECs to increase training quality in the existing programmes and provide an extra 71,500 places.
We think that such programmes will help to tackle the skill problems of this country.
We back the development agencies in Scotland and in Wales.
They have been successful in bringing in inward investment and greater job opportunities in those countries.
It is vital for small, home-based industries to grow as well.
We believe that, in that way, Britain can pull itself out of the slump and out of the recession into better times economically.
Mrs. Teresa Gorman (Billericay)
I congratulate the Government on their remarkable turnround of our economy from the strike-ridden, dilapidated, collapsing structure in 1979, when we came in, to the dynamic and modern economy that we have today.
It is unfortunate that there are people who are out of work, but we should try to keep a balance and remember that most people who want work are in work.
Perhaps over 90 per cent.
of those who want a job can find one.
Each day more people arrive in Britain and find work.
Whenever I go in a minicab on my way to a radio or television programme — the companies are kind enough to take us in a car — I end up discussing with the driver how he has come to Britain in the fairly recent past and now has a job driving round London.
I have met people from Africa, Europe and all over the world.
Every day such people come to Britain and are still able to find work because they are determined to find it.
They come here to make a success of their lives, which suggests to me that, despite all the gloomy statistics and stories that we hear from the Opposition, this is still a country of enterprise and opportunity, if one really wants to find that opportunity.
I welcome the fact that as a country we do not drive the unemployed into begging or starving.
We are quite generous towards unemployed people.
They are not well off, but they are not on the breadline and it is to our credit that we have a structure that supports people when they are between jobs.
Nevertheless, there are still many opportunities for people here.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
What the hon. Lady has just said is astonishing.
If she walks within a few hundred yards of this building, she will see young people, whom the Government have deprived of benefit, sleeping rough and begging on the streets because of the total indifference of people such as the hon. Lady and Conservative Members.
Mrs. Gorman
I take the hon. Gentleman's challenge.
If he can produce individuals who will come and have a discussion with him or with me, I bet that we could find somewhere where they could work, especially in a city such as London where jobs in the tourist industry, in the retail trade and in the back-up to that are still available.
I urge the hon. Gentleman to get a copy of the Evening Standard every night and to have a look.
I urge him to go to the railway stations each weekend and to get the newspapers that are handed out free of charge.
I urge him to read the newspapers that come through my door in Billericay.
Each week, the free papers are stuffed full of job advertisements.
That is how the newpapers pay for themselves.
Although I am sorry for those young people, I believe that their problem is often psychological, rather than inability to find work.
In a constructive spirit, I certainly would wish to help them to find work and I am sure that the hon. Gentleman would too, if he will bring those individuals to our attention.
The Government have a great deal of which to be proud in their record since 1979.
Our economy continues to advance, to become more technological, to bring out new products and ideas and to develop new industries.
We always forget the new industries that are blossoming.
At this very minute things are being designed under railway arches about which we have no idea, but which will emerge as new industries in the future.
Industry does not stop because one of our political parties likes to suggest that everything in Britain is going wrong.
How could we have guessed 10 years ago that there would be a video shop on every street corner?
How could we have guessed that there was an enormous and developing business in entertainment of a new kind, with a range of information technology and machinery?
All that is going on now and we do well to remind ourselves of it.
The Opposition's attitude to industry is negative because they largely view the world from the past.
They always look back to the old smokestack industries.
In fact, people did not have a very nice time working there, with dirty conditions, long hours, heat and underground work.
The jobs from which we say that we want to rescue people are in industries which, thankfully, are now in decline.
The Labour party should be pleased about that, but, because those industries are its old power base, it naturally regrets that it no longer has trade union members coming from that source.
The trade unions have sustained the Labour party over all these years and Labour gave the trade unions the appalling powers which were so badly abused in the run-up to the 1979 election when, as we all know, the country was brought to its knees by a new strike almost every week.
As an employer of labour, I have vivid memories of that time.
I am one of the hon. Members who has started a business from scratch and who has been an employer of quite a lot of people whose jobs were created out of that initiative and enterprise.
Another feature of our economy is that we have many enterprising people.
We have people such as Alan Sugar, who start off in life without any great qualifications.
They start off on a barrow in a market and they build up an enormous industry.
People such as Richard Branson and the Body Shop founders constantly come up with new ideas.
The freedom and liberalisation of our economy which were created by this Government allow such people to get new industries off the ground.
That is another reason why, for the sake of our economy, we must stick with the Conservative party.
We do not want to creep back to the economy that we had when Labour ran the country.
The Opposition are very fond of the idea that one can create new’ safeguards’for employees.
They love the idea of saying,’ We must have laws that say 48-hour working weeks, two years' maternity leave and a minimum wage.’
They imagine that by designing such schemes and by imposing them on employers, they are protecting workers.
They may change the job conditions for some people who are in employment.
A business that depends on its trained work force may be able to take on board those extra restrictions on profitability.
By and large, those extra’ advantages’, as the Labour party calls them, for the employee have to be paid for out of the profits of the organisation as a whole and they eat away at the capital that the business would ultimately have available to reinvest in jobs.
The pay-off in the long term is probably bad, although it may seem quite good in the short term.
I am more concerned about employers who employ only a few people and whose main criterion is the flexibility of being able to take on staff, to change their hours from time to time and, on occasions, to get them to work 60 or 70 hours a week when they are busy.
We do that in Parliament and my minicab drivers tell me that they work about 60 or 70 hours a week.
People who do shift work often choose far longer hours than the basic hours that the Labour party would have them work.
If we impose those conditions on employers we shall discourage some of them from employing anyone.
We never know how many jobs are lost that way.
There are no bureaucrats going round counting the jobs that never happened, the jobs that went away or the small firms that have packed up because they could no longer make a profit under the new controls and restrictions on their work force.
Nobody adds those up, but they are significant.
The restrictions often affect the most vulnerable people — people who badly need a job, but do not have the qualifications to get one in, say, ICI or the Department of Trade and Industry.
Such people's best chance of employment is with small firms which may not be very profitable.
To force increased employment costs on such firms, as we do when we add all that baggage to employees, is likely to drive them nearer to the margin, nearer to closing down.
We can create conditions for an employer, but we cannot make him employ someone under those conditions.
We must remember that, when we talk about the desirability of improving workers' conditions.
Furthermore, if restrictions eat too far into profits, employers will look elsewhere to get their work done.
I remind the Opposition that many people come to this country to persuade businesses here to make their products abroad.
When I ran the Alliance of Small Firms, we had regular visitors every year sponsored by the Government of Korea, who wined and dined small business men and tried to persuade them to take their work to Korea to be done.
When things become too expensive to do in this country, the jobs will go abroad.
Many employers will seek alternatives — perhaps now in eastern Europe.
I understand that Rolls-Royce and one of the German companies — Mercedes, I believe — are about to open a new factory in Poland or eastern Germany.
They will make things there which, if the climate were better and the labour more flexible and less expensive, they would have continued to make in this country.
Yesterday we heard the hon. Member for Crewe and Nantwich (Mrs. Dunwoody) complaining about the loss of jobs at Jaguar in her constituency.
Where have the jobs gone?
Perhaps they have been driven out of the country and gone abroad because extra conditions have been imposed here.
Certainly that can happen.
The conditions may sound wonderful, but they can have dire consequences.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Is my hon. Friend saying that imposing a condition to help a class of worker is quite likely to disadvantage that very class?
For example, insisting on conditions that would in theory make the employment of women more likely often has the opposite effect.
Mrs. Gorman
I agree.
I could not have said it better or more concisely.
Employment is a two-way trade and it is as well to remember that the conditions that we in the House think can be imposed on employers may backfire on the very people whom they are supposed to help.
No one asks the woman in the part-time job in the bookshop whether she would like the extra maternity leave and all the rest of the baggage, or whether she would prefer to keep her job.
I remember when sick pay and conditions were added and when, under the wages councils, wage rates were raised.
Little shops employing people part time had to drop some of their jobs.
They could not make more money from selling books.
People did not suddenly rush into the shops to spend more money on books because the Government said that staff had to be paid more.
So jobs disappear and nobody notices how many — except the people who lose out.
I urge the Government to continue to resist the idea of more regulations being attached to employees.
Mr. Forth
What?
Mr. Lloyd
The directive has now been grossly amended.
The Minister may want to announce what it now contains, because we have had no official announcement.
Mr. Forth
In the interests of honesty and truthfulness, I must ask the hon. Gentleman to withdraw the form of words that he used — that the Government’ blocked’the directive on pregnant women.
He must know, because we told him and everybody else at the time, that the directive on pregnant women went through the Council of Ministers on the European Community a few weeks ago, with only the Italians voting against.
How he can square that with what he has said, I really do not know.
Mr. Lloyd
If the Minister cares to read my remarks in Hansard, he will have to consider the absolute truth.
The Government were part of the process of blocking the directive until it was so badly mauled that it is now very different from the one that we first saw and debated in the House a month ago.
Mr. Leighton
Is it not the case that the Minister perhaps he will confirm this — abstained to allow through an emasculated formula which gave pregnant women in this country the equivalent of sick pay?
Not many of us think that women producing babies are suffering from an illness.
We think that that is insulting and humiliating.
Mr. Lloyd
I can confirm that that is exactly what happened.
It certainly is not pregnant women who are sick the Government have that problem.
We are intent on making sure that British women, even if no longer with the protection of the directive, have adequate protection during pregnancy.
We know that the Government have blocked the directive on part-time workers, which would have helped many women in Britain.
We know that the Government have a record on child care.
This Government in particular took away tax relief on workplace nurseries.
Even from his hon. Friends, the Minister has received a request to consider that matter again.
The women of Britain — the women in the work force and those who want to be in the work force — will not look to the Minister to offer them any hope of liberation or any hope of a better future.
They will rightly look to a Labour Government who will not look at the matter in the narrow economic calculus that we have heard from Conservative Members but will recognise that, unless we are prepared to accept the role of women in the labour force, we will fail as an economy to receive and achieve our full potential.
The minimum wage seems to exercise Conservative Members to the greatest extent.
The Government try to justify their claims about a minimum wage on the grounds of what it might to do employment, so it is worth spending a little time on the reasons why we shall insist on introducing it, and the rationale behind that.
The Select Committee on Employment recently produced a very good report on home workers, which revealed that many earn as little as 20p or 30p an hour for making up Christmas crackers.
Some receive wage rates of £1 for sewing blouses, skirts and dresses.
Some receive 20p or 30p an hour for packing cards and others 80p or 90p an hour for painting table mats.
I hope that the Minister will comment specifically on whether that is an acceptable employment practice for this country or whether he believes — as I most certainly do — that we should offer some form of legal protection for those women are the most exploited.
I also hope that the hon. Member for Brecon and Radnor (Mr. Livsey) will reconsider his unyouthful radicalism in that context, because surely nobody can justify pay rates of 20p an hour.
Such women — home workers are almost exclusively women — are entitled to some statutory support, but they are most definitely not getting that support from this Government, with or without the wages councils.
The same report examined individual cases.
We are not prepared to accept the fact that women, such as one woman from my own city of Manchester, can make skirts, blouses and trousers and be paid as little as 25p per pair of trousers.
That women was not offered a contract of employment or a payment slip, and does not know whether she is an employee or self-employed.
Each item takes between 30 and 40 minutes to complete now, but took as long as one hour during her training period.
Her employment conditions are atrocious.
Her health and safety provisions are non-existent.
The protection that she is offered is so grossly inadequate that the Minister should be ashamed that he has done nothing about it.
Such people deserve legal protection.
They deserve a role in our society that gives them a little more economic security and social dignity than is offered by the current outrageous employment practices.
We know that many people in Britain who are on poverty wages, even if they are in more regular forms of work, simply cannot make ends meet.
The’ Breadline Britain’report quotes the words of a Liverpool housewife in a low-wage family.
Talking about the reality of living on poverty wages, she said:’ The children, mainly, don't get enough to eat; things they need when they need them, like the shoes and the clothes.
I just wish we could do the things we want without having to worry where the money is coming from.’
When a mother is forced to deprive her children of food, clothing and shoes, the Minister must explain the employment policies and successes of the Government, because we have yet to hear them.
We know that roughly 10 million people in Britain today cannot afford adequate housing; that 7 million people go without essential clothing, such as a warm, waterproof coat for the winter, and that about 2.5 million children are growing up in families that go without the essential things in life, such as three meals a day, toys and out-of-school activities.
The list could go on and on.
When we know that poverty is one of the biggest growth industries in Britain, we know that the Government simply are not working — at least not in the interests of all our people.
About 4 million people would gain from the minimum wage that the Labour Government would introduce.
If the Minister has not heard it before, this is another commitment for him — 4 million people would gain.
Half of them would gain at least £10 a week and another quarter at least £20 a week.
About 40 per cent.
of Britain's adult women part-time workers would benefit from Labour's proposal for a minimum wage.
We are not running away from the moral and social justification for introducing that minimum wage, because it is an outrage in our society that no such thing exists.
It is an interesting curiousity that the nearest thing that we have to a minimum wage was introduced by Winston Churchill that one-time Conservative Prime Minister, in an earlier political guise.
That fact is of great fascination to Labour Members whose view of Winston Churchill might otherwise be differently coloured.
We know that more than 10 million people in Britain are low paid according to the Council of Europe's decency threshold.
The gap between the top 20 per cent.
and the bottom 20 per cent.
of men working full-time has never been wider in the past 100 years than it is today.
One million people in work claim means-tested benefits.
For all the reasons that I have given, we are determined to introduce a minimum wage that will offer decent protection to decent people whom I, my hon. Friends and, indeed, Conservative Members represent.
We hear scaremongering that a minimum wage will destroy jobs.
We heard the same thing when the Labour Government introduced the Equal Pay Act 1970.
Conservative Members and their predecessors came out with the same sorry story that paying women acceptable wages equal to men's wages would destroy jobs.
It did not happen.
Instead, there was a steady growth in the number of women in employment in Britain.
Empirical studies of what happened when a minimum wage was introduced in France show that it did not destroy the economic base of France.
Mr. Forth
Wrong.
Mr. Lloyd
The Minister can refer to the definitive report prepared for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development by Martin and Bazen, which made it clear that there was no loss of jobs among adult workers and no evidence of loss of jobs among youth workers.
Empirical models give a different tale from the hysterical claims of the Secretary of State for Employment.
He started by claiming that a statutory minimum wage would result in three quarters of a million jobs losses.
Then, perhaps a little frightened by his own rhetoric but thinking that he might as well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb, he increased the figure to 1 million.
Then, in a fit of excess, he ratcheted it up to a full 2 million job losses.
Everyone who has examined the issue with any professional respectability thinks that the Secretary of State is simply off his head.
Having lost out to the Treasury on training, lost face with the British public by failing to recreate a climate of industrial expansion and lost out politically to his colleagues in Cabinet, he is in need of a political success.
He hoped that he would have such a success on the minimum wage.
He simply will not achieve it, because the British public share the view of the Labour party that social decency and economic efficiency are assisted by a minimum wage which gives all our people a long-term secure role for them in the labour market.
This has been an interesting debate, because there is such a sharp contrast between Opposition Members and those who support the Government in their view of the future of Britain.
Conservative Members see Britain as a low-pay, low-cost centre of production.
They see our future as merely an offshore island for foreign investment which guarantees some tenuous future in the European Community.
Opposition Members believe that the British people have the basic talents and abilities which, with investment in their skills and a programme committed to training, will allow us to map out a better, more secure and more dignified future not for only those already in work but for the many people who will join the labour market in years to come.
It will not be long before the Minister will be able to continue his ideological rantings, but this time he will do so from not the security of the Department of Employment but from the Front or Back Benches of a Conservative Opposition.
Mr. James Arbuthnot (Wanstead and Woodford)
I begin by congratulating my hon. Friend the Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham (Mr. Conway), if congratulating is the correct expression.
I often wonder whether being successful in the ballot is a matter for congratulation or commiseration.
I suspect that in many cases — and perhaps in that of my hon. Friend because, as he said, he has a severe cold — it is a matter for commiseration.
My hon. Friend has chosen a particularly important subject for today's debate, and I congratulate him on that.
We have had a most interesting debate, in which several hon. Members have taken part.
I do not want to take too long, but I should like to refer to some of the points made by the Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton).
He suggested that I should visit my local training and enterprise council, the London East TEC.
As it happens, I was there only last Friday.
This debate is an opportunity for me to pay tribute, as he did, to the excellent management skills and work of Iain MacKinnon and his task force.
They do valuable work and are led by a good group of people.
I disagree with the impression of London East TEC that the hon. Member for Newham, North-East gave.
Far from bumping along on the bottom, desperate for money, it is in good heart.
The deputy chief executive of London East TEC wrote in an article:’ LETEC is proving to be an essential catalyst to the economic rejuvenation of the London East area.
We are not just watching from the sidelines, but rather are rolling our sleeves up and getting involved not just in getting local people back into work, but in keeping them there.
The young people of the London east area will have enormous opportunities in the future.
We must ensure that they are equipped to grasp them.’
I was heartened to see that one of the slogans on London East TEC's letterhead is:’ Our vision is that by the year 2000, the East side of London should be as prosperous as the West side’— that seems to be an excellent vision for London East TEC.
It continues:’ Our mission is to help local people and local businesses to share fully in that new prosperity.’
The TEC is well equipped to achieve precisely those aims and that is something which we very much hope to see.
Mr. Leighton
I am pleased that, like me, the hon. Gentleman is liaising closely with London East TEC.
It may have told him that although 2 per cent.
of the country's population is in its area it receives only 1 per cent.
of the expenditure on TEC programmes.
I hope that he will help to rectify that situation.
In the documents that the hon. Gentleman is quoting from, did he notice the statement that unemployment in the TEC area has risen by 81 per cent.
since March 1990, by 57 per cent.
since November 1990 and that the highest rise was in Waltham Forest — is his own constituency, I believe — where it rose by 6.5 per cent.?
Mr. Arbuthnot
The hon. Gentleman will forgive me if I say that he has the same problem with me that I have with the Whips Office.
Sometimes they confuse me with the hon. Member for Walthamstow (Mr. Summerson)— I am the hon. Member for Wanstead and Woodford, and unemployment in my constituency has not risen to quite the extent that he suggests.
I was quoting a different document from the leaflet that the hon. Member for Newham, North-East has.
It says:’ On Monday 7 October LETEC hosted the national press launch for the new Employment Action programme.
The launch was headed by the Secretary of State for Employment.
LETEC requested 1,000 places but were allocated 800.
We were of course disappointed.
None-the-less, we are determined to fill those places by the New Year and then go back to the Department of Employment for more.’
London East TEC is obviously not getting everything that it would like, and the hon. Member for Newham, North-East and I will be pressing for more spending to cure the ills of unemployment in our area.
We both work for our area in different ways with our different policies.
London East TEC is doing an extremely good job.
For example, it is taking steps to discover what local employers and businesses need and want from their employees.
One example is the recent survey of 1,500 local business people.
LETEC is using the information acquired in that survey, along with other research information to develop its training and enterprise support initiatives.
During the next few months and years, we must avoid continuing in the trap that we were in before.
When this bout of unemployment is over, or when unemployment is declining, we must avoid children leaving school with no idea of the skills that they will need to work properly in the jobs that they will want, and in the jobs that will be available.
Education has to be the key to that.
I welcomed the computer initiative in schools, which has brought so much innovation to our schools, from the primary age up.
Last night I visited the Queen Mary and Westfield college in the Mile End road and I was told that it was soon to have a level of computers of almost one work station for every six students.
That is most impressive.
One of the problems that the college told me about is that school children are leaving school with more computer literacy than the university teachers, so university teachers are having to run hard simply to keep up with the people they are teaching.
There is always a problem with education providing for skills in information technology.
It has always been noticed that information technology skills, of which we shall need more and more in the coming years, have tended to lag behind the demand for those skills.
Perhaps it is not surprising, because those demands change so much and so often.
To return to some of the initiatives London East TEC has introduced, it has set up a series of education and business partnerships.
Employers now come to schools and colleges to talk about what they need from their employees, and pupils go to their potential future work places and gain considerable valuable work experience.
Another plan is to help a minimum of 10 local students find a job with companies in east London before those students go on to university or a polytechnic.
The scheme is called Year in Industry and it is operated by Top Business Links — a company which helps businesses to communicate with schools.
Obviously, that is extremely valuable.
It improves the experience of the students themselves and the businesses' experience of the type of people coming out of the schools.
It provides links between businesses and students so that students know what the businesses need and the businesses know how they can influence the schools.
A year of a different sort of experience before university or polytechnic is valuable.
It builds a sort of dedication, a work ethic, which is valuable at a university or a polytechnic.
Part of today's debate has been about an increase in unemployment which has hit this country like so many others.
It is good news that the increase in unemployment in this country last month was the lowest for almost a year.
I hope that that means that the trend is that we shall plateau soon and thereafter we shall see unemployment reducing.
If that is true, as I hope it is, it may well be that the long-term trend of unemployment, which has seen troughs and peaks rising over the past 30 or 40 years with every trough and every peak getting higher, will turn round so that the peak of unemployment will be considerably lower than the last peak of unemployment.
The hon. Members for Stretford (Mr. Lloyd) and for Newham, North-East gave a telling and effective account of what happens during unemployment — of the destructive, demoralising and damaging effect on individuals who are unemployed.
Of course they were both right.
We must never dismiss the problem of unemployment as unimportant.
The fear of unemployment is hitting everywhere, particularly in the south-east.
It is hitting even my constituency in a way it has not done for many years.
What follows from that is that the last thing we should do is to introduce policies that are almost specifically designed simply to increase unemployment.
We must not impose minimum wages on businesses, whether or not they can afford them.
The hon. Member for Stretford said that 4 million people would gain from the imposition of a minimum wage.
He is assuming that all those people now paid below what his party would bring in as a minimum wage would keep their jobs.
The opposite would be the case.
Many businesses would be unable to afford people at a higher rate.
In any event, the Labour party's suggestion of a minimum wage is in itself rather obscure and bizarre.
As I understand it, it is tied to the average and would therefore not only be relatively high at £3.40 but would increase as the average wage itself increased.
With each increase in the average rate of pay, the minimum wage itself would have to go up and it would be for ever chasing its own tail.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
Perhaps I can help the hon. Gentleman.
It will be tied to the median, which is not the same as the average.
It is simply a mid-point on the range and would not be affected by changes in the minimum wage.
Mr. Arbuthnot
From what I understand, even an amount tied to the median would be affected because if the lowest wage were increased to £3.40 per hour, the median would have to rise.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
I shall put the matter in simple terms.
The median, the mid-point in a series of numbers such as 2,2,5,6 and 7, is defined as being the difference between 2 and 7, which is 3.5.
If we alter the figures 2 and 2 to 3.5, the middle figure of 5 would remain unaltered because it is independent of the bottom figures.
Mr. Arbuthnot
I do not understand the hon. Gentleman's mathematics and I slightly doubt whether he does.
Mr. Matthew Carrington (Fulham)
I am extremely confused.
I studied mathematics for some years at school and I have not totally forgotten all of them.
The median is not the mid-point between the first number and the last.
It is where the largest number of items in a sample comes to, whereas the average is obviously the sample multiplied by the number of items.
The hon. Member for Stretford (Mr. Lloyd) is obviously extremely confused.
The median has a precise mathematical definition which is absolutely right, and my hon. Friend is correct in saying that the median is bound to alter if the number at the bottom of the scale is changed.
That will alter the average as well in a different way, but it is bound to alter the median.
Perhaps the hon. Member for Stretford wishes to define median in a non-mathematical sense.
Mr. Arbuthnot
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for sorting out at least the hon. Gentleman's mathematics with obvious skill and knowledge.
Another aspect of the policies that Labour is pledged to implement and which would only increase the damaging effects of unemployment is the imposition of high taxes.
It would impose taxes on business and individuals which would discourage enterprise and discourage people from trying to work hard.
It would discourage profit and perhaps take us back to that nadir of Labour party policy when Shirley Williams was able to say with some pride that profit levels were the lowest they had been for years.
As the hon. Member for Stretford said, Labour would impose a training levy of 0.5 per cent.
of the payroll.
That is nothing more or less than a direct payroll tax on jobs.
It is like the selective employment tax that a Labour Government introduced many years ago.
Every Labour Government, except one, since 1929, has doubled unemployment, and the exception increased unemployment by only 50 per cent.
Therefore, it was not surprising that when I intervened on the hon. Member for Newham, North-East he was a little coy about referring to his party's record on unemployment.
The hon. Member for Newham, North-East made an interesting speech.
He put forward the proposition that adherence to the exchange rate mechanism is what causes unemployment in socialist France and socialist Spain.
But adherence to the exchange rate mechanism is one of the policies not only of the Conservative party but of the Labour party.
While the hon. Gentleman's speech was interesting if idiosyncratic, he appears to join us in condemning the employment policies of the Labour party.
Mr. Leighton
The hon. Gentleman says that a training levy is the same as a selective employment tax.
How could he be so confused?
The previous selective employment tax went to the Treasury.
If a firm spends 0.5 per cent.
on training, it does not pay the tax.
We have heard that Nissan is spending about 15 per cent.
of its payroll on training, and it is an extremely successful company.
All successful companies spend much more than 0.5 per cent.
on training.
The only criticism one might make of the Labour party's proposal is that it is not large enough.
So the hon. Gentleman should not get nervous about0.5 per cent.
of payroll being spent on training.
If he really supports the work of the east London TEC, he should not be saying that firms should not spend 0.5 per cent.
on training.
Mr. Arbuthnot
My answer to that long intervention is that I did not say that a payroll tax was the same as the selective employment tax.
I said that the payroll levy that the Labour party would introduce would have the effect of being a tax on jobs, in precisely the way that the selective employment tax had the effect of being directly a tax on jobs.
They are both ways of discouraging firms from taking additional people on to their payrolls.
I applaud Nissan for having a high training budget, but decisions of that type must be taken by companies.
The Government can encourage firms to train more, but for the Government to impose taxes on companies to insist that they train more does not take into account the effects, demands and needs of different industries.
People who see that high training encourages success, as obviously it does for Nissan, will follow the designs and needs of the marketplace and will themselves introduce high training.
Levies on the payroll will not have that effect.
My hon. Friend the Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) made the sort of eloquent and well-informed speech that we have come to expect from him every time.
He had trouble with one phrase, when he referred to the’ genuine crocodile tears’of Labour Members.
Mr. Leighton
It was a bogus sham.
Mr. Arbuthnot
The hon. Gentleman suggests that it was a bogus sham.
I think that my hon. Friend had difficulty with the phrase because of the girations of Labour policy on so many issues.
Its policy on Europe could best be described as jerking from one extreme to another within a few years, at one moment leaving the European Community altogether and in the next being willing to sign up to anything for which the EC asks; at one moment supporting the closed shop and in the next denigrating it.
The problem is that the Labour party dodges all the important European issues because its conversion to the EC is not so much skin deep as ruled purely by expediency.
Labour believes that it can hijack the EC towards the type of socialism that has been rejected throughout eastern Europe.
In socialist France, unemployment is now higher than it has ever been in that country's history.
Unemployment is rising in every European country except in Spain, but there it is twice as high as it is in Britain.
In France and Spain —
Mr. Leighton
What about Germany?
Mr. Arbuthnot
— the national minimum wage of the type presented by the Labour party is one of the causes of their unemployment.
The Minister will no doubt refer to the OECD report, which appears to have been dismissed by the hon. Gentleman.
In every EFTA and G7 country, unemployment is higher than it was a year ago.
Unemployment is a consequence of various factors — of inflation and world recession — and not something that we can escape.
We could make it worse by insisting on the sort of minimum conditions put forward by the Labour party, conditions that would disadvantage the very people whom Labour says they are designed to protect.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
This has been a good debate, as Friday debates often are.
I thank and congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham (Mr. Conway) for giving the House an opportunity to cover this important ground.
It has elicited a number of interesting points on which we would do well to reflect.
It may be significant that, as I have sat here throughout the debate, riveted as ever to the contributions that have been made, I have noticed no more than three Labour Members present at any point.
At one time, a Liberal Member was present.
That does not suggest the outrage that a perusal of Hansard might beguile readers into expecting.
It is important to put that fully into context.
A good aspect of the debate, especially on this side of the House, has been the positive attitude towards the training and enterprise councils.
Whether that attitude is as positive among Opposition Members remains to be seen.
My hon. Friends well appreciate the nature of the role of the TECs.
It has been a radical step for the Government to hand over large parts of the policies which, until now, have been centrally determined.
The hon. Member for Tooting (Mr. Cox) seems to want everything to be centrally determined and his speech reflected the dying echoes of the old-style centralised Labour party that we all knew and, at one stage, loved in our way.
We need to hear more about the Labour party's current attitude to TECs.
TECs are a vital part of the delivery of modern policies in a modern society.
The fact that business men have volunteered to give up their time and expertise to TECs is a major new breakthrough in the delivery of policies at local level.
We recognise the vital importance of policies being tailored to local needs.
Handing them over to people outside government who know their local community has been a quantum leap in the delivery of Government policies in the important areas of training and skills.
For Opposition Members to paint a negative picture of TECs failing to do what they have been set up to do is not good enough, because, after all, they have been in existence for only two years.
That is made worse by the fact that the network of London TECs has, in some cases, been in existence literally only for weeks.
I should like hon. Members to give TECs not only their support but the time to develop their approach locally to see whether they can meet the high expectations that understandably now exist.
They will certainly have the fullest support of my Department and the Government in that and I hope that they will have the fullest support of Opposition Members, too, although that has not come through in this debate.
Perhaps we shall hear more about that once Opposition Members have reflected on the important role of TECs.
May I put some of the comments that have been made into a broader context.
Disgraceful accusations were made by Opposition Members, including, I regret to say, the Chairman of the Select Committee on Employment, the hon. Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton), from whom I expected better.
He suggested that the Government were engineering or conniving at a high level of unemployment.
Such a suggestion is unworthy of the hon. Gentleman.
How is it that, when this country has been going through a recession, which has been shared by countries throughout the world — not least the United States — our unemployment figures are lower than those of many other countries?
For example, I had the privilege of visiting Australia last week, when I met a good friend of the hon. Member for Newham, North-East.
Australia has had a Labour Government for some time, but unemployment there is higher than in the United Kingdom.
Socialist France has higher unemployment than the United Kingdom and unemployment in socialist Spain is at least 50 per cent.
higher than in this country.
Those examples show, by clear implication, that those other Governments, who call themselves socialist and pursue policies similar to those which the Opposition would like to pursue, all have the same result.
Yet we are accused of engineering high unemployment.
The Opposition cannot have it both ways.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
Nor can the Minister.
Does he dissent from the Chancellor's comment that unemployment is a price worth paying?
How is it that 80 per cent.
of the increase in unemployment in western Europe has been in Britain?
Mr. Forth
It is easy to answer the last question.
It is because until recently this country had one of the lowest levels of unemployment in Europe, so the increase here has, regrettably, been greater.
The hon. Gentleman's mathematical skills are letting him down today — perhaps I should not go too deeply into that in case we get into a tangle.
However, it is important for us all to keep the matter in context.
There has been a recession; the Government have had to deal with the consequences and have implemented the policies necessary to help the unemployed.
I hope that Opposition Members do not believe that Conservative Members neither understand nor care about the personal circumstances of those who, tragically, have lost their jobs.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
There should be some recognition of the fact that the programmes that the Government have set up in the network of jobcentres, including restart, job clubs, job interview guarantees and all the programmes that they deliver through jobcentres or training and enterprise councils, help to alleviate the misery that comes with loss of employment.
The fact that, even now, 50 per cent.
of people who lose their jobs are back in work within three months is encouraging.
That the long-term unemployment figures are much lower than they were bears testimony to the fact that many of our pledges and the policies that we have implemented are having a positive effect on the ground in relation to the individuals about whom Opposition Members spoke with such understandable feeling and passion.
Having made those general comments, I shall now address specific matters raised in the debate by Opposition Members.
I turn first to my opposite number, the hon. Member for Stretford (Mr. Lloyd), who made some interesting statements, not least that relating to his spending commitments.
His comments were useful because they provide us all with the opportunity to see what the Opposition have in mind and the approach that they will take in the run-up to the next election and if they were ever to be elected to government.
I shall leave to one side the figure that the hon. Gentleman gave somewhat glibly when he said that women in this country were underpaid by £21 billion.
He had previously made much play of the fact that the Labour party wanted to do more than the Government to ensure that women were paid properly.
I take that as the hon. Gentleman's first spending commitment, except that he is making it on behalf of employers and businesses.
It was not a Government or taxpayer commitment, but a commitment being made by the hon. Gentleman on behalf of the private sector and employers.
Therefore, the hon. Gentleman clocked up, for starters, a mere £21 billion burden on employers in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
The problem with the Minister's logic is that his colleague, the other Under-Secretary of State for Employment, the hon. Member for Wantage (Mr. Jackson) has recently gone on record saying that he believes that women should have pay parity with men in accordance with the law.
Therefore, the Government would also have to fund the £21 billion differential.
Mr. Forth
I have not discussed with my hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary whether he is pledging a £21 billion expenditure increase, but, having heard what the hon. Member for Stretford has said, I shall have a quiet word with my colleague to see whether he agrees.
We also heard of the commitment underlying the Opposition's desire for the full effects of the original text of the EC directive on pregnant women to be implemented.
I was challenged about that — I do not know why, as I thought that the position was clear.
When explaining this matter to the House, I shall have to explain to Opposition Members how the European Community works.
I do not blame the Opposition for not understanding the issues as fully as we might hope, but, given their new-found support and desire for everything European, I thought that they might have developed a better understanding.
The process is as follows: the Commission makes proposals which are considered by the European Council and the Council of Ministers.
During that process the proposals are amended — it is not impossible for them to be amended, although to hear Opposition Members speak one would think that the proposals went straight from Commission draft into law without an intermediate stage.
Given the Opposition's desire to give increasing powers to the European Parliament and their lack of understanding of how the Council of Ministers works, we should perhaps excuse the lack of appreciation of the process.
The pregnant women directive was brought forward in one form by the Commission.
In its original form, it would have involved a cost to the British taxpayer, to the Government and to employers of up to £500 million.
The directive was then discussed at great length in the Council of Ministers.
I attended the final meeting, at which the member states, guided by the Dutch presidency, came together behind a text that they found acceptable.
I was prepared to support it.
I abstained on a procedural matter because, as Opposition Members may recall, we had a reserve about the treaty base of the directive.
I will not go into detail on that unless pressed to do so by Opposition
Child Abuse (Leicestershire)
Mr. David Ashby (Leicestershire, North-West)(by private notice)
To ask the Secretary of State for Health whether he will make a statement on the abuse of children in children's homes in Leicestershire.
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
As the House will be aware, on 29 November, three child care officers formerly employed by Leicestershire county council were convicted on extremely serious charges of sexual assault and other acts of violence which occurred in three Leicestershire children's homes between 1973 and 1986.
These were particularly despicable crimes.
They went on over a long period and affected many children who had been entrusted to the defendants for care and help.
I do not believe that it is necessary for me to put into words the outrage of the House
Hon. Members
‘Hear, hear.’
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
and of the country at the things which we heard during that trial.
The first concern of hon. Members, particularly those representing Leicestershire constituencies, will be to know whether children in Leicestershire children's homes are now properly protected against abuse.
As soon as the charges came to light earlier this year, the Department's social services inspectorate carried out an inspection to assess the present quality of child protection in the county's children's homes.
The report showed that there had been many changes and improvements since 1986, but that some deficiencies remain.
The inspectorate's recommendations are now being vigorously addressed under the leadership of the present director of social services, Mr. Brian Waller.
Through the Children Act 1989 and its associated regulations and guidance, the Government have ensured that a much more effective framework for controlling children's homes is now in position.
It includes proper complaints and rigorous inspection procedures.
This new framework is both endorsed and supplemented by the Utting report of last August.
As I announced at the end of the trial, I am immediately doing two things.
First, I am directing Leicestershire county council to establish a statutory and legally chaired inquiry whose terms of reference will be to inquire into management responses to complaints or other prima facie evidence of abuse, malpractice or other related matters in Leicestershire children's homes between 1973 and 1986; and any other relevant management and personnel management matters during that period or subsequently.
No amount of legislation can in itself guarantee that there will be no more child abuse in our children's homes.
This trial shows yet again the danger that work with vulnerable children, particularly in residential homes, may attract the very people who should be kept at the greatest possible distance from it.
This means doing more than checking qualifications and setting up systems, although these things should be done.
It means that there must be constant vigilance by the authorities; it means that there must be methods of responding swiftly to alarm bells that may be rung either by staff or by children and that there must be alarm bells that can, in real life, be rung.
But the trial shows the need to look with the utmost care at staff selection procedures.
I am therefore also establishing a national inquiry whose chairman will be Mr. Norman Warner, former director of Kent social services.
The inquiry's terms of reference will be’ to examine selection and appointment methods and criteria for staff working in children's homes and to recommend improvements; and to make such further examination as the committee may consider justified of management or other issues relevant to the protection of children and young people and to the support and guidance of staff in such homes.’
I will wish to see the report and its recommendations by1 July 1992.
I have no doubt that the majority of staff working in this difficult field do their job with compassion and professionalism, but this trial has shown that we can afford to take nothing for granted.
Mr. Ashby
I think that the whole House will welcome that statement and the fact that two inquiries will be set up.
This is yet another major scandal involving the social services department of a council, and the country is rather tired of such scandals.
I hope that the second inquiry, of which Mr. Norman Warner will be the chairman, will look closely at the role, quality, education and training of social workers as well as the way in which they are selected.
In respect of the inquiry into Leicestershire county council, in general there appears to have been a major cover-up by those responsible for the care and welfare of these children.
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will wish the inquiry to investigate how numerous complaints came to be disregarded, how Mr. Frank Beck was able to simply resign, why the police were never informed of the complaints so that they could be fully investigated at the time, why Mr. Frank Beck, having resigned voluntarily after numerous complaints, was given a reference, why there was not even a report into the then Department of Health and Social Security, and why the inquiries by Brent therefore proved negative.
My right hon. Friend will agree that those questions must be answered and that we have to get to the very heart of the scandal to ensure that it should not happen again, not only in Leicestershire but elsewhere, and those responsible for the cover-up are made to realise what they have done and the subsequent effect it has had on numerous children.
Mr. Waldegrave
I agree with the second part of my hon. Friend's question.
He raises a range of issues into which the statutory inquiry must look.
On the first part, I could quote to the House increased statistics for money spent on training, but I do not wish to mislead the House into thinking that there is any qualification that can guarantee against the abuse that we have seen.
Mr. Beck was a formidably powerful personality and doubtless would have passed any examination set for him in his profession — indeed, he did so.
Examinations do not preclude against evil.
What matters is that the authorities exercise their responsibility for checking and double checking what happens on the ground.
Mr. Greville Janner (Leicester, West) rose
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Janner
Is the Minister aware that everyone in Leicestershire will welcome the setting up of the inquiry into the regime of Frank Beck?
There was, of course, not a shred of truth in any of the allegations of criminal conduct made against me during the trial by Beck and by his accomplice, Winston.
I hope to raise many important aspects of the matter in the House tomorrow evening, if I am fortunate to catch your eye, Mr. Speaker.
As my wife, my family and I have had a taste of the suffering that Beck can impose on innocent people, will the Minister join me in sending to the real sufferers, the individuals who endured Beck's homes and whose lives have been wrecked at his hands, the profound sympathy of us all?
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Waldegrave
I am sure that the House has demonstrated its feelings on the matter in relation to the hon. and learned Gentleman by the reception that he has just received.
I am sure that the House wished to join him in sending its sympathy to the many victims, some of whom may have suffered irreparable damage.
We hope that that is not true in too many cases.
Mr. Michael Latham (Rutland and Melton)
I thank my right hon. Friend for what he has just said about the vile allegations and lies against my hon. and learned Friend — I use both words advisedly — the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner).
I thank my right hon. Friend especially for the inquiry into Leicestershire.
This terrible matter has brought shame on Leicestershire, and we expect to get to the heart of how it could have gone on for so long, while apparently nobody did anything about it.
Mr. Waldegrave
That is exactly what the local statutory inquiry must get to the bottom of.
I am sure that it will wish to consider a wide range of evidence, including the Newell report producted by the county, which I am sure contains matters germane to the inquiry.
We must get to the bottom of the matter.
I repeat that there is no system that can automatically preclude evil people getting into positions of power over vulnerable people.
That is why we must have complaints procedures that can be worked and really do work, why authorities must use their powers in the proper way and why we must have constant vigilance.
Mr. Jim Marshall (Leicester, South)
I thank the Secretary of State for acting so expeditously in establishing the two public inquiries.
I also take the opportunity to inform him and the House that the people of Leicestershire have been shattered and appalled by the relevations of abuse in our children's homes.
Does the Secretary of State agree that it is vital that the public inquiry in Leicestershire establishes the circumstances that permitted the regime of terror to go on for so long and that permitted complaints made by the children to be ignored for long?
Only if that background is established can we be assured that abuse will not take place in future either in Leicestershire or in other counties.
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman puts his finger exactly on some of the issues that must be addressed most seriously.
The citizens of Leicestershire need not feel shame.
There is no reason why such evil cannot happen anywhere, and it is their ill luck that many of their children have suffered from it.
Mr. David Tredinnick (Bosworth)
My right hon. Friend will recall that I asked on 18 July for an inquiry, and my constituents will welcome what my right hon. Friend has said today.
Is the discredited regression therapy still taught and used in any homes and, if so, will he make it illegal?
What plans are there to tighten up the foster service vetting which, in this case, allowed a known homosexual to adopt a child?
Will my right hon. Friend consider extending the inquiry of Leicestershire social services department to investigate departments throughout the country?
Mr. Waldegrave
On the latter point, the statutory inquiry must consider this case.
Lessons may well be learned from it, but the statutory inquiry has the terms of reference that we have directed the county to adopt, with, I must say, the full support of the county and its present director of social services who, I am reliably informed, has a very high reputation in the service.
On the other matters, we should await the report's conclusions.
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Bosworth (Mr. Tredinnick), I have personal views about some of those matters, but we should await the report, when we will have a little more to go on about the circumstances and how this could have happened.
There are discredited and out-of-date theories around, and I have asked officials in my Department to report to me on those matters.
However, we will need a little more evidence before we reach conclusions on some of these things.
Mr. Keith Vaz (Leicester, East)
May I join the hon. member for Rutland and Melton (Mr. Latham) in condemning the cowardly attacks made on the character of my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner).
I am sure that we all want to pass on our good wishes to his wife and family after their terrible ordeal over the past few months.
On 18 May 1989, in Standing Committee B, I moved an amendment to the Children Bill, supported by my hon. Friend the Member for Monklands, West (Mr. Clarke), which would have required all local authorities to appoint a children's rights officer.
Bearing in mind the fact that the first complaint in this case was made on the advice of the Leicestershire children's rights officer, will the Secretary of State reconsider the Government's view about the appointment of those officers?
Will he, as a matter of urgency, issue a directive or circular to all local authorities requiring them to appoint an officer as a matter of urgency and not simply to wait until the end of the inquiry before making such an appointment?
Mr. Waldegrave
I think that the important thing is the provision in the Children Act 1989 to have a named person to whom children in such homes can complain.
It is no earthly use appointing a particular officer if the childen do not know how to complain to him or her and cannot do so.
That is the vital and most important thing that has been done.
I warn hon. Members not to think that there is an easy institutional panacea for any of those matters.
All the authorities must work properly and openly if we are to avoid such abuse in future.
Mr. Peter Thurnham (Bolton, North-East)
Will my right hon. Friend consider the chasm that seems to exist between local authority children's homes, where 85 per cent.
of the staff are unqualified, and private sector residential homes, which are run as businesses and which charge local authorities as much as £1,000 a week and the directors of which draw as much as £750,000 per annum?
Mr. Waldegrave
I would warn the House, and repeat my earlier point, that Mr. Beck had qualifications.
There is no particular reason to think that people who are determined to get their hands on vulnerable children will be so stupid that they cannot pass examinations.
The issue is a little more complex than that.
Mr. David Bellotti (Eastbourne)
I congratulate the Government on appointing Mr. Norman Warner to conduct the national inquiry.
His views and leadership will be well respected by hon. Members on both sides of the House.
In that inquiry, do the Government intend to consider two very important aspects, the first of which is funding?
The Secretary of State will be aware that the social services departments of many local authorities are struggling to meet their financial commitments in implementation of the Children Act 1989.
Many local authorities are millions of pounds short of the necessary resources.
For example, Hampshire is £2 million or £3 million short, and East Sussex is £2 million short for next year.
I hope that the inquiry will consider all those aspects, because the things that we all desire come at a price.
Secondly, is not now the time for the Government seriously to consider an independent inspection service for complaints because in many cases — pindown was one, Leicestershire is another and I understand that there may be further examples at Wrexham and Bangor — the local authorities are not the best bodies to investigate the complaints?
Will the terms of reference of the Warner inquiry include those two important aspects?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's support for Mr. Norman Warner, whose appointment will be widely welcomed by those who know him as an independent-minded and good man.
However, I warn people against lumping together pindown and what has been happening in Leicestershire.
Pindown was a serious professional failure, but was a hundred miles removed from the level of criminal activity of which we heard in the recent trial.
Although the House was right to be concerned about pindown, we are talking about something of a different order of magnitude in this case.
The Warner report will not become involved in the issue of independent inspections.
However, we have now insisted that there should be arm's-length inspectorates.
Our own central social services inspectorate will be not only carrying out its own inspections, but also checking on the quality and systems of the arm's-length inspectorates that have been set up by the local authorities.
It must be for the local authorities, which have the statutory responsibilities, to take those responsibilities extremely seriously and I would not want to divorce them from the primary responsibility for undertaking those tasks.
More money could, of course, be spent, but if we think that this is simply a matter of money —
Mr. Bellotti indicated dissent.
Mr. Waldegrave
Indeed, I am sure that the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) did not mean to say that.
There are things on which we should be spending money, which is why we have increased the standard spending assessments in recent years, but in this case
Mr. Bellotti indicated assent.
Mr. Waldegrave
I know that the hon. Gentleman agrees with me, because I can see him assenting.
This is not necessarily a matter of money.
Evil men can be fully qualified and have resources at their command, so we may still find that we have evil to contend with.
Mr. Roger Sims (Chislehurst)
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will agree that we should be grateful to the vast majority of staff who work in children's homes and who deal daily with children who, almost by definition, are difficult and disturbed.
Although I accept that people can be both highly qualified and evil, does my right hon. Friend agree that it is important to have adequate numbers of properly trained staff in such homes?
Is he satisfied that the establishment of the homes is sufficient and that a sufficiently high proportion of the staff are properly trained?
Does he further agree that there might be a case for extending the training of social workers, especially in this area?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am sure that there is common ground with my hon. Friend, because I accept that we need steadily to improve training — indeed, we have been putting more money into that.
Although the Utting report, which was published in the summer, made it clear that training was not the central issue in such cases, I am not arguing that professionalism is not important.
As I was saying earlier, paper qualifications cannot guarantee to exclude the kind of evil that we have been reading about in the past few weeks.
Miss Joan Lestor (Eccles)
I welcome both the inquiries that the right hon. Gentleman has so speedily set up, but may I advise him that, if we do not get it right this time, we shall be at the Dispatch Box again to consider still more cases?
Unfortunately, there has recently been a terrible saga of children who have been abused.
The crux of the matter today is that those children were not listened to or believed when they complained to the very people in whose care we had put them for protection.
Although we must get it right, we will not necessarily be able to prevent such cases from happening again, because human beings are full of frailties.
Nevertheless, this case could have been avoided.
In connection particularly with the second inquiry, will the right hon. Gentleman bear in mind the fact that we have children in private as well as in local authority homes, all of which need to be looked into quickly?
How is it possible not only that children are not listened to when they complain, but that the man against whom they are complaining can leave one employment for another and be given a reference by the very people who have already received complaints about him?
That seems unbelievable.
I hope that the Secretary of State, who I know is as appalled as all of us about the matter, will pay special attention to how that could possibly happen.
I hope that the inquiry will underline the fact that, by and large, children do not lie about such matters and that the people who have now come forward as adults have probably been permanently damaged because no one would pay any attention to what they said.
It is important that we examine the Children Act 1989 to make sure that we have got the complaints procedure right.
There must be an independent person to whom children can complain.
The children's charities are backing our policy of a children's rights commissioner to whom children can go, wherever they are, and be listened to.
That is important.
I accept the Secretary of State's point that all the training in the world will not deter an evil man like Beck.
The main inquiry will examine the vetting of people who work with children.
Will the Secretary of State bear in mind the fact that the police tell me that there is a backlog of six to 10 weeks for vetting certain people, especially teachers?
To avoid other children being subjected to abuse during the inquiry, it is important that the backlog is dealt with as a matter of the gravest urgency.
These are our most vulnerable children, and they deserve our best support and protection.
Mr. Waldegrave
I welcome the hon. Lady's comments.
I will take up the latter point both in my Department and with my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary.
That is probably an issue that we should examine.
I strongly support the thrust of what the hon. Lady said.
Children must be heard, and must feel confident that they have an independent person to whom they can complain.
We have taken steps to draw to the attention of all children who go into a home the fact that there is a telephone number, a contact point and a named officer separate from the home to whom they can complain if they feel the need.
That is a vital step.
The inspection under the Children Act 1989 is now extended to private homes.
That is a welcome step.
The reference issue, which my hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West (Mr. Ashby) also mentioned, is one of the matters to which the statutory inquiry must direct its attention.
I shall not make any further comment about it today, but it must be one of several essential issues which the inquiry will have on the table.
Home Secretary (Appeal Court Judgment)
Mr. Speaker
Before I call the Home Secretary, I should say that I understand that a notice of appeal has now been lodged but that I propose to exercise my discretion in respect of the sub judice rule to allow questions covering the Home Secretary's statement.
Hon. Members
Resign.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Baker
The House will know that, on Friday, my action in the case of the deportation of a Zairean national was subject to a judgment by the Court of Appeal.
I have now had the opportunity to study that judgment and I have taken further legal advice.
The court gave me leave to appeal.
I have decided that an appeal to the House of Lords should be lodged, and this has been done.
I have placed a copy of the judgment, together with the earlier judgment of Mr. Justice Simon Brown, in the Library of the House of Commons.
The issue centres upon the response to an order made by Mr. Justice Garland in the early hours of 2 May and the consideration that I gave to that order at a meeting at 4 pm on the same day.
I was, of course, advised throughout not only by Home Office lawyers but also by Treasury Counsel.
As this matter will be central to the proceedings in the House of Lords, the House will recognise that I can say no more about it.
As the Master of the Rolls has acknowledged, this case raises issues of constitutional importance, issues which go far beyond the facts of the case which gives rise to them.
The question posed by the judgment of the majority of the Court of Appeal is whether Ministers of the Crown and civil Servants, acting in the course of their duties, can be separated from the Crown itself.
I should like to make it clear to the House that I accept full responsibility for the actions taken in this case by officials of the Home Office and by my hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary, who dealt with it.
I was involved in the case at a late stage, and that is the subject of the court's findings.
On any view that may be taken, this case breaks new ground of great constitutional importance.
Every Minister acts, and must act, under the rule of law.
The only comment I wish to make at this stage is that the court recognised that I had no intention to act in defiance of an order of the court or to hold myself above the law.
Mr. Roy Hattersley (Birmingham, Sparkbrook) rose
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
Where is the honour?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) to sit down.
Mr. Hattersley
Is the Home Secretary aware that, by purporting to describe his motives in persisting with the deportation order despite the instructions of the court, he is contributing to a debate which he described as sub judice?
Will he understand that had he wished, as his statement claimed, to remain within the law, his proper course would have been to accept the court's ruling and then appeal, not to flout the court's judgment?
He claims that he had no intention of acting in defiance of the court order.
That is exactly what he did.
He also broke an undertaking which had been given to the court in his name.
Will the Home Secretary confirm that, aside from the point of law to which he draws our attention and which will soon become sub judice, the judgment described Home Office procedures as reflecting no credit on the Home Secretary, and called the treatment of that asylum seeker a disgrace.
Does he understand that, while he may postpone or prevent debate on such matters in the House, outside he will be called upon to justify his incompetence?
Finally, the Home Secretary will recall that, at the time of the Brixton escape fiasco, he claimed that no blame attached to him because he had not been consulted.
In the case of the wrongful deportation of any asylum seeker, he admitted that he was consulted, but he hides behind the excuse that he did no more than accept civil servants' advice.
Are there any circumstances in which the Home Secretary would feel it right to take the honourable course and resign from the office which he discharges so inadequately?
Mr. Baker
Once again, the right hon. Gentleman mistakes the constitutional wood for the political trees.
He has sought to make a political attack on me, and I shall reply in the same way because the right hon. Gentleman has been highly selective in his summary of the case.
I remind him that the applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 September 1990 on a flight from Lagos, Nigeria, using a false passport, and claimed that he would be persecuted in Zaire —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Home Secretary should bear in mind the fact that this case is sub judice.
Mr. Baker
Could I say that the actual issues that go to the House of Lords do not relate to the earlier events to which the right hon. Gentleman has referred.
I wish to come to the point that the right hon. Gentleman raised specifically about my role in this matter.
I remind him that the applicant was interviewed three times, on 24 September, 2 December and 17 December, and was given every opportunity to present his case.
The case for asylum was turned down, as the right hon. Gentleman knows, and there were three applications for leave to move for judicial review.
Three hearings took place, two of them on the afternoon of 1 May.
Could I now come to the events of which the right hon. Gentleman accused me — namely, my involvement on 2 May?
In the various judgments that have been made in the High Court by Mr. Justice Brown, no contempt was found against officials or my hon. Friend for what is called phase 1 and phase 2.
I was involved because an order had been made in the early hours of 2 May.
I was advised by my legal advisers in the Department, and subsequently by first Treasury counsel, that that order was beyond the power of the court, and I was given leave to apply for it to be varied or discharged.
I asked for that to be done at the earliest opportunity, the following morning at 9 o'clock.
When the court met, that order was withdrawn.
That is the issue that will go to the House of Lords.
As I said, it is an important issue, because it involves a decision which I took.
I do not shirk any responsibility in this matter, nor do I shirk any responsibility for the actions taken by my officials or for the way in which the Parliamentary Under-Secretary handled the case.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
Will my right hon. Friend accept that no hon. Member on this side of the House and, if they can leave aside party politicking for a moment, no hon. Member on the Opposition Benches, would believe that my right hon. Friend was capable of flouting the law —— as has been suggested, either in his personal capacity, or, still less, as a holder of one of the great offices of State?
Interruption
Is it not a fact that this is now an area of very important constitutional dispute, that my right hon. Friend accepted the advice of senior Treasury counsel, that two judges have spoken in his favour and two against, and that the House of Lords may find that he was right and they were wrong?
Is it not also a fact that in this case it is clear that, if the Court of Appeal believes that he had no intention of flouting a court order and of putting himself above the law, that should be good enough for the rest of us?
Mr. Baker
I thank my hon. and learned Friend for those comments, and I quote from the judgment of the Court of Appeal —
Interruption
I could read the whole of it if I am asked to do so.
On the question of the rule of law and observance of the rule of law — this is a very important matter; Ministers are subject to the laws of the land and to enforcing the rule of law — the Master of the Rolls said:’ He’— that is, the Home Secretary —’has disavowed any intention to act in defiance of an order of the court or to hold himself above the law.’
That is a disavowal which I fully accept.
Mr. Robert Maclennan Caithness and Sutherland)
Does the Home Secretary accept that, in his high office, he is the prime protector of the liberties of the subject and upholder of the rule of law, and that his position has been fatally compromised by his unwillingness to carry out the order of the court and to ask questions about it subsequently?
Is he aware that, by persisting in the claim that he was not bound by the order of the court, he is compounding his offence?
Mr. Baker
I wish that the hon. Gentleman had made himself familiar with the two judgments in the case — those of Mr. Justice Simon Brown and of the Master of the Rolls.
If he had, he would know that what he has said is not right.
Sir John Wheeler (Westminster, North)
My right hon. Friend rightly accepts responsibility for what happens in the Home Office.
Is it not a fact that everyone in the Home Office associated with this case has been properly advised by qualified lawyers, that the facts that my right hon. Friend had produced to the House today are not in dispute and that the issue is one of constitutional importance only?
Mr. Baker
As I said, I think that this issue is of very considerable constitutional importance, because the effect of the judgment is to separate the activities of a Minister acting under his own name from those carried out while acting as a Minister of the Crown.
That has considerable implications for the conduct of affairs.
It is certainly at variance with the constitutional practice —
Mr. Alex Carlile (Montgomery)
Oh?
Mr. Baker
The hon. and learned Gentleman has his own view, but I think that, as a lawyer, he will agree that it is at variance with the constitutional practice that has operated hitherto.
It certainly cannot be limited just to matters of contempt but must relate to the other coercive jurisdictions of the court.
This is a matter of major constitutional importance which will have to be looked at by the House of Lords and no doubt considered by this place in due course.
Mr. Jeremy Corbyn (Islington, North)
Is the Home Secretary aware that his decision of 2 May put that Zairean teacher in an extremely dangerous and vulnerable position, and that it is not the first time that his Department has deported people in the face of a court decision that they should remain in this country?
Does he agree that it is now essential that he withdraw the Asylum Bill now under consideration and instead institute a proper system of legal appeal that gives automatic rights of appeal to political asylum seekers and does not leave them at the mercy of his erroneous decisions?
Mr. Baker
In the consideration given to that case, the most scrupulous care was taken of the safety of the Zairean.
Right at the last minute, before the final Court of Appeal hearing on 1 May, evidence alleging torture was adduced.
It was looked at by my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State and was available to the Court of Appeal when the appeal was turned down.
As for the safety of the Zairean, I was glad to see that, in his judgment, Mr. Justice Brown said:’ However, it is at least now clear that no irreversible damage has resulted from his removal on 1st/2nd May’— as he has been in touch with his solicitors both from Zaire and Nigeria since then.
I certainly will not withdraw the Asylum Bill.
Indeed, such legislation would have helped in a case like that, because the asylum seeker concerned sought asylum at the port of entry.
The Bill gives asylum seekers in that position the right — it did not exist when the case was before the court — to appeal to an independent adjudicator.
Sir George Gardiner (Reigate)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that he has considerable sympathy on this side of the House and in the country, especially as there is now some doubt about whether the judge had the power to make the order that he made?
Mr. Baker
I would be treading a little widely in the direction of sub judice if I were to answer that, because any decision is for the jurisdiction of the court.
All that I can say is that the judges who have considered the matter so far are divided.
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
Although I accept that the Home Secretary will not resign at this stage, does he accept that, when that case is combined with prisoner escapes and Sunday trading, his credentials as a law and order Minister begin to look a little threadbare?
Mr. Baker
That raises very different questions.
The Attorney-General and the Minister of State, my right hon. Friend the Member for Mitcham and Morden (Mrs. Rumbold), made statements on Sunday trading, whereas I have made a statement on the interpretation of last Friday's judgment.
Mr. David Sumberg (Bury, South)
Is not the hypocrisy and confusion in the Opposition ranks shown by the fact that, when that judgment was announced, the legal affairs spokesman for the Opposition was immediately in the media demanding my right hon. Friend's resignation, while the shadow Home Secretary was demanding that he remain.
After a weekend's contemplation, the shadow Home Secretary now says that my right hon. Friend should resign.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the case breaks new ground, that he acted at all times on legal advice and that wise counsel should permit the case to go before the House of Lords rather than rush to judgment now?
Mr. Baker
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
The right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) is entitled to change his view, as he does from time to time.
The view that he changes is not usually very considered and, from his short statement, he has clearly not studied in depth either of the judgments that we are discussing today.
I hope that he now applies himself to them, because he has not applied himself to the rest of his portfolio.
Mr. Andrew Faulds (Warley, East)
Is not the right hon. Gentleman's attitude to this judgment typical of the decline in standards of political integrity over the 11 years of the regime of the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher)?
Is not it particularly typical of the tacky conduct of the Home Secretary in every office that he has held?
Mr. Baker
I had not appreciated the fact that my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley had been involved in the matter; as far as I know, she has not.
I know perfectly well what responsibilities I have for the Home Office and for the actions of Home Office officials and the Minister who handled the case, and I know my own responsibility in this matter.
If the hon. Gentleman would do me the service of going to the Library and reading the judgments, he would find that in the earlier proceedings, neither the Home Office nor my hon. Friend were held in contempt for the actions that were taken on 1 and 2 May.
Mr. Snape
I understand that, and I am grateful to the Minister for pointing it out.
He is aware that the BMA has expressed considerable reservations about the enforcement of the levels and about the legislation, particularly given the lack of experience of the transport police in administering the law in respect of railway staff.
Perhaps the Minister can clarify whether the provisions of the Bill will be operated specifically and only by the transport police.
Mr. McLoughlin indicated dissent.
Mr. Snape
We shall be asking for more details in Committee about who else will be involved and how they will discharge their duties.
While I stress that we believe that the safest limit is no alcohol at all, we should be reluctant to see the Metropolitan police in London entering railway property willy-nilly to enforce the provisions of the Bill.
Could that happen under part II?
Will police forces other than the transport police be responsible for administering certain aspects of the Bill?
Mr. McLoughlin
The hon. Gentleman makes an important point.
Primarily, it will be for the British Transport police to carry out the tests.
However, other police forces will also be able to enforce provisions if a transport police constable is not available, or in relation to systems not covered by the British Transport Police, such as tramways, preserved railways and the Tyne and Wear metro.
Normally, however, one would expect the transport police to be responsible, but it is possible for other police officers to conduct tests.
Mr. Snape
I am grateful to the Minister for clarifying that, and we shall wish to return to the matter in Committee because there must be safeguards on both sides.
In Committee we shall consider the way in which this merited and necessary change in the law can be administered.
Chapter II of part II provides for amendments to legislation dealing with railways and similar systems and the footpaths that cross them.
It amends the Highways Act 1980 to allow closure or diversion of footpath crossings on grounds of safety.
That part of the Bill has been strongly opposed by the Ramblers Association, but I imagine that it will be welcomed by railway locomotive drivers who, for example, face more than 100 such crossings whenever they drive from King's Cross to Newcastle.
The blocking of footpaths and the removal of rights of way are obviously contentious.
As a former railwayman, I read the views of the Ramblers Association with some scepticism.
In its brief, the Ramblers Association has stated that it’ doubts whether such new powers are needed.’
That shows a failure to appreciate the dangers of crossing a railway line.
Those dangers were amply illustrated by the recent terrible accident at Carr lane crossing, Doncaster, when a woman and two small children were killed.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett rose
Mr. Snape
I know that my hon. Friend will have something to say about this matter and I shall give way to him later.
In the case to which I have referred, the footpath to a privately owned nature reserve crossed five railway tracks.
The maximum speed of trains on at least two of those tracks was 125 mph.
At that speed, pedestrians would have had seven seconds from the time the train came into view until it reached the crossing.
For the Ramblers Association to state:’ BR should be required to improve safety or make reasonable alternative provision, for example by building a bridge’demonstrates a lack of feeling for the views of the bereaved and for the two drivers involved, both of whom will remember that tragedy every day for the rest of their lives.
Mr. Bennett
The Ramblers Association does not dispute that there is a problem.
It has made it quite clear that it believes that the existing legislation can deal with such matters.
The association has stated clearly that it is up to British Rail — and, perhaps, the Government — to take such dangers into account if they wish to increase railway speeds, as many of us would like, and to ensure that people can cross the line safely, even if that means the Government providing the money either for an underpass of for a bridge over the line.
Mr. Snape
I am aware that the Ramblers Association has said that, but there are 100 such crossings on the east coast main line, which is the example that I gave.
Is my hon. Friend saying that an alternative method of crossing should be provided for each and every one?
If so, I must advise him — and Conservative Members before they intervene — that that is not a commitment that I should like to make on behalf of any future Labour Administration because it would be an unreal commitment.
Indeed, the Ramblers Association has gone further than my hon. Friend has suggested in connection with that line, and has stated that, if British Rail increases the speed on a line, it will also be reducing the safety on it.
I do not see it like that, and I am sure that the nation as a whole would not either.
If we were to take the Ramblers Association's argument to its logical conclusion, every train on the east coast main line would be preceded by a man on foot, carrying a red flag, in case someone wanted to walk in front of the train.
Mr. Bennett
Does my hon. Friend accept that, if British Rail has decided that only 13 of those crossings are unsafe, it therefore appears to believe that 87 are perfectly safe?
Is that not an interesting observation?
Surely, if only 13 of the 100 crossings are unsafe, it is not unreasonable for British Rail at least to propose alternative crossings at some of those points.
I am sure that if British Rail had done that, the ramblers would have been prepared to compromise.
They were upset because British Rail wanted to close 13 crossings as unsafe without offering to provide alternatives at any of them.
Mr. Snape
I am not here to defend British Rail's management decisions — I am usually better at condemning them — but during the passage of the legislation to which my hon. Friend referred earlier, British Rail stated that it had picked the least safe of the 100 crossings to which I have referred.
From my discussions with British Rail, I know that it made specific proposals for the diversion of at least four of the crossings and that the Ramblers Association objected to them all.
There must be some co-operation from both sides.
I do not think that British Rail should be given carte blanche to abolish rights of way on every railway track, but where train speeds and frequencies are as great as on the line to which I have referred, we must recognise that the combination of pedestrians and such high-speed trains is deadly.
The evidence that proves just how deadly that combination can be is on my side.
I hope that at a later stage we can persuade the Minister that a compromise is possible, feasible and affordable.
Opposition Members support clause 56, which seeks to make the directors and managers of British Rail personally liable for offences attributable to their neglect.
In the aftermath of the Clapham disaster, I am sure that the House will agree that such a provision is both necessary and overdue.
We also welcome the provision in part III that removes the use of the private Bill procedure to obtain powers that could be granted by orders for harbours.
I should, however, like the Minister to clarify the issue of rights of way in dock areas, where I do not think that many trains will be travelling at the high speed of 125 mph.
Such orders are often made in connection with works.
However, diversions or blockages of a right of way can be considered under the provisions of part I.
So far, we have achieved a degree of unanimity.
Although we welcome the Bill, we shall subject it to detailed scrutiny in Committee.
I give an undertaking, however, that we shall not attempt to delay its progress unduly.
Both sides of the House could and should support most of its provisions, but where improvements are necessary we shall be pressing them on the Minister, and I hope that we shall receive as fair a hearing from him as I have tried to give his Bill this afternoon.
Mr. Robert Adley (Christchurch)
As this is a tightly drawn Bill, there is no opportunity of making a general speech on transport matters, and I have no intention of trying to abuse the procedures of the House by doing so.
I welcome the presence on the Treasury Bench of my hon. Friend the Minister for Public Transport, in addition to my hon. Friend the Minister for Shipping.
I have rarely met two Ministers who take more trouble to carry out the duties of their ministerial office.
The presence of my hon. Friend the Minister of State shows that he does not miss any opportunity to listen to his colleagues.
We are dealing with a time-honoured procedure.
Those who have some knowledge of railway history will recall what was known in the last century and in the early years of this century as’ the railway interest’.
One can only assume that, if the Bill had been introduced 70 or 80 years ago, the House would have been rather more crowded than today.
Although I welcome the presence of my.
hon. Friend the Member for Hexham (Mr. Amos) immediately in front of me, I should have welcomed equally the presence of the attractive blonde lady who was sitting in front of me last week, but she obviously has other things to do this week.
Although it is clear that the House welcomes the Bill, the provisions appear to have been drafted largely with British Rail in mind.
Before I comment on the Bill in any detail, I must declare a possible future interest with British Rail in activities that are unrelated to my parliamentary duties.
I say that more in hope than expectation, but one never knows.
My main concern about the Bill is its possible effect on some of our preserved railways.
I am not sure, but I believe that I am the unpaid, unofficial’ parliamentary friend’of the Association of Independent Railways Ltd.
That body has not yet contacted me about the Bill although the Association of Railway Preservation Societies and David Morgan thereof certainly have.
I should like to put to my hon. Friend the Minister one or two points which, due to his courtesy, I have been able to discuss with him briefly during the past few days.
I hope that he will take on board some of the concerns that have been expressed to me.
Almost all the proprietors of the preserved railways are members of either the Association of Independent Railways or the Association of Railway Preservation Societies, and carried more than 6 million passengers on their railways in 1989, which is the latest year for which I have the full figures.
Like any other railway, a preserved railway normally requires statutory authority for its operations, which nowadays — until the Bill becomes law — is, in practice, enacted under a light railway order.
It is likely that, in recent years, a majority of such orders have been sought by the preserved railways under the very procedures that are to be replaced by those laid down in the Bill.
Thus, the Bill is of vital interest to those railways, and they are probably much more affected by it than the two earlier speeches have suggested.
If we are to look after the legitimate interests of the preserved railways, one or two changes need to be made to the Bill.
The first is in connection with Scotland.
Although there are no hon. Members from Scottish constituencies in their places at the moment, my hon. Friend the Minister made a passing reference to Scotland, which is one of the issues that I discussed with him the other evening.
The memorandum at the front of the Bill refers to ministerial orders in England and Wales, but schedule 4 shows that the whole of the Light Railways Acts 1896 and 1912 are to be repealed; so Scotland will find itself in an invidious position.
My hon. Friend the Minister touched on the matter, but his interpretation was not one which I or the Scottish preserved railways share.
He said that, if the Bill is passed unamended, the preserved railways in Scotland would have to be dealt with under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1936.
That is correct, but not satisfactory.
Such an arrangement is potentially much more complex than the existing one.
It would be a time-consuming and expensive procedure which required provisional orders under the Act.
It seems wrong that a few legitimate private railways in Scotland should be disadvantaged by the Bill.
The only beneficiaries would probably be the lawyers.
It is my impression that the Department of Transport has not so far been sympathetic to the potential plight of some of the preserved railways in Scotland.
I should prefer to see the Bill amended so that the two Light Railways Acts were repealed only in England and Wales.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Minister will give serious consideration to that point.
The Conservative party is not exactly in the ascendant in Scotland.
I remind my hon. Friend the Minister, who has Scottish ancestry, that to upset large numbers of railway enthusiasts in Scotland would not be of additional help to the Conservative party north of the border.
If that is special pleading, so be it.
The second point that worries me is also a minority concern.
For some reason best know to those who drafted the Bill, line 23 of clause 60 says that a railway means a system of transport employing parallel rails which’(b) form a track of a gauge of at least 350 millimetres.’
At least one narrow-gauge railway in Britain operates on a gauge of 10.5 in, and there may well be others.
If those words are retained in the legislation, those railways would still require a light railway order at some time.
I suggest to my hon. Friend the Minister that he could simply delete that line of clause 60.
I cannot see that it serves any useful purpose.
Everyone in the House welcomes the proposals in the Bill which relate to safety.
I have considerable sympathy with the point made by the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape).
He dispassionately and properly referred to the feelings of locomotive drivers.
They are people whom we rarely consider in this House, but when there is a suicide or accident on the railway, the driver, and his mate if appropriate, may be mentally scarred for life by the experience.
It is surely incumbent on us to do everything possible to ensure that safety is paramount.
The hon. Member for West Bromwich, East made the simple proposal that it should be a criminal offence to take any alcohol if one is driving a train.
I should certainly like to see the Bill amended to take care of that point.
In his few remarks on clause 56, the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East assumed that it referred to British Rail.
He talked about British Rail's management.
I should like my hon. Friend the Minister to imagine the effect of the Bill as it is presently drafted on the preserved and private railways.
Such railways are manned mainly by volunteers.
Clause 56 could put a terrific burden on the unremunerated directors or officers of a preserved railway.
If a ganger was working on the track and was found to be over the limit, a director or manager could be found guilty of a criminal offence.
Will my hon. Friend the Minister allow me to bring a delegation from the Association of Railway Preservation Societies to discuss the matter and the other two matters that I have raised?
It would make the association feel that it had had a better hearing if it saw the Minister face to face rather than pursuing the matter in correspondence.
Mr. McLoughlin
I give the undertaking that I will meet any delegation that my hon. Friend wishes to bring to me.
Mr. Adley
I am most grateful to my hon. Friend.
I had no doubt that he would say that.
Railway safety is a big subject.
It is just one illustration of the double standards that we have tolerated for generations that, for one and half centuries, the House has rightly imposed the strictest safety rules and regulations on the railways, while doing virtually nothing about the roads.
The result is that we kill 5,000 people and maim a quarter of a million on our roads in the name of personal convenience.
I have often thought that I should like to push through the House a simple single-clause Bill which would reduce death and injury at a stroke: it would be to insist that road traffic operated with signals in the same way as trains.
That would save an awful lot of lives and make travelling by train a great deal more attractive and competitive.
I understand from a brief discussion that British Rail is reasonably happy with the Bill.
I echo the point made by my hon. Friend the Member for New Forest (Sir P. McNair-Wilson) about the delays that could be inherent in the new system proposed by the Bill.
None of us would want to find that, at the end of our work, we had produced a piece of legislation that increased the delay in obtaining the approval necessary to build new railways.
My hon. Friend the Minister must pay attention to the point that has been made — that time limits must be set for, first, appointing an inspector and secondly, the production of the inspector's report once the inquiry is complete, if not necessarily on the length of the inquiry.
The hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) made several interventions — I was going to say on behalf of, but that sounds rude; in which he put the view of — the Ramblers Association.
I share the view of the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East that it does not make sense to go back to the days of the red flag, but we must find a compromise between the passenger's interest, which is the interest of the railways, and the pedestrian's interest.
I say to the hon. Member for Denton and Reddish and my hon. Friend the Minister that I do not see why British Rail, as ever, should be expected to bear the full cost.
That simply illustrates yet again the inequality and double standard which we employ in the treatment of road versus rail.
If the Government of the day decide that a motorway is to be built and a footpath is to be built over the road, the cost of building a bridge or underpass is all part of the cost of building the motorway, and it is borne by the taxpayers.
I see no earthly reason why we should shackle British Rail in providing a better service still in terms of safety and speed if it comes into conflict with those who want to walk across the line.
We must find an equitable solution that does not put a yet greater financial burden on British Rail.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
Does the hon. Gentleman accept that, if he is as keen as I am to provide a level playing field for road and rail, he should recognise that, when motorways were built around Greater Manchester, of three footpaths that crossed the motorway, one was closed or diverted and bridges or underpasses were put in for the other two.
That sort of compromise would be reasonable in dealing with footpaths that cross railways.
Mr. Adley
The hon. Member illustrates my argument — there are double standards.
As he said, two of those motorway crossings were paid for by the taxpayer.
I shall not pursue the matter further, as I have bored my Back-Bench and Front-Bench colleagues endlessly with it, but it is fair to say that there should be an equal playing field.
Talking of double standards, of road versus rail and the Bill, where footpaths are concerned we are talking about the removal of ancient obligations.
British Rail has an ancient obligation to pay for its own police force.
In this day and age, why should we expect that?
Let us think of the cost that the police incur on all our behalfs by attending accidents.
Think of the untold billions of pounds spent by the police on attending court cases dealing with so many facets of the internal combustion engine.
However, nothing in the Bill would relieve British Rail of that burden, which costs in excess of £40 million a year.
I do not think I would be out of order in recalling a private conversation with the Secretary of State for Transport about a year ago on this subject.
He said that he did not think that it was a high priority to ask the Home Secretary to take £40 million out of his budget and put it on to the Secretary of State for Transport's budget.
He did not think that he would get away with it.
It is a shame that the Bill does not deal with that matter.
Nor does it deal with the historical obligation for British Rail to maintain hundreds of listed buildings.
It offered an opportunity to do so.
Perhaps those matters may be attended to during the passage of the Bill.
Finally, clause 56 states:’ Where an offence under this Part committed by a body corporate is committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body, or a person purporting to act in such a capacity, he as well as the body corporate shall be guilty of the offence.’
We are prepared to clobber the ganger working on the Keighley and Worth Valley railway or his notional supervisor, or send him to prison.
Meanwhile, large supermarkets are defying the law by opening on Sundays and abusing society in almost everything they do, but we are doing nothing about it.
I should like clause 56 to be utilised to deal with the activities of many other organisations.
I welcome the Bill, I wish it a speedy passage and I hope that some of my suggestions will result in one or two minor changes in it.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett (Denton and Reddish)
I welcome the Bill, even though on the surface it hands considerable powers from Parliament to Ministers.
I have spent too many hours on these Benches arguing on behalf of Bills, often at considerable length.
I have meandered round all sorts of fairly obscure topics, just about pleasing the Chair by remaining in order, knowing that whatever I said it would not make the slightest difference to the outcome of the private Bill.
Provided that I and my colleagues could keep going until 10 o'clock, the fate of the Bill would be decided by whether 98 hon. Members returned from dinner or 102.
It was a pretty farcical procedure.
Mr. Snape
My hon. Friend is far too modest.
We all know that what he terms his’ meandering’round private Bills has been responsible for a good deal of heartache and not a little management time in British Rail spent trying to meet some of his objections.
Those objections might not always have been covered by the Bill that we were discussing, but we understood his argument.
Mr. Bennett
I accept that, and I admit that there have been occasions when I and other hon. Members have blackmailed various organisations, including British Rail, with the amount of time that we would take in the House unless they did something to improve the position of our constituents.
It is high time that the private Bill procedure was reformed.
However, we must be clear in our minds that we are dealing with substantial issues.
We are considering the rights of individuals as against the rights of the state and of corporate bodies.
We must also recognise that any changes that we make will almost certainly not satisfy people outside.
I sometimes think that it would be almost impossible to satisfy them.
If someone wants to put a nuclear power station, a new road or railway, a science park, a supermarket or even a public convenience at the bottom of one's garden, most people would not want it.
However one designs the procedure — whether a parliamentary procedure or a public inquiry — the majority of poeple will think that it is unfair that it is being forced or inflicted on them.
The Bill will be a better way at least to convince people that they have an opportunity to influence events than the present private Bill procedure.
We all know what is supposed to happen.
The House debates a Bill on Second Reading and it is passed by chance rather than as a benefit of the arguments.
Then the Bill goes to Committee.
Four hon. Members are appointed — two from each side of the House — as well as the key appointment, the Chair, who has a casting vote.
We all know that all sorts of manipulations take place during the appointment of the members of a Committee.
It always amazes me how Bills which the Government support end up with a Chairman from the Government side of the House, thus giving the Government a majority.
People argue and give evidence to the Committee, for perhaps 10 or 12 weeks or longer.
In theory, everyone listens carefully to the evidence, but some of us know that the reality has much more to do with the political persuasion of hon. Members appointed to the Committee and to discussions that take place when they are debating.
It can be extremely frustrating for people who have to travel to London and face the expense of preparing a case — sometimes employing parliamentary counsel to put their case — knowing that decisions are not necessarily taken on the merits of the arguments but on political considerations.
Mr. Barry Field
I apologise for taking up the time of the House.
I chaired the Committee that considered the London Underground (Safety Measures) Bill, which will improve the safety of a number of London underground stations when it takes effect, including Oxford circus, which several million commuters pass through every day.
The Labour party, to which the hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) belongs, objected to that Bill and voted against it.
Is he suggesting that, by wanting to improve safety in one of our biggest underground stations, I am a Government stooge?
Mr. Bennett
I am not suggesting that.
However, various political considerations come into play with some Bills rather than their merits.
Any hon. Member who does not understand that is relatively naive.
It is important that we discuss the new procedure.
There may be problems and differences between the two sides of the House over the way in which we plan Britain, especially as we move into the next century.
The Conservatives have a tendency to believe that planning decisions can be taken on the profit motive.
Opposition Members believe that there should be more objective planning criteria.
Some of the measures that will come before us will have international or national significance and others will have regional or local significance.
Under the Bill there will be problems deciding whether the matter has local or national significance.
Perhaps I may pursue that in Committee.
Another question is whether Parliament should give its approval first before a public inquiry is held or whether Parliament should have a say after the inquiry.
There is also the question of the evidence put to Parliament, and I want to take up those issues in Committee.
I press the Minister to consider carefully the order-making procedures.
For most of my time in the House, I have been dissatisfied with them in the same way as I was dissatisfied with private Bills.
I am dissatisfied with the way in which the House deals with secondary legislation.
Whether it is affirmative orders for national schemes or negative orders for local schemes, the procedure is very unsatisfactory.
When hon. Members table an amendment to a Bill, it can concentrate the Minister's mind on a clause or section and occasionally hon. Members can be persuaded to force amendments on the Government.
It is almost impossible to form a coalition of interests to get something changed in a statutory instrument or an order, so if there is broad agreement that an instrument is a good idea, one must either take it all or have nothing to do with it.
Mr. Cryer
Will my hon. Friend further agree, on that important issue, that it cannot be argued that there are no precedents of statutory instruments being subject to amendment?
For example, orders relating to the census are subject to just that procedure.
Mr. Bennett
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
I regularly argue with the Table Office that we can table amendments to Bills which make provision for orders that are amendable because of the census legislation.
I cannot recall it precisely, but I believe that there is one other parliamentary precedent to that effect.
In Committee, the Minister invariably points out that Parliament has a simple way of dealing with orders and that we should stick to it.
He points out that they are negative or affirmative orders and that the Standing Orders of the House lay down that such matters may be debated for an hour and a half after 10 o'clock.
Although we are now debating a piece of works legislation, it represents a major reform of parliamentary procedure, so I put down a marker at this stage to the effect that the Minister should be more forthcoming in considering whether we should have new procedures for dealing with orders.
Such new procedures could allow for longer debates, perhaps in Committee, with the ability to amend regulations and with provision for an effective vote to take place in Committee.
It is nonsense for us to debate such matters in Committee for an hour and a half and then, at the end of the debate, we vote not on the merits of the matter but on whether it has been considered.
A day or two later — whenever it suits the Government — the theoretical actual vote takes place on the Floor of the House and, if a Division is called, most hon. Members do not know what they are voting about.
On this occasion, because of the unique nature of the measure, we should be prepared to consider in Committee changing the way in which we deal with statutory instruments, enabling us to give them more adequate scrutiny.
That is especially so at this time, when we are effectively handing from Parliament to Ministers the right to decide, on private Bills, to lay orders.
That is a considerable sacrifice of parliamentary power.
Although I accept that it is right for us to do that, a counterbalance should be a more effective way of scrutinising affirmative and negative orders.
Various organisations have lobbied me about the Bill.
I join the hon. Member for Weston-super-Mare (Mr. Wiggin) in pointing out that the Inland Waterways Association believes that it was not sufficiently consulted on the Bill.
That association is particularly concerned about a measure that is proceeding through the other place and the question whether it will be dropped and be replaced by the provisions relating to canals in this legislation.
I hope that, when we come to that part of the Bill in Committee, the Minister will assure us that the association has been consulted and its fears allayed.
The fears of ramblers' associations about closures have been rehearsed.
I appreciate everything that has been said about the need to maintain safety standards.
We must be equally concerned about the effect of what we do on engine drivers.
Historically, British Rail and its predecessors have argued to the House for certain railway lines to be built in a particular way.
They argued at that time that pedestrian crossings of railways were perfectly safe.
For almost every railway line built by the different railway companies — permission for which was passed by the House in different eras — we laid down different procedures.
It was common for some to build footpaths across the lines and in other cases bridges were built.
Indeed, on some lines, bridges were built on almost all occasions.
It should be possible to obtain a compromise which is effective in the legislation and which says, in effect,’ There will be some crossings which are so rarely used that people are not inconvenienced by their closure.’
In other cases, a simple diversion, often involving the use of a private crossing that already belongs to British Rail, could be brought into use to enable people to cross in safety.
In some instances it will be necessary to provide a bridge or underpass.
I am often upset when people approach British Rail on the safety issue and ask how much it would cost to do the job properly.
The price quoted for a bridge or underpass is always horrendous.
The old railway companies had almost Meccano kits for bridges which were built as standard in various places.
They varied only according to whether the approach was from the right or left.
If it was possible to do that in the past, it should be possible now for British Rail to design relatively cheap crossing facilities.
I appreciate that there are problems.
In one instance, when a local authority was asked to approve a bridge, which could have been built relatively cheaply, the authority refused because, it said, the bridge must be suitable for use by the disabled.
I appreciate the arguments that go on nowadays, but let us not forget that the old crossings were not suitable for the disabled, which is why, in the case to which I am referring, it seemed unnecessary for the authority to insist on a ramp being built.
I hope that in Committee we can make some progress on that front.
I have received a set of objections from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
It is concerned about the implications of the legislation on estuaries.
I am keen for the Bill to cover estuaries, in view of my experience with private Bills over the years.
In the 1970s many local authority Bills were introduced dealing with issues such as procession clauses.
More recently, we have had many railway Bills.
I predict that, if we do not reform matters, we shall have introduced a large number of Bills dealing with estuaries.
There are power schemes and other proposed developments involving estuaries.
That particularly applies to the Severn and the Mersey.
There are schemes on hand for virtually every estuary in the country and it is important for the legislation to cover them.
At the same time, we must have a proper national debate to see how many estuaries can be changed from being tidal areas, where there is extremely good feeding for birds, to areas which, in effect, become inland lakes.
That has significance nationally and internationally, especially if we reduce the facilities for large numbers of birds.
We must ensure that there are proper safeguards in legislation.
Although a scheme may appear local in nature and the amount of an estuary that it encloses or otherwise alters, we must take the national significance into account for breeding birds.
I am worried by the enthusiasm of some of my constituents for the Bengal tiger and rare species in various parts of the world, while tending to disregard animals in our local habitats.
I hope that we can deal with that, too, in Committee.
We must look carefully at environmental statements which accompany orders flowing from the legislation.
I appeal to the Minister to give at least some consideration to how far the environmental statement should come from a neutral source rather than from the promoters.
Although promoters may employ reputable consultants, it is difficult for a consultant to a project to put all the disadvantages from the environmental point of view as thoroughly and firmly as would be done by a totally neutral person.
I urge the Minister to bear that in mind.
Many attempts have been made in the House to reform the private Bill procedure and many of them have collapsed because it has always been easier for a private measure to be introduced.
We must do all we can in the coming few years to block any parliamentary private Bill which could as easily be dealt with through this legislation.
It is a question for the Court of Referees, and it will be a matter for the House.
I would have hoped that the Minister might have spelt out more clearly the fact that he would not expect any more private works Bills to be introduced.
We have had 23 this year, of which 13 or 14 have been works Bills.
They may go through, but I hope that he will make it clear that, in the next Session of Parliament, this legislation will apply, and anybody considering introducing a works Bill will do so through this legislation and not as a private measure.
I hope that we shall have a useful Committee stage in which many of the points that I have made can be answered.
Mr. Barry Field (Isle of Wight)
No mention of private Bills would be complete without paying tribute to my hon. Friend the Member for New Forest (Sir P. McNair-Wilson) for the way in which he chaired the Committee which sought to untangle this web.
His knowledge and that of my hon. Friend the Member for Christchurch (Mr. Adley) is considerable.
I also pay tribute to Mr. Willoughby and the staff of the Private Bill Office, whose courtesy is unfailing.
They have assisted many hon. Members, including myself, in fathoming the difficult procedure.
No mention of private Bill procedure would be complete without mentioning the Dartford warbler.
It is always endangered and turns up whenever we discuss a private Bill.
Whether it is the Felixstowe Dock and Railway Bill or the Hampshire (Lyndhurst Bypass) Bill, the Dartford warbler is always certain to be nesting in the middle of the projected works.
If we ever want to save endangered species, the private Bill procedure may be one way to ensure that they are more plentiful.
The hon. Member for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape) assured me that a Labour Secretary of State would be bound by the timetable that he proposes for public Bill procedures.
However, the Felixstowe Dock and Railway Bill took 41 hours to be discussed in the Chamber and 86 hours on 24 days, spread over five months, to be discussed in Committee.
After several weeks, the Committee's proceedings were suspended because a Labour Member departed from the Committee.
As Chairman of Ways and Means, you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, attempted to resolve the situation and eventually you made history in the House by deciding that the Committee would be quorate with just two members.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
As I recall, the Chairman of Ways and Means did not attempt to resolve this situation — he did so.
Mr. Field
Indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you did so most expeditiously.
I would not be so ungallant as to doubt the word of the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East today, but given the pressure that Labour Members placed on that Bill, a serious question mark would hang over any Labour Secretary of State who did not give way to pressure regarding the timetabling of a public inquiry procedure and who did not take some time to allow the result to be published or deliberated on.
Mr. Snape
I was beginning to fear that the preamble to the hon. Gentleman's speech was part of the delaying tactic that he denounces.
I made a couple of moderately long speeches on the Felixstowe Dock and Railway Bill, but we are not discussing existing procedure.
The undertaking that I gave refers to the Bill before us.
It refers not to truncating the inquiry but to the timescale before appointing an inspector and publishing the report.
I can only give an undertaking and I hope that the hon. Gentleman will accept it in the spirit in which it is given.
I hope that he will also accept that Conservative Members have used the existing procedure to delay legislation which they have disliked over the years, which is why we want to change it.
Mr. Field
The hon. Gentleman will appreciate that it would not be the first inspector's decision that took some time to see the light of day once it had been referred to a Department.
That was the point that I was trying to make.
I have been in the House for only a short time, but since I have been here I have been involved in a number of private Bills.
The Isle of Wight Bill was my alma mater.
Because of the activities of the hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) in holding it up, I eventually became the wrecker of every other private Bill.
It always amuses me when Liberal Democrats accuse me of having a ministerial career.
If only they had seen the correspondence that flowed to party chairmen from’ Horrified of the Home Counties’when some of those Bills hit the deck; one example was the correspondence from the lighthouse keepers association.
Some of my colleagues, even to this day, hardly speak to me because of how their Bills were delayed.
With your wonderful knowledge of the Bible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you produced the Lazarus motion which revived them all from the dead and they eventually passed on their way through the House.
I also served on the Committee considering the London Local Authority Bill which was, remarkably, opposed by the ice-cream alliance when the SDP and the Liberal Democrats were in a state of meltdown.
That Bill abused the rights of individuals to object to private Bills.
London local authorities had delayed hearing petitioners' cases and put them to considerable inconvenience.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
I do not want to delay progress, but someone must say that he is not entirely happy about the way in which British Rail has promoted the Bill and about the contents of some of the clauses.
Many of us believe that parts of the Bill — especially part III, which has been considered in Committee — could be improved.
There is a widely held view in Leicestershire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and the east midlands in general that British Rail is riding rough shod over many thousands of people and their elected representatives merely by failing to take the opportunities available.
For example, part III contains provisions for the purchase of and rights over land, part IV relates to protective possession and part V contains the usual provisions relating to planning permission and arbitration.
A great sense of frustration is building up because many hon. Members feel that the Bill represents a lost opportunity for British Rail.
I shall seek to remain in order by referring to what is in the Bill.
Nevertheless, I must say briefly that the constant inability of British Rail in successive British Railway Bills to recognise a real need is causing much frustration.
If one writes to British Rail, one gets the brush-off.
If one writes and asks — or begs — British Rail to include improvements in the Bill which it could easily have done by extending part III, one gets the same treatment.
Part III deals with purchase of land and the rights over land and schedule 3(1) specifies the purpose.
Those parts of the Bill are vehicles for British Rail to do work that is publicly demanded but which it resolutely refuses to give even the slightest hint that it contemplates.
I thoroughly welcome the Bill, but it is what is missing that worries me.
What is missing and what concerns tens of thousands of us is that the midland main line should be electrified as soon as possible.
Madam Deputy Speaker
Order.
I have given guidance on the rules of debate.
This is Third Reading.
Question put and agreed to.
Bill accordingly read the Third time, and passed.
Construction Board (Training Levy)
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
I beg to move That the draft Industrial Training Levy (Construction Board) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 13th November, be approved.
The proposals before the House seek authority for the construction industry training board to raise a levy on employers in the building and civil engineering industries to finance the running costs of the board and to fund a range of training initiatives, including a grants scheme.
The basis of the proposals is a levy of 0.25 per cent.
on the payroll of employers in the industry and a levy of 2 per cent.
on all payments made by employers for sub-contract labour.
Employers with a payroll of £45,000 or less will be exempt from the levy.
The proposals have the support of the employers, as required by the Industrial Training Act 1982, and have the full support of the board.
The House will know that the Government thought long and hard about their decision to retain the statutory training board.
In principle, we believe that independent employer-led arrangements which have the full support of employers offer the best way forward for industrial training.
In general, the track record of compulsion through statutory levies in raising the quality and quantity of training is not good.
In the White Paper’ Employment for the 1990s’, we recognised that the industry has particular characteristics which create peculiar problems for training.
The mobile nature of the work of the industry and the mobile nature of its work force, both geographically and between employers, together with the large-scale use of sub-contract and self-employed labour, produce a unique set of circumstances.
Against that background, we consulted the industry widely about the contruction industry training board.
There was a widespread and strongly held view that the CITB should be retained, but that its management should be streamlined and reformed.
In addition, the employers in the industry argued strongly for the retention of a statutory levy because of the largely self-employed nature of the labour force.
We were persuaded to give the industry a chance to reform its training board, to remodel it as an employer-led body and to alter the basis of levy collection.
I am happy to say that much progress has been made.
The board was reconstituted with a majority of key employers from within the industry, its operations and financial systems have been restructured and a strategic plan has been produced which sets out clear objectives against which the success of the board's actions can be judged.
New measures have been introduced to counter the effects of the recession on training, and the board is on schedule to create national vocational qualifications for all major occupations by September 1992.
All the signs are that the board, under its chairman, Sir Clifford Chetwood, is fully committed to demonstrating its value to the industry and others.
I especially draw the attention of the House to positive relationships that the board has established with 102 training and enterprise councils and local enterprise companies for the provision of training for about 20,000 young people on its youth training schemes and to the £6.5 million that it is using from its reserves this year to maintain the momentum of training in the industry.
The improvement in effectiveness will be taken into account next year, when we review the continuing need for statutory arrangements in the industry.
It is right for 1992 that the House should approve the draft order.
I commend it to the House.
Mr. Henry McLeish (Fife, Central)
The construction industry is an industry in crisis.
The crisis has been created by the Government and it provides the context in which there have been tremendous implications for training.
The Minister introduced the order characteristically, outlining the Government's interest in voluntarism and the fact that the order has the support of the construction industry training board.
The reality is far removed from his speech.
We have no desire to divide the House, because this is a procedural order.
It allows the board to continue with the levy, which ensures that income will be gained and that training can continue.
However, important issues should be raised this evening.
The order does not command the support of the CITB.
A pistol is pointed at its head, because it has been warned that, in the next year, there will be a further review under which it is likely that it will again lose its statutory framework and be cast adrift into voluntarism along with the 22 other boards which have been dismantled in the past eight to nine years.
In that context, it is important to identify the flaws in the order.
The crisis in the industry has now been reflected in the near-collapse of skills training in the sector.
There is probably no better example of an industry and a sector in which economic policies are causing so much damage.
The crisis has been created over the past 10 years, and this is the second recession in which the building industry has been hit hard.
A number of strands to the crisis should be identified.
First, there is the recession.
It is clear from all those in the industry that the recession has a devastating impact on emloyment and on the ability to train.
It is measured in the repossession of houses and in the lack of new house starts.
Secondly, the crisis is measured in terms of Government cuts in training.
Over a year ago, just after the autumn statement, the Government cut almost £340 million from the training budget, including the budget for adult training and the budget for youth training.
Over the past year, some of the cuts have been reinstated, but the damage has been done.
As will become clear tonight, the construction industry still suffers from the irresponsible cuts imposed by the Government.
Thirdly, uncertainty now surrounds the future of the industry.
The Minister suggested that the Government had listened to the employers and had decided to provide a statutory framework for the CITB.
We welcome that.
However, the decision to allow the board to continue was cloaked in Ministers' remarks suggesting that the statutory provision would be short-lived.
We have the major problem that one of the key sectors in British industry has hanging over it the threat that, in a year's time, the decision will be further reviewed and the industry will again lose its ability to impose a statutory levy.
Fourthly, the threat is an example of the Government's lack of commitment to training and to skills development.
Every other nation in Europe puts that at the top of the agenda, but in Britain training is used as a political football by the Conservatives.
The Government have launched TECs, but they have then provided less funding than was envisaged.
Morale is low, and many people are disillusioned.
One problem above all is the lack of commitment to sector-based training.
The French, the Germans and, increasingly, the Italians value strong sectors producing quality training in which the employers and the trade unions have confidence.
That is very different from the approach of the Government, who have not only abandoned a serious commitment to training, but have suggested that sectors do not have a valuable role to play.
We have one of the best construction industries in Europe, but unfortunately, it has one of the worst Governments.
In a’ State of Trade Enquiry’report published in November by the Building Employers Confederation, we read the outline of one of the bleakest futures for any construction sector in the whole of Europe.
The confederation asks why, after two recessions and amid the deepest recession since the war, the Government show no sign of listening to the pleas made, or to the concerns expressed on the training front and, more importantly, on the need for investment.
The Building Employers Confederation had a meeting with the Prime Minister, which was reported on 1 October in The Independent.
It was clear that the employers proposed a plan to generate more immediate investment in the sector to provide some stability and to ensure that quality training would be provided.
The article says:’ Mr. Major disagreed with the delegation's gloomy forecast of when the recovery in construction would begin, saying he expected industry to emerge from recession in the middle of next year.’
Clearly the construction industry has extremely bleak prospects, and the Government do not take its major concerns especially seriously.
We talked about the importance of the sector to the economy.
One would not think that it was important from the statistics that have been compiled about the industry under this Government.
Over the past 10 years under this Government, the number in employment in the construction industry has declined by almost 250,000.
In the present recession, almost 100,000 jobs have gone, according to the Government's figures published in Employment Gazette.
The industry says that the figure should be almost 165,000, and that more jobs are threatened to go in the next few months.
Construction output is falling rapidly.
We have to look back to the first quarter of 1988 to see a time when construction output was so low.
We have to go back to the first quarter of 1986 to see such a low figure for construction output per person in the past decade.
Regardless of the statistics used, we now find that one of Britain's greatest industries is threatened by a Government who ooze indifference, and who are not interested in investment or in investment in skills.
We really discover the extent of the difficulties facing the industry when we consider training.
Between 1989 and 1991, the number of construction trainees enrolled by the CITB fell by 40 per cent., from 14,385 to 8,500.
In the same period, the number of apprentices registered with the council fell by 45 per cent., to just 2,710 starts.
That 2,710 starts for apprentices must be set against an industry which employs nearly 1.8 million people, half of whom are employees and the other half self-employed.
Those starts cannot sustain the skills in the industry in the decades ahead.
Local authority direct labour organisations are the cornerstones of training in construction.
According to a recent survey by the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians and the Association of Direct Labour Organisations, training places have been cut by 27 per cent.
for women and by 47 per cent.
overall between November 1990 and November 1991.
The construction industry has an excellent provision for youth training, unlike many other sectors of British industry, but by 20 November 1991, only 9,562 young people had started on YT, compared with 11,877 by the same date last year.
That is a reduction of 2,315, or 19.5 per cent., in just 12 months.
The raw statistics show that training faces a crisis for many reasons.
The Government fail to appreciate — although they are prisoners of their own rhetoric and ideology — several important points which others readily grasp and would clearly like to do something about.
The cut in the number of trainees has already been identified.
It is also obvious that there are fewer apprentices.
One of the damaging implications of the recession is that very few employers are now able or willing to offer employment to trainees.
Indeed, very few employers are willing to provide work experience instead of full employment.
All that has been compounded by the Government's crazy cuts in youth training, including in the construction industry.
The Government laughingly refer to a YT guarantee for every young person.
However, it is clear that, throughout Britain and particularly in the construction industy, the YT guarantee for many young people is simply not worth the paper that it is printed on.
Because of that, the CITB has had to introduce various schemes using its own investment to tide it over what it believed at the outset would be a short recession, but which has now become a very deep and long recession.
If the recession lasts much longer, and with present cuts in Government funding, the board will not have enough money to invest to tide itself over this period in which young people face such difficulties.
The board faces a crisis, and the Government are unable — some people would say unwilling, but I would be more charitable — to assist.
However, that behaviour is characteristic of the Government.
What can we expect from a Government who are dismantling quality training in the construction industry and whose record on training boards over the past decade has been one of failure?
There used to be 23 such boards, but 16 were demolished.
Of the seven remaining, five were then demolished and the two that remain are now under threat.
What next for the training boards?
Skill centres are a key part of the provision in any sector, but the Government have privatised them.
That privatisation was ludicrous.
Four of the sectors under the TICC consortium have entered receivership, and £2.1 million of public money has simply disappeared.
The Government have reneged on all their commitments to the civil servants who were transferred into the private sector.
We have lost capacity, skills and people who had some faith in the Government's processes.
They have been sold down the river.
What about the Manpower Services Commission?
It was charged with the objective of bringing Britain into the premier league for skills.
However, the Government nearly abolished it.
Many people deplored that.
Clearly, our national focus for training has been removed.
The employment service is disillusioned, demoralised and underfunded.
In a sense, it is not required by a Government who preach the market model and who see no long-term future for the service.
The treatment of training in the construction industry falls into line with the Government's practices over the past decade.
The Government have nothing to be proud of over that period.
After all that and the investment of nearly £30 billion in real terms, this nation has nothing to show for 12 years of this Conservative Government.
The order refers to the future of the CITB and the continuation of a levy.
The Minister said earlier that that is supported.
It is not.
The Building Employers Confederation and the trade unions — the key providers — do not want a levy at 0.25 per cent.
of payroll.
That is far too small.
They are arguing for a minimum of 0.5 per cent.
of payroll.
I am sure that the Government were informed of that, but they did not listen.
The Building Employers Confederation wanted no exemptions, because it must be right that every employer should contribute investment to his employees.
The BEC must have told the Government that, but they did not listen.
Exemptions have been raised from a base of £10,000 to £45,000.
The industry wanted to be able to use the funds that it had generated to invest in youth training.
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that charities are also exempt.
Does he object to that?
Mr. McLeish
Every employer in Britain, including charities, small businesses, medium-sized and large businesses, must contribute to the skills needs of the country.
When we talk about exemptions, the Government refer to them simply from a basis of ideology.
They do not want a levy: they want everyone to be exempt.
That is the essence of voluntarism.
The BEC, which is not a strong supporter of the Labour party, has requested no exemptions, because it sees the benefit of every employer being involved, but the Government ignored that plea.
The Government also ignored the Confederation's plea to use its finances to support YT when it saw fit.
The Government encouraged heating and ventilating and plumbing and electrical to remove themselves from the scope of the CITB.
Why do the Government preach that we should listen to industry when they ignore everything that industry tells them about training in the construction sector?
The simple facts speak for themselves.
I received a letter written by Mr. Smith, the secretary-director of the CITB, on 28 November.
He made a point about the exemptions from the levy and said:’ The Board and much of industry considers that there should be no exclusion from levy but that the whole of industry should contribute to the cost of training.
However, the current legislation and Government policy requires a level to be set and the present level is reluctantly accepted on that basis.’
That is the board's view of Government policy — the very same Government policy that the House has been told has been endorsed by all those in the construction industry.
I must advise the Minister that that is not what the construction industry is saying to others about the problems that it is facing.
Faced with such a crisis, we need some action.
We are facing a loss of jobs, skills and capacity.
The prospects for the immediate future are bleak.
The Government need to take action on four issues, the first of which is the skills shortage.
By instinct and possibly by ideology, the Minister never shows much interest in this subject, but perhaps he should listen to this debate.
If we ever climb out of the current recession, the skills shortage in the industry will be a major problem.
Some forecasts suggest that, by the turn of the century, 250,000 skilled people will have been lost to the industry.
That is a product of the present lack of interest in the construction industry which the Minister must address, because the skills shortage is of crucial concern not only to those in the industry but to Britain, because we must invest in training in the 1990s if we are to survive.
Secondly, there is a widening trade deficit in building products.
Why, in 1989, did we have a £3 billion trade deficit in building products against the background of building firms, building material producers and brickmakers all going to the wall?
It does not make sense to squander important resources that the nation can ill afford to lose.
The third issue is our failure to meet the demand for new housing.
Is the Minister interested in building homes in Britain not only to tackle the problem of homelessness but to allow peple to move within the private sector?
Is he not interested in ensuring that building skills are available and, more importantly, that homes are made available in the right place and at the right time?
The fourth issue is something in which the Minister will not be at all interested — European competition in the 1990s.
Whether the Minister likes it or not, we must be prepared to face such competition, because major European contractors are already in Britain, winning contracts and using skilled labour from their own countries in which there is better investment.
Those are some of the important reasons why the Government should be alive to the problems faced by the industry and the challenges that lie ahead.
The first thing that Britain needs is a new model for sector skills training.
We need to take advantage of the European experience.
We need strong sectors and effective organisations that are widely representative of their members.
We also need organisations that are free to determine and to organise the most effective way to tackle those needs.
We need sectors that will work in partnership with Government.
Secondly, along with the development of the training and enterprise councils, Britain's sectors should be given a key strategic role.
We need national coverage in key sectors to provide skills and company-specific training.
There should be an interface with the delivery of local training through the TECs, which can provide an intimate local delivery mechanism based on their own activities and local intelligence.
Thirdly, we need a CITB and engineering construction sector from which the heavy hand of conservatism has been removed.
If the industry wants a levy, it should have one.
If it wants to decide on the level of that levy, that issue should also be left to the sector.
If the industry does not want to have any exemptions from the levy, it should be able to undertake such a policy in partnership with Government and the TECs.
That is what we mean by freedom from increasing centralisation and from the Government's highly prescriptive policies.
Industry should be allowed to fashion and to shape its own policies based on the needs of the employer group companies.
We need a sector policy that will look closely at the Engineering Training Authority, which was also dismembered by the present Government.
The construction industry's authority should remain a statutory body while the Engineering Training Authority should be allowed to take over the functions of the old engineering industry training board.
Because of the importance that we attach to their manufacturing activities, we should take an early look at those organisations' progress and performance within their sectors.
That amounts to an important step forward for the sectors.
I am sorry that the Minister finds this subject uninteresting.
In the past decade, it has never been clear whether the Government have found satisfying their own political philosophy more important than satisfying the training needs of the nation.
In the last two or three months before they leave office, they have an excellent opportunity to mend some of their ways and to start to take the construction sector seriously.
They should embark on the programme and policy that Labour will certainly pursue when we are in office.
Finally, it has been said that the Department of Trade and Industry bears the mantle of the most unsuccessful Department of State.
However, the Department of Employment shows no leadership, no understanding, no commitment and no real interest in training.
It contains a’ hands off — do nothing’set of Ministers.
Time is running out for them, but, fortunately for the sectors involved, we will invest in them when we take office and will start to do the things that are being done in Europe which have made companies there so successful and so much more competitive than ourselves.
That is the way forward.
That is what we intend to do when we remove the Government from office at the earliest opportunity.
Sir Michael Neubert (Romford)
I must declare a new interest at the outset of my speech in that I have recently become the parliamentary adviser to the Federation of Master Builders.
As the order's reference to the 27th levy period suggests, the motion is not a great parliamentary novelty.
The previous 1991 order was discussed at a slightly later time of night, but on the same day of the week nine months ago, since when there has been no significant change in the construction industry's circumstances.
Times are still hard, not to say very hard.
Although the order does not propose any great innovations, it is worth making some brief comments on its background.
I hope that the hon. Member for Fife, Central (Mr. McLeish) will understand that I do not intend to follow what he said in his long speech — it was almost the same length as his speech in our previous debate on the subject — or his wide range of criticisms of the Government's policy.
This is not because I share his criticisms — quite the opposite — but because, like him, I anticipate and relish the prospect of my hon. Friend the Minister replying to the debate, when I hope that he will give a robust rebuttal of the hon. Gentleman's criticisms.
As far as it goes, the order has the support of the industry, although that support is not unreserved, does not come from all quarters and does not relate to all aspects of the provisions.
Like the hon. Member for Fife, Central, I refer to the exemption of small employers with a payroll of less than £45,000.
The advantages of exemption can be easily seen, if only as an illustration of the de minimis principle.
However, things can look rather different from the angle of those just above the exemption limit.
At the best of times, the industry is very competitive, but this is not the best of times.
When price competition is at its keenest, the extra on-cost that is entailed in the payment of a statutory training levy can be unwelcome for a company that is competing with a slightly smaller concern which enjoys the exemption.
The same factor comes into play with value added tax, in which there has been a change as a result of last spring's Budget.
Those just below the VAT level can have a clinching advantage over those just above it, but that is the nature of thresholds.
Such considerations may appear comparatively unimportant in other industries, but the construction industry contains many small firms, more than 23,000 of which are likely to qualify for the exemption that is provided in the order.
However, as I said, the industry broadly goes along with the CITB's proposals and with this order, which embodies them.
The dominant day-to-day concern of the industry is naturally the recession.
Technically, it may have come to an end, but recovery will be slow, sluggish and patchy.
By tradition, the construction industry is the first to feel a recession and the hardest hit — and this recession is no exception.
In his statement on public expenditure — in part, this refutes what the hon. Member for Fife, Central said — my right hon. Friend the Chancellor announced increased programmes in a number of Departments which will provide substantial work for the industry.
Of course, for the next financial year that is still some dark winter months away.
When the upturn comes, there will be a renewed demand for skills.
It has been estimated that the industry may be short of some 50,000 skilled craftsmen in the next two years.
That is a round figure subject to the hazards of forecasting, but no one should doubt that, among the quarter of a million people who lost their jobs in the recession, there will be many craftsmen and trainees, who will be permanently lost to the industry.
That puts the importance of the order in sharp focus.
Unless training continues, the future of the construction industry will be in jeopardy.
Wage inflation and overheating will be in prospect as employers chase scarce skills with higher payments.
That underlines the importance of the construction industry training board.
The Federation of Master Builders fully supports the board and believes that the special character of the industry justifies its continued role and its statutory powers to collect a levy and pay grants for training.
It is difficult to see how the training function could be guaranteed otherwise.
The construction industry is different.
In a competitive climate, it has short-term objectives.
In good times, the timespan can be as much as three months.
In any other times, it can be less than a week.
In those circumstances, it is not a realistic option to take the long view which is characteristic of other industries and to invest in benefits that are achievable only years ahead.
So a statutory levy makes sense.
Without it, the short, cheap cut would almost always be taken.
It has to be recognised that the construction industry consists of a large number of businesses which are mainly small.
They are widely dispersed and are engaged in a wide variety of activities.
The workload is cyclical, vulnerable to changes in economic policy and economic performance, and often subject to the late award of contracts.
In those circumstances, forecasting of manpower requirements a matter of weeks or months ahead, which might be typical in other industries, is impossible.
Large projects can distort the skills requirement in a locality for short durations.
The construction industry is a mobile industry.
The site is the working place and the working place is the site — and for short periods at that.
Businesses come and go with alarming frequency.
Well established firms are relatively few.
However, it is all to easy for a person to establish his own business or become self-employed, however inadequately trained or qualified.
Yet in one respect, training in the building and construction industry is particularly important.
The nature of the work means that the industry has a high risk of accident and injury, so safe working practices are imperative.
They can be inculcated only as part of proper training.
My last point is realistic and understandable.
No employer will willingly train a craftsman only to see him go down the road to work for another employer who has invested nothing in training.
In those circumstances, a central statutory requirement for a training levy is absolutely necessary.
Contrary to the assertion of the hon. Member for Fife, Central, the Government have made the judgment that an exemption is warranted.
It is clear from my brief remarks that I endorse the Government's judgment.
The purpose of the order is of high importance and it deserves the support of the House.
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
I agree with many of the comments of the hon. Member for Romford (Sir M. Neubert).
He explained why a training levy is important, especially in the construction industry.
Plenty of studies, and my own experience of talking to people in the construction industry and especially small businesses, have shown that the fear of poaching is constant.
It is the reason why people do not invest as much in training as they should.
They feel that the benefit of any investment that they make will be enjoyed by someone else.
The hon. Member for Romford was also perfectly right to point out that, in the construction industry perhaps more than in most industries, health and safety are of considerable importance.
Regrettably, the number of deaths and injuries is far too high.
The importance of training in health and safety cannot be overestimated.
As the hon. Member for Fife, Central (Mr. McLeish) said, it is a disappointment that the number of people engaged in training in the construction industry has steadily declined.
The number of youth training trainees on the construction industry training board's programme dropped from 14,385 in 1989 to 11,379 last year — a fall of 20 per cent.
A further fall of 20 per cent.
to 8,500 is expected in the current year.
That is clearly related to the recession, which has hit the construction industry particularly hard.
It has been a severe recession for the construction industry.
Whatever the technicalities of coming out of the recession, to those engaged in the industry it does not appear to be over.
If there is any upturn, people wonder when it is going to benefit them and whether it can be sustained.
My hon. Friends and I have proposed some measures, which we accept will not slash the unemployment figures but which would be helpful.
The receipts from council house sales should be unfrozen to be invested in housing.
More should be invested in the fabric of our schools.
We should engage in more energy efficiency projects such as draught-proofing and insulation.
Such projects are all worth while in their own terms, but they would also bring direct benefits to the construction industry and should be introduced and stimulated.
The chairman of the CITB, Sir Clifford Chetwood, made a statement in July this year in which he announced some of the board's projects to stimulate training.
He bemoaned the recession, and said:’ The government does not appear to be aware of the seriousness of the situation, especially with respect to smaller builders who are on short term jobs.
Amongst them bankruptcies are up 100 per cent.
this year compared with last year.
It is now a question of survival.
Mere exhortation to train is not enough.’
When one criticises the exemption, as some hon. Members have done tonight, one must bear in mind the fact that, for many small businesses, survival is of the essence.
I regret that I do not know at what level the exemption was first introduced.
I think that it was originally about £10,000.
I cannot recall whether it was a Labour Government who set it at that figure.
If it had been index-linked, it would now be about £100,000.
At £45,000, only the smallest of businesses are affected.
I take the point made by the hon. Member for Romford — that any threshold gives rise to feelings of unfairness.
I suspect that it might be administratively difficult to have a sliding scale from £45,000 to £100,000, but a levy of 0.15 per cent.
or 0.25 per cent.
might be worth considering.
The jump would not be as high as is implicit in the order.
I understand why the Government have maintained an exemption for small businesses, for which survival is of the essence.
There is another unfairness in the system.
I have found that employers who are registered with the CITB feel that it is unfair if other companies which have set up just down the road do not appear to be on the board's records.
What steps have been taken by the CITB to ensure a maximum register of employers and that none slips through the net?
As all hon. Members who have spoken have said, training is exceptionally important in the construction industry.
Another relevant factor is the sense of unfairness and the feeling that some employers seem to get off free.
I hope that the Minister will deal with enforcement when he replies.
Mr. Den Dover (Chorley)
I came to the House 12 years ago.
In my first few years in Parliament, the building industry experienced a tremendous downturn in its work load and was worried about its future.
However, from about 1982 to 1989-90, there was a tremendous increase in building and civil engineering activity in Britain.
The industry is comparing the biggest boom it ever had — the peak in 1989-90 — with today's admittedly lower level of activity.
In recent months, the industry has been whingeing and moaning.
I agree that there has been a drop in investment, but this is a good time to invest in building — whether in property, in house building, for industry, in extensions or in repair work.
I am delighted to be able to say that I have just received notice from the Department of the Environment that Chorley is to be allocated an additional amount for doing up old housing — nearly £0.25 million.
That will have a fantastic effect on local housing and the lack of facilities in my constituency.
The money will be put to good use, and the work is labour-effective.
A great deal of labour is required for repair work and for such fiddly jobs as roofing, installing an extra bathroom, or for mechanical, electrical and plumbing work.
The present recession is a complete about-turn.
Normally, the regions and the north-west suffer badly, but at the moment the south is suffering.
In my patch, many small builders are doing well and are struggling to find enough labour to keep them going in today's market.
However, it is impossible for small builders to take on trainees.
They do not have the wherewithal to carry out the administration and paperwork or to watch over them and ensure that they learn on the job and produce an effective piece of craftsmanship.
Only the medium and large builders can mount a training campaign and ensure that it is effectively carried through.
I have no interest to declare in the construction industry, but during my first 10 years in that industry I worked for John Laing, then I worked for Wimpey for about eight years, and I was the head of the largest direct labour organisation in the country — the Greater London council — for nearly three years.
I speak from hard experience at the workface.
Mention has been made of direct labour and of how such organisations have reduced the number of trainees by about 40 per cent.
in the past year.
In a downturn, it is inevitable that there will be fewer trainees, but in the boom years of the mid and late 1980s, much good training took place.
That is why the industry was able to cope with its highest work load ever in real terms, and did not suffer the labour shortages experienced in the 1960s.
I am delighted that my hon. Friend the Member for Romford (Sir M.
Neubert) said that the Federation of Master Builders — it is composed of small builders, and there are a large number of them — fully supports the order.
Small builders cannot see their way to take on many trainees.
It is right and proper that the medium-sized and larger building firms should carry out proper training.
Admittedly, they are training on behalf of some of the smaller firms, but it is in the interests of the industry.
Many of those trainees go to smaller firms, perhaps taking over positions of responsibility or even taking over from the owners when they die and thus continuing the industry's good work.
I fully support the order.
A levy of some sort is essential, so that the industry plays a major part in all training.
I pay tribute to the efforts of the construction industry training board.
However, small builders need to be exempted.
I am delighted that the value added tax position was eased in the last Budget.
That has made an enormous difference, and has replaced a lot of penpushing with bricklaying and planning.
Mr. Forth
This has been a useful debate on an important subject.
The knowledgeable contributions made by hon. Members — certainly those made by Conservative Members — have added greatly to the value of the debate.
I take issue with the hon. Member for Fife, Central (Mr. McLeish).
It is all very well for him to pepper a debate with the emotive terms to which he is addicted, such as’ crisis’and’collapse’, and to describe the board as having’a pistol to its head’.
That sits oddly with the fact that the board was reconstituted as recently as May 1990 and has been rationalised, streamlined and reinvigorated since that date.
To suggest that the board was cowering timorously before the Government is ludicrous and pays no tribute or attention to its good work and to the robust way in which it represents its interests and those of the industry.
I should be surprised if many Conservative Members opposed a review, although Opposition Members seem to be suggesting that reviews are a bad thing.
I should have thought that it would be common ground that it is right to review such organisations from time to time to establish whether they are achieving their objectives.
If the hon. Member for Fife, Central dislikes the idea of reviews, it suggests that his attitude to public expenditure is less rigorous than I would have expected.
Mr. McLeish
Will the Minister acknowledge that, if the review takes place next year, the construction industry training board may say that it wants to retain a statutory levy, to determine the rate of levy imposed and also wants flexibility on exemptions.
Will the Minister respond positively and allow the board to do what it wishes?
Mr. Forth
That is hardly my idea of a review.
A review is what it says.
I confirm that, when undertaking a review we would consider what the board has done, how it has done it and whether it had achieved its objectives and we would draw the appropriate conclusions.
To ask me to give commitments in advance of the review is an outrageous request, and I cannot meet that commitment for the reasons that I have given.
Another criticism was about levels of expenditure.
Given the robust level of reserves that the board has enjoyed, and given that about £6.5 million of the reserves is being drawn down by the board to ensure a continuous and constant level of training, I should have thought that the board was exhibiting a responsible approach.
Having built up the reserves, it is prepared to use them in difficult times, and that is the right thing to do.
As for the comments made by Opposition Members about the reduction in the number of trainees in the industry, regrettably that has to be explained by the fact that the industry has been going through an especially difficult time and still is.
My hon. Friends, from their knowledge and connections with the industry, pointed out that fact.
The fact that the numbers of trainees have been maintained at present levels, despite the difficult times that the industry is experiencing, is a tribute to the continuing commitment in the industry to such levels of training, assisted by the board and the work that it is doing.
I should have preferred that to be put in a more positive light than the hon. Member for Fife, Central was able to do.
Several hon. Members referred to the exemption provisions.
They drew an interesting distinction between the Government and Liberal Democrat approach, and that of the official Opposition.
We fully recognise the need for an exemption provision.
We believe that the level is about right, although in a sense it always has to be arbitrary.
I confirm to the hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) that the exemption level was introduced at £15,000 many years ago and was only recently raised to £45,000.
That was not indexation but a recognition of the fact that, if an exemption is to be made, it should be at a sensible and workable level.
It is worked out at broadly the level of a payroll of three employees.
In the circumstances, that is about right.
The fact that the Opposition seemed to find exemption so objectionable was interesting.
With my responsibility for small firms, the House will not be surprised that I for one would robustly defend the exemption level and the fact that it helps small firms in the industry.
I would applaud that.
Mr. McLeish
The Minister misses one essential point about the changes in the labour market.
The construction sector employs under 1 million people at present and there are 800,000 self-employed workers in the industry.
The nature of the sector is changing dramatically.
If the exemption policy continues, one will probably find that the group of people one wants to bring into training is completely outwith the scope of the board.
Mr. Morgan
The Minister will probably claim that the decline in the number of smokers is greater in this country than it is in Italy and in France.
However, the decline is smaller than the decline in the United States, where smoking among the middle class and among college students is virtually unknown.
It would be great if we could achieve that level of non-smoking among school and college students.
The banning of tobacco advertising would be a great contribution to achieving what the United States has already achieved.
Mr. Wilson
Everyone recognises that the banning of tobacco advertising does not achieve all those ends on its own — that it has to be part of wider strategy.
It is obviously highly desirable that middle-class youngsters and students drop out of smoking — even in this country, they do so in relatively high numbers — but that concentrates with an even stronger focus the efforts of the tobacco and advertising industries on youngsters who do not come from such categories.
A huge gulf exists.
I do not have the statistics to hand, but they show how the number of smokers differs between socio-economic groups.
In a group of 20 or 30 youngsters from the background described by my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, West (Mr. Morgan) it would be considered odd for someone to be puffing away and spreading filth in the direction of others in that group.
However, in a group of 20 or 30 youngsters from the least successful socio-economic background, who have the least going for them and the smallest incomes, the chances are that there will be a greater number of smokers.
The corollary of that is that a higher proportion of their income is spent on tobacco products.
The attitude that smoking is anti-social is gaining currency among the more articulate, better educated and more aware groups in society, but the vicious corollary is that the tobacco and advertising industries must get their recruits from the lower end of the socio-economic scale.
I attended two meetings in my constituency yesterday.
The first comprised people with advanced educational qualifications.
To some extent, it was a self-selecting group.
There were no smokers in the room.
However, there was a much wider range of society at my second meeting.
There were more people from lower socio-economic groups.
I emerged from that meeting, like everyone else, covered in the smell and stains of tobacco smoke because 60 or 70 per cent.
of the people had been smoking at the meeting.
It would be desirable if we could reduce the number of smokers to the level found in the higher socio-economic groups.
As an interim step, we must try to wean from smoking the people in society who are most vulnerable to the habit.
The Strathclyde university report stated:’ The idea of a mature tobacco market’— that means a market which cannot expand any further’cannot be supported the key group for the tobacco industry is young smokers.
They have to be recruited and retained for the industry to flourish.
In no sense can this market be said to be mature.’
The report examined research from the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia, and concluded that cigarette advertising is getting through to children and encouraging them to smoke and to carry on smoking.
That will doubtless be satisfactory news in Canada, and probably in the United Kingdom, where we know, from incontrovertible evidence, that that is the precise name of the tobacco industry's game.
I want to refer to the relationship between tobacco and sport, and particularly the role of sponsorship.
Recently, I was astounded to receive a document in my post entitled’ British International Sports Relay.’
It is difficult to establish who published that document.
Where one would normally expect to find those details, there is the logo of the Sports Council, and the statement:’ Additional copies of Relay available from Sports Council International Affairs Unit.’
Under the heading’ Tobacco Sponsorship’is a debate in which David Pollock, the director of Action for Smoking and Health, argues against tobacco sponsorship in sport under the accurate heading,’A cancerous growth on sport’.
However, to my bewilderment, I found that the argument in favour of tobacco sponsorship was not put by some fruitcake from the tobacco industry's front organisations, but by the general secretary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, Mr. Peter Lawson.
If the Minister for Sport was on the Treasury Bench, I would ask him — instead, I ask all hon. Members and the country — what is going on when the general secretary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation puts his name and that of his organisation to a positive argument in favour of tobacco sponsorship in sport?
His words read like an ultra-right libertarian tract rather than the reasoned utterances of a representative of a body that has been entrusted by the Government with the responsibility for sport and physical recreation.
He begins:’ Sport in Britain is strapped for cash.’
We all know that.
The article continues:’ Sports bodies are denied resources by government, which takes more from sport than it ever gives back.
The gap between government parsimony and the needs of sport is filled by commercial sponsorship.
Without it, sport would wither.’
That may be a wee indictment of the Government, but so far the argument is reasonably incontestable.
However, Mr. Lawson then continues by making no distinction whatsoever between tobacco sponsorship and any other form of sponsorship.
I very much regret that it is impossible to have a sports event, club or team these days without having a commercial sponsor.
We could have an interesting separate debate about the role of sponsorship, but we accept that, if any sport in this country is to get off the ground, such sponsorship is a mandatory part of the scene.
Surely, however, there are lines to be drawn, and it is not only remarkable, but worrying, to find that someone in such a responsible position can argue that the tobacco industry provides a neutral form of sponsorship.
Mr. Lawson continued
’ The tobacco industry is frequently and unfortunately vilified for its association with sport.
Such criticism is, in my view, totally misguided.
The governing bodies of sport are not naive, nor are they irresponsible.
Sponsorship decisions that they face and must take because of their impecunity are based on a careful assessment of their impact upon their participants and their supporters.
Sponsorship of sport by the tobacco industry is controlled by voluntary agreement and is carefully monitored to ensure that young people are not recipients of a pro-smoking message.’
With respect, that is so much tosh.
Mr. Lawson knows it, the tobacco industry knows it and the Government know it.
Indeed, I would be deeply concerned to think that the people who preside over the Central Council of Physical Recreation do not know it.
It is extraordinary that an employee of that body is allowed to write publicly in such terms.
It is even more odd that the Sports Council should publish his words.
We know that the controls over tobacco sponsorship of sport do not have the affect that Mr. Lawson attributes to them, because all the academic research shows that the tobacco industry's sponsorship of sport is aimed at a younger market.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Dumbarton (Mr. McFall) has said, the sponsorship is aimed at a market that identifies sport with glamour and, by extension, with tobacco.
That is not only the market at which the advertising is aimed — it is the market that it hits.
It is appalling for the general secretary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation to argue otherwise.
However, Mr. Lawson continued’ The often repeated suggestion that sports bodies are free to select sponsors as and when they wish is nonsense.’
I shall stop quoting Mr. Lawson there because, until that point, he has used the argument of impecunity.
The Government must address that argument directly.
I am not interested in scoring cheap points in this debate about the underfunding of sport, but if sport is using underfunding as an excuse or justification for taking large amounts of money from the tobacco industry, the Government must address the question whether they should put more money into sport so that sport does not have to use that excuse.
Mr. Lawson moves on to what I regard as even more dangerous territory.
He writes:’ At base, there is a larger issue than that of finance.
Fundamentally, it is a question of freedom.
Are sportsmen and sportswomen to be at liberty to negotiate in the interests of their sport or are they to be browbeaten by the lobby of latter-day puritans?’
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is going wide of the subject before the House.
He should return to the targeting of tobacco advertising on young people.
Mr. Wilson
I am grateful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but sponsorship is a form of advertising.
Every sponsorship is accompanied by advertising.
There is manifold evidence which I could —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is talking about the financing of sport.
Mr. Wilson
I have left that subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
As Mr. Lawson writes’ At base, there is a larger issue than that of finance.’
So we are off finance altogether.
He continues:’ Fundamentally, it is a question of freedom.
Are sportsment and sportswomen to be at liberty to negotiate in the interests of their sport or are they to be browbeaten by the lobby of latter-day puritans?’
Mr. Lawson applies that description to people like me, who believe that tobacco advertising and sponsorship of sport are immoral and have precisely the effect that they are intended to have, which is to recruit young people into smoking.
Mr. Morgan
Surely the critical issue is that of role models.
Sporting heroes are naturally role models for young people.
The deviousness and deceitfulness of tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship activities which are directed at children lie in the fact that they tell them that one must be healthy and have lung function of 120 per cent.
to do well at sport, while it is practised by people wearing jerseys and caps carrying insignia and logos which bear a message about a product which will reduce one's lung function to 80 per cent., 50 per cent .
and eventually zero per cent.
Mr. Wilson
My hon. Friend is right.
There is a link between the the words’ advertising’and’sponsorship’.
The tobacco industry plans a long time ahead.
It sees the writing on the wall for its advertising.
It knows that, whatever the Government say, eventually European law or the law of a more enlightened British Government will say,’ You just cannot do it.’
Tobacco advertising on television was banned in 1965.
The industry has had 26 years grace for other forms of advertising.
That will not go on much longer.
Now the tobacco industry is going for the slightly more subtle form of advertising which is sponsorship.
It is aimed at the same target, which is the young and vulnerable people in society whom the industry needs to recruit.
I am aware that other hon. Members wish to speak.
The points are obvious and clear.
The only question is whether the Government have the will to do anything about them.
Let us confront the matter.
It is a moral question at root.
We talk in many different contexts about the need to protect young people from various vices in society.
The fact that something happens to be legal as a matter of tradition going far back into history does not mean that it is not a vice in society.
I suspect that, if someone now discovered a substance as addictive and harmful as tobacco, even this Government would be highly unlikely to license it to get it off the ground as a marketable product.
We experienced a similar event in Scotland, when Skol Bandits started to be manufactured in East Kilbride.
They were a relatively new product.
Eventually, the Government intervened to prevent the manufacture of that product in Britain.
We all inherit a tradition from a different age when tobacco was acceptable.
As I said earlier, one cannot switch off the tap and ban tobacco.
That is not the proposition, but the fact that one does not ban it does not mean that, with the knowledge that we now possess, we do not regard it as a debilitating and dangerous influence on society, and especially young people.
The question is whether we protect those young people from the recognition of the information that we have accumulated in the past two or three decades.
That is a moral choice.
I have no wish to attribute motives, but clearly finance intervenes.
Every advertisement on behalf of the tobacco industry delivers millions in tobacco tax to the Treasury.
If that is the wages of sin, to what extent are the Government prepared to maintain them?
If the price of doing that is leading another generation into that habit
Mr. Alun Michael (Cardiff, South and Penarth)
The subject of the debate is the targeting of young people.
Surely all hon. Members would argue that it is wrong for the industry to be able to target young people.
However, does my hon. Friend agree that the Government have the worst of both worlds?
They seem to be allowing the targeting of young people through advertising, but, because of the tax regime that they have introduced in the past few years, they seem to be exporting jobs in the tobacco industry.
We seem to have the worst of both worlds.
We still seem to have cigarettes, but jobs are going overseas, yet we allow the targeting of young people.
Both parts of that equation seem to be crazy.
Mr. Wilson
It is tricky to agree with that argument.
I am not that interested in where the jobs that make the product are located, but I have sympathy with tobacco workers.
Like everyone else, they were taken into whatever jobs were available for them.
If a social and political decision is taken against tobacco products and cigarettes, clearly there is a social and political responsibility to find other forms of employment for those people.
In parts of Glasgow, the tobacco industry is very important.
One cannot shut up shop and say,’ We wipe our hands of those people.’
There is a responsibility to create other employment, and that would be the view of any responsible Government.
I agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, South and Penarth (Mr. Michael) that it is doubly absurd to destroy jobs in the British tobacco industry — as has been done on a large scale — if that leads not to a reduction in tobacco consumption but to the substitution of imported brands of cigarette.
Mr. Michael
There is a large tobacco factory in my constituency.
I have made it clear to the people who work there and to the management that I am against the encouragement of tobacco addiction and in favour of measures which will prevent the use of tobacco in public places.
However, when the company was considering the service and repair of machinery and was thinking of sending it abroad to Scandanavia, it was willing to listen and to ensure that the work was carried out in this country.
The Government, through their tax regimes, do not seem to be interested in that.
Tobacco consumption will be a fact of life in this country for some time.
During that period, we want to do all we can to reduce it, especially among young people, and we want to avoid targeting them in advertising.
However, we must do what we can to ensure that that does not have a consequent effect on unemployment in this country through a failure to understand that process.
Mr. Wilson
My hon. Friend argues his own case very well.
I do not disagree with a word of it.
I suspect that people who work in the industry are under no illusions.
They know the way that the wind is blowing, and would be only too pleased to be redeployed into another trade.
The tragedy is that, whatever the direction that market forces blow, when they are left to their own devices, the choice for workers in such industries is not between the status quo and redeployment, but between the status quo and loss of their jobs.
In those circumstances, it is natural that those who work in the tobacco industry should be as anxious as anyone to defend their jobs.
I conclude with a plea to the Minister.
We are faced with a moral choice: do we allow our youngsters to be exploited?
Do we allow people from the age of 12 to be induced into a habit which is addictive and will undermine, and in many cases destroy, their lives?
How many smokers who were hooked when 12, 13, or 14, in their formative years, are grateful for having been subjected to the wiles of the tobacco and advertising industries?
The vast majority curse the day they became hooked on the habit.
That surely places a responsibility on any Government of any political complexion to trample on the bogus libertarian appeal of the tobacco and advertising industries that they are only offering choice.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths (Edinburgh, South)
I am grateful for the opportunity that we have been afforded by my hon. Friend the Member for Eccles (Miss Lestor) to debate an extremely important subject.
We are also indebted to the Minister and the Whips for allowing us adequate time in which to adduce our arguments.
The debate is not about banning the advertising of tobacco.
It is about the impact of tobacco advertising and the promotion of tobacco on young people.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Cunninghame, North (Mr. Wilson) pointed out, we in Scotland know that the words of some irresponsible sectors of the tobacco industry during the 1980s turned out to be weasel words.
One thinks of the way in which the industry set up a factory, with considerable Government money, to produce Skoal Bandits, and then blatantly promoted that carcinogenic product, which promotes mouth cancers, to children in nearby schools.
That factory turned out to be a short-lived exercise and a gross waste of Government money.
It was a symptom or symbol of the 1980s and a lesson for the 1990s of collusion between Government and irresponsible elements who have done much to give the tobacco industry a bad name.
I pay tribute to people who have advised parents and children of the dangers of taking up smoking.
Dr. Lynne Michelle, of Edinburgh, has highlighted in her studies on the perception of children of the promotion of cigarettes the grave danger, almost the entrapment of a younger generation by irresponsible elements in the industry and, sadly, the example set by other adults, including parents.
Those results were published last year and cited by an all-party group in Westminster Hall.
The findings were horrific.
I also pay tribute to Alison Hillhouse, of ASH in Scotland, who has done much to highlight the dangers of smoking.
Mr. Michael
While my hon. Friend is paying tribute to several people who have highlighted those issues, will he also pay tribute to a specialist in Wales, with the Celtic name of Dr. Ian Campbell, who has highlighted those issues strongly?
In the light of his experience and expertise at Llandough hospital in my constituency, he has alerted people in Wales to the dangers of smoking, the burdens that smoking places on the NHS and the tremendous damage that it does to health.
He, too, has sought to publicise and to persuade the public of the need to avoid the activities that are being condemned in this debate.
Mr. Griffiths
I could not pay a more eloquent testimony to the doctor than my hon. Friend has just paid.
He, too, will have had a chance to study the fourth report of the Committee for Monitoring Agreements on Tobacco Advertising and Sponsorship, several paragraphs of which deal with the targeting of tobacco advertising at young people.
Before I go into the details of the report's findings and the accompanying and interesting, if depressing, press statement by the Minister on 9 September, I should say that there is not only increasing public awareness of the problems of smoking and its long-term consequences to the health of smokers, but an increasing awareness of the dangers of passive smoking, particularly to children.
Lothian Region Transport plc has done much to ensure that smoking is banned from public transport in the Lothian area.
As in America, smoking is now increasingly prohibited in public places in Britain, which means that children are less influenced by adults who smoke and whose passive smoking does much to damage young children's health.
I look forward to the day when restaurants, pubs, cafe s and public transport undertakings through the United Kingdom take seriously the problems of smoking.
If they permit smoking, they should set aside special rooms for those who wish to smoke and for those who do not.
Mr. Morgan
I hope that my hon. Friend agrees that, if, we are to stop young people inhaling smoke unintentionally and passively in public places such as restaurants and railway carriages, the physical segregation between areas where people are allowed to smoke and those where they are not must be far better.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
None of that relates to the targeting of advertising on young children.
Mr. Morgan
I am sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I was about to come to that.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
I think that I will allow the hon. Gentleman to get on with his speech.
Mr. Griffiths
It was not an unhelpful intervention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because one of the problems in dealing with the targeting of advertising is that advertisements aimed at adults will be less effective than the Minister may wish if they take account of the fact that children may be present.
The problem that my hon. Friend rightly highlights of there being no closing doors on trains between smoking and non-smoking areas exposes children to smoking.
Mr. Morgan
The point that my hon. Friend is about to come to is that the advertising directed at young people creates a climate of social acceptability in which children will then not complain about the awful smell of smoke from the other side of a physical barrier —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
That is nonsense.
Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths
The fourth report of the Committee on Monitoring Agreements on Tobacco Advertising and Sponsorship was produced this summer and the Minister will have had time to study it in detail.
One of the most disturbing aspects of the report relates to the financing of the committee.
The funding for direct mail research was £24,000, the chairman's fees were £2,000 and there was a miscellaneous sum of £331 for telephone, stationery and the like.
That is a total of £26,331.
An additional sum for certain members and secretaries' expenses was met by the Department and the companies, but the amount is unspecified.
That is a derisory total for a committee monitoring agreements on tobacco advertising and sponsorship.
It is less than £30,000, compared with the tens or hundreds of millions that are spent on promoting tobacco.
Only four members of the committee represented the Department of Health, but there were seven from the trade, the Tobacco Advisory Council and various tobacco companies.
That shows an imbalance.
More disturbing is an analysis of the complaints.
A fifth of the complaints against companies for advertising in an irresponsible fashion in breach of the code were upheld.
That is serious in view of the fact that the committee has been running for more than four years.
One would have thought that its very existence would be some sort of deterrent.
The fact that one in five of the complaints were held to be breaches of the code shows that the tobacco companies have perhaps been treating the committee and the issue in a cavalier way.
The report shows that the committee devoted some time to analysing a helpful report from the Health Education Authority,’ Beating the Ban’, which was published in 1990.
It grieves me to say that the committee seemed to spend some time trying to denigrate the authority's findings and to vindicate the tobacco industry.
It should have spent a little more time looking at the serious work being carried out by the Health Education Authority and less time on carping criticisms of the authority's work.
Sadly, the preface to the report, the covering letter from Mr. John Belloch, chairman of the Committee for Monitoring Agreements on Tobacco Advertising and Sponsorship, shows that the increase in the number of breaches in the past year has risen by 35 per cent.
Perhaps that increase reflects a decline in profits, the recession and the drive by tobacco companies to advertise their products even more fiercely.
None the less, the rise is worrying.
The committee was set up under the terms of a voluntary agreement.
The Minister and I may disagree about whether the emphasis should be on voluntary or statutory agreements.
The agreement was concluded with the Government on 1 April 1986.
The committee contains leading representatives of the tobacco industry and its task is to monitor the operation of the agreements on advertising and on sponsorship of sports by tobacco companies in the United Kingdom.
My hon. Friend the Member for Cunninghame, North spoke about that.
That is a more recent agreement, dating from January 1987.
I shall not read out the main provisions of the agreement, because they fall outwith the terms of the Adjournment debate topic, but they are available to the general public, and to hon. Members in the Library.
The problems that are highlighted — here is where we question the faith of some of the marketers of tobacco companies — include the limiting of expenditure on cigarette brand poster advertising to 50 per cent.
of the level in the year ended 31 March 1980.
The problem arises from the fact that —
It being Ten o'clock, the motion for the Adjournment of the House lapsed, without Question put.
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Griffiths
I was saying that the proportion of advertising expenditure given was for that in the two lowest tar groups, which was rather less than the proportion of total sales.
I do not want to carp about the work of the Committee.
I welcome the fact that the industry gets together with the Minister's representative and with representatives of other Departments, and I welcome the agreement to cease advertising in cinemas and to support an advertising campaign about illegal sales to children under 16.
These measures have the full endorsement of the Labour party, which also welcomes the fact that notices about the law will be made extensively available for display by the retail trade and will be fixed to automatic vending machines by operators.
I know that the industry and the Department of Health are to consider what further action is needed to publicise the law in the light of the Children and Young Persons (Protection from Tobacco) Act 1991.
I refer to the case outlined in the report of breaches of the code and to the cases behind the figures that I have given.
Mr. Michael
My hon. Friend has mentioned the reports of the Committee, including one on the general aspects of two televised sporting events sponsored by tobacco companies.
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is not the specific element, but the general targeting of young people, which may not be explicit, that causes the most difficulty?
All of us who have worked with young people know that, in relation to pop music and sport, the impact of the event and the personality goes way beyond what one would expect.
Should this not be taken into account, and does it not appear that it is not taken into account in the voluntary code?
Mr. Griffiths
I endorse that point, which follows on from the one that I have been making.
There are volumes of evidence to substantiate what my hon. Friend has said, and I hope to give the House some examples.
The Evening Standard of 20 May this year published an excellent critique of advertising and the ways in which the tobacco industry had dodged bans on advertising.
Anyone who has not read Mr. Eric Clark's excellent article charting how classic adverts, in the past and in the present, have succeeded in linking the cigarette with sophistication, should read it.
As he so rightly says, despite all the increasingly tougher codes, much of what is happening in advertising now does not contravene codes, yet tobacco companies get the message across in the same way.
Marlboro, for instance, does not have to show or even mention somebody smoking cigarettes — it just has to show a cowboy.
That is an example of what my hon. Friend has in mind.
Mr. Morgan
There was a notorious example, similar to the one that my hon. Friend has given, which no doubt had a great deal of appeal to young people.
It was the famous Peter Stuyvesant advertisement which showed passengers on aircraft.
No doubt it had a great deal of appeal because it suggested that, if someone could afford air travel, he must be a bit of a swinger and must be with it.
That was bound to appeal to young people as well.
That was shown about 20 years ago, shortly after the first voluntary code.
Instead of the advertiser stating directly that someone is a with-it swinger if he smokes, he implies that to young people by showing them smoking Peter Stuyvesant cigarettes on airliners.
Mr. Griffiths
It could well be that it will take more than the measures that the Government have introduced to strip the glamour from smoking, notwithstanding the 115,000 smoking-related deaths per year in Britain alone.
Tragically, as my hon. Friends have said, the image that is portrayed is still one of the smoker being chic or macho.
That image is targeted at adults and at children, who are the most impressionable.
Mr. Michael
It seems that my hon. Friend is going to the essence of the argument.
For many years before coming to this place, I worked with young children.
It strikes me that it is young people who are most at risk and who have most to lose.
The children with whom I worked had the least opportunity in terms of personal development and careers, and they were likely to be drawn into a variety of different forms of behaviour, among which the first was often the use of and then addiction to tobacco.
Mr. Griffiths
My hon. Friend makes the point well and pithily.
The article in the Evening Standard takes up the issue in the same vein.
I am sure that that newspaper lives or dies by its advertising and can claim some expertise on the subject.
The article states that we have only to look’ at the black-and-white magazine shots of Val Kilmer, Jim Morrison in The Doors, with a cigarette.
Read about Julia Roberts as she takes a deep draw on the cigarette in her right hand'.
Or visit the Olivier/SWET 91 award-winning play Dancing at Lughnasa and hear talk of Wild Woodbines'.’
All these things have an impact on the public.
In particular, as the journalist, Mr. Clark states, they have an effect on his daughter, who is 13.
She mimes smoking.
I am sure that that will be familiar to hon. Members with teenage children.
That shows the impact of smoking.
It is almost passive advertising and promotion, but I am convinced that it is carefully crafted in many instances by the advertising companies on behalf of the cigarette companies.
The notion that we do not have to have anything to do with those who want to smoke is odious, as my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, West and Penarth (Mr. Michael) has said.
The notion also that advertising is designed to persuade people to smoke one company's brand instead of that of another — in other words, to switch — has little validity.
Today's cigarette has 110 years of image-making behind it.
Part of the task of the modern tobacco promoter is to make the smoking habit appear clean and healthy, and to imply that it is all right to smoke if we take plenty of exercise.
Spurious devices are used to put forward a powerful message.
For young women in particular, the message conveyed is that of elegance, poise, and perhaps a hint of luxury.
Such an image can be seductive to people who have not enjoyed so-called rising prosperity — the number who have not done so is increasing — and have fewer pleasures in life.
I refer to people who, as I speak, are sitting at home, unable to put on their electric fires.
The message that one can gain for just a few pence, by smoking, something that a Liz Taylor or a Julia Roberts with all their millions have can be seductive — and it is being deliberately promoted.
The tobacco industry has done much to sidestep the Secretary of State's restrictions by moving more into other marketing areas, such as sampling, road shows, travel films, clothing, and sponsorship — from Glyndebourne to rock, from angling to snooker.
Earlier this year, Philip Morris appointed a London agency to explore news areas of so-called non-conventional advertising.
At the heart of the debate, and of the promotion of cigarettes to young people, is a crisis of confidence in the House and the country over the good will of the tobacco industry.
The Government have at least been partly honest in their stand.
A few years ago, they went in to Europe with the deliberate aim of sabotaging any tough ban on cigarette advertising, and any insistance on tough medical warnings of the kind that appear today.
Since then, the Government have perceived public opinion and disquiet with their handling of the issue, but still they have not fully learnt the lessons.
When the new voluntary agreement on tobacco advertising was concluded, the Secretary of State for Health issued a trumpeting press release stating:’ The agreement will ensure that the new health warnings such as Smoking Kills', which will appear on cigarette packets from 1992, will also appear on advertisements.’
Three cheers for that — but they are three cheers three years too late in terms of Government action, the tens of thousands of people who have died from smoking, and the tens of thousands more who have taken up smoking during that time.
The messages that the Secretary of State trumpets in his press release are’ Smoking Kills,’’Smoking Causes Cancer,’’Smoking Causes Heart Disease,’’Smoking Causes Fatal Diseases,’’Smoking When Pregnant Harms Your Baby,’and’Protect Children: Don't Make Them Breathe Your Smoke.’
They are all welcome but my right hon. and hon. Friends — together with responsible interests outside the House, such as the British Medical Association and other medical authorities — have pressed for such a policy for some years.
I suspect that the Secretary of State's inability to press that policy on the industry, and the industry's failure to adopt it voluntarily before now, has done much to heighten public awareness of the reticence of the Secretary of State and of the industry to take the issue as seriously as they might.
I believe in tough regulations, not knee-jerk reactions to public opinion — but the industry should be allowed to gear up to them and to plan five or 10 years ahead.
If the industry had gone along with the sort of scheme that we were urging three or four years ago, it would be well geared up to meeting the challenge now, instead of being caught short by its friends — who I am sure the industry feels have in some way betrayed it.
In his press release the Secretary of State says:’ Many of the new measures are designed to protect children from being influenced to take up the deadly habit of smoking.’
Again, we welcome that, but is it not sad that it comes 12 years after this Government were elected and after not just one but two Secretaries of State since I have been a Member of Parliament have been influenced because of criticism of tobacco advertising and irresponsible elements in the tobacco industry?
The Secretary of State said that he wants to discourage’ children and young people, particularly young women, from taking up smoking’and that it is’one of the most important things we can do to protect their future health.’
We welcome that statement.
In the remaining 15 minutes we look forward to hearing from the Minister what he intends to do to advance that cause further.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Eccles (Miss Lestor) o securing this debate and on mobilising so much support from her side of the House.
Despite the best efforts of one or two of her hon. Friends, I do not believe that the debate has revealed a party political difference on anything other than the very narrow issue of an advertising ban.
There is no dispute about the incidence of smoking among young people and among the population as a whole, which must be reduced.
Statistics have already been quoted and they bear repetition.
They show that 100,000 unnecessary deaths a year are the result of tobacco consumption.
That is a Lockerbie disaster every day of every year.
A third of all deaths in the age group 40 to 70 are smoking-related.
That is a frightening statistic.
A few Opposition Members told us that smoking costs the national health service £437 million a year.
I am not sure how accurately that can be measured, but it represents a substantial cost to the NHS, which the hon. Member for Eccles compared, in my view rightly, with the large sums of money that the European Community still commits to subsidising tobacco production, against which we have argued vehemently in Brussels.
At the very least there is something contradictory — most people would apply a stronger epithet to it — about an organisation that subsidises tobacco production but seeks to present itself as interested in reducing tobacco consumption.
This Government's record, as well as that of our predecessors who pursued precisely the same policy, shows some success in delivering the objective that both parties have espoused — reduced tobacco consumption.
The number of smokers has fallen from 45 per cent.
of the population in 1974 to 32 per cent.
of the population in 1988, the most recent year for which figures are available.
The Green Paper which my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Health published this summer, entitled’ The Health of the Nation’, suggests, as part of the consultation about health targets, that we should adopt as a target a further reduction, within the time span of the White Paper, when it is published, of that proportion of the population who smoke from 33 per cent.
in the case of men, as it was in 1988, to 22 per cent.
and from 30 per cent.
of women down to 21 per cent.
— a reduction of more than 30 per cent.
on present incidence rates.
There cannot be and there should not be any attempt to open up a party political divide over the importance of further reducing tobacco consumption.
Nor is there any serious basis on which it can be argued that there is a party political divide over the particular of reducing tobacco consumption among children.
Clearly, if we want to deliver long-term reductions in tobacco consumption, we need to ensure that the smallest possible number of children — preferably none — take up the tobacco habit.
Once again, that is not in dispute.
We have made it clear that we are disappointed at the figures revealed in the latest survey by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys of tobacco consumption by young people.
It showed that, in 1990, 10 per cent.
of children aged between 11 and 15 still used tobacco.
I was horrified by the definition of’ regular’users.
Those are not children who smoke one or two cigarettes a week to prove to their contemporaries that they are older than they are; if they are boys, they smoke more than 56 cigarettes a week and, if they are girls, more than 49 cigarettes a week.
By any definition, that is a substantial level of tobacco consumption by children, to whom it is illegal to sell cigarettes.
Action has been taken, not just in the past few years but consistently by successive Governments since 1904, to inhibit tobacco consumption by children.
The sale of cigarettes to children has been illegal since 1904.
Successive legislative steps have been taken since then to tighten the restrictions on access to tobacco by young children.
The most recent was the Children and Young Persons (Protection from Tobacco) Act 1991, which the hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) mentioned.
It was passed with the Government's support.
The Act makes it an absolute offence for a shopkeeper to sell cigarettes or any other tobacco product to young people.
It makes it clear that a shopkeeper who sells cigarettes to young people cannot simply say that he did not know that he was doing so.
To establish his innocence, he must prove that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid the commission of an offence.
In other words, if a shopkeeper cannot show that he took every reasonable step to satisfy himself about the age of the person buying cigarettes or any other tobacco product, he has committed an offence.
Action has been taken to deal with one of the issues which undoubtedly is an important contributor to tobacco consumption by young people — their access to tobacco products.
The law is tighter than it has ever been, and it has the backing of both sides of the House.
Mr. Morgan
Does the hon. Gentleman really wish to imply that it is difficult for young children to buy cigarettes from a local corner shop?
My impression is that the old trick of saying that the cigarettes are for one's mother or older brother still works 99.99 per cent.
of the time.
Mr. Dorrell
The House need not rely on the hon. Gentleman's view that it happens 99.99 per cent.
of the time.
One of the slightly more encouraging findings of the OPCS survey — I emphasise the word’ slightly’— was that, in 1988, 8 per cent.
of young smokers had been refused cigarettes by the supplier the last time they sought to buy them but that, in 1990, the figure had risen to 15 per cent.
Although that meant that 85 per cent.
had been able to buy cigarettes illegally without challenge, none the less it was a welcome trend.
The special position of young people has been recognised in the voluntary agreements that the Government have negotiated with the industry and it was explicit in the 1986 voluntary agreement.
It has been suggested that the voluntary agreement makes no reference to children and young people, but that is not true.
I quote the 1986 agreement under which the industry agreed’ to take special care to ensure that their advertising and promotion does not represent a greater attraction to young people than to the population as a whole.’
The agreement binds the industry and is carried forward into the new agreement.
It is the basis on which any discriminatory advertising directed at young people can be challenged under the terms of the voluntary agreements between the Government and the industry.
The voluntary agreement published in September this year by my right hon. Friend takes several further steps towards restricting the extent to which advertising is directed — purposefully or otherwise — at young people.
The voluntary agreement commits the industry to a 50 per cent.
reduction in shop-front advertising starting at the shop fronts closest to schools.
It commits the industry to applying the same ban on billboard advertising overlooking playgrounds as already applies to billboard advertising close to schools.
It also commits the industry to a ban on cigarette and other tobacco advertising in magazines specifically aimed at the young women's market.
’ Specificially aimed’in that context is defined in the agreement as describing any magazine where the age group 15 to 24 comprises more than 25 per cent.
of the magazine's readership.
This year, we also insisted on a substantial strengthening of the nature of the health warnings put on packets and on any tobacco advertising.
To suggest that the Government have taken no action, or have taken no action against the specific problem of advertising directed at children, is a charge that does not stand up.
The hon. Member for Eccles mentioned the case of the Canadian company Imperial Tobacco Ltd.
The charges against that company are serious, although the hon. Lady made it clear that there is no suggestion in any of the supporting paperwork that the claims relate to any sales outside Canada and certainly not that they relate to any sales in this country.
Indeed, it would be hard for them to do so, because British American Tobacco does not sell tobacco in the United Kingdom.
The hon. Lady also quoted the use of the puffin symbol by Gallaher.
That is a good illustration of the strength of the voluntary agreement approach to advertising and of the weakness of seeking to enshrine it in statutory to legal bounds.
If the hon. Lady or Puffin Books can show that the use of the puffin symbol contravenes the text that I quoted from the 1986 voluntary agreement, without being bound by court procedures and legal niceties and technicalities, we have a system deliberately designed to be sufficiently flexible to allow action to be taken and new barriers which will not be allowed to be broken.
We will not extend the limits of what is acceptable.
I have stressed that there is no disagreement between the Government and the Opposition about the importance of reducing tobacco consumption or of reducing access to tobacco, especially among children, as a contributor to that objective.
If the House is to take that objective seriously and then to deliver that objective, we need to consider what influences tobacco consumption among children.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths rose
Mr. Dorrell
I have only two minutes and I want to make some more points.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will forgive me.
The evidence suggests overwhelmingly that the biggest single influence on whether children smoke is the parental influence.
First, it is a mistake to imagine that access to tobacco for children is an entirely discrete subject.
Advertising directed at reducing tobacco consumption by parents has a substantial secondary knock-on effect on children.
The second point to bear in in mind when we consider what influences children's consumption is the question of access and the tightening of that access.
Hence our support for the Bill last year.
The third is to ensure that children understand the health hazards that they run.
One of the most encouraging aspects at the moment is that the Health Education Authority recently found that 87 per cent.
of schoolchildren between nine and 15 think that smoking can kill.
Therefore, the education message is getting through.
Our most important priority is to secure the agreement of the industry to effective voluntary agreements and then to police them robustly.
Evidence from the continent and comparison of our record with that of other European countries show that that is the route which delivers a substantial reduction in tobacco smoking.
The motion having been made at Ten o'clock, and the debate having continued for half an hour, Mr. Deputy Speaker — adjourned the House without Question put, pursuant to the Standing Order.
Adjourned at half-past Ten o'clock.
NHS Trusts (Scotland)
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I will take points of order afterwards.
Mr. Lang
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a statement about NHS trust applications in Scotland.
As the House is aware, applications for NHS trust status in Scotland have been submitted on behalf of the Foresterhill group of hospitals in Aberdeen, the Royal Scottish National hospital at Larbert and the South Ayrshire group of hospitals.
Statutory public consultations have been carried out and I am grateful to all those who responded.
I have carefully considered all the comments submitted and I have today written to the sponsors of the applications separately, setting out my decisions.
Copies of the letters have been placed in the Library.
In all three cases, the responses to the public consultation revealed concern that trusts might not be part of the NHS and that services might be fragmented.
Those concerns are misplaced.
The position, as the Government have repeatedly made clear, is that trusts will remain part of the national health service.
Services will continue as at present to be free at the point of delivery.
Trusts will operate in a framework in which health boards will be required to fulfil their statutory obligations to cater for the health needs of all those in their areas.
Bearing that in mind, I have closely examined the three proposals and the comments that they have attracted, in accordance with the published criteria which included the likely effect on patient care, the competence of the management teams, including involvement in management of senior professional staff, and the financial viability of the hospitals concerned.
Taking Foresterhill first, a recurring comment in the responses to the trust proposal alluded to the contribution that individuals have made to the development of hospital care in Aberdeen over very many decades.
I fully understand that and I recognise the justifiable pride which people in Grampian have in the services provided and in the developments which have taken place in conjunction with the medical school.
None of that, for reasons that I have already explained, is put in jeopardy by the trust proposal.
Indeed, I am satisfied that the proposed trust, operating from a sound financial basis, with a management team, including clinicians, possessing a proven track record, and with sound proposals for improving facilities, offers a great opportunity to build on the already high reputation for patient care which the hospitals enjoy.
I have therefore decided to grant the application.
Hon. Members
Shame!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Lang
I turn to south Ayrshire.
The sponsors of the trust proposal see the new Ayr hospital as providing an excellent opportunity for further enhancing the quality of services provided in south Ayrshire.
I am sure that they are right.
I am satisfied that the proposals for NHS trust status for the south Ayrshire group of hospitals also meet the criteria which I have outlined, and in particular that they will secure benefits for patients and an improved quality of service.
Again, therefore, I have decided to grant the application.
Finally, there is the application from the Royal Scottish National hospital at Larbert.
The hospital serves people with a mental handicap.
It has been suggested during the consultation period that, because of the vulnerability of that group, the hospital would not be an appropriate candidate for trust status.
I do not accept that proposition.
NHS trust status is about providing a means for improving care.
I see no reason why that should be denied to those hospitals serving the mentally ill or people with a mental handicap.
As with Foresterhill and South Ayrshire, I am satisfied not only that the RSNH is financially viable but that significant benefits for improved patient care will flow from trust status.
It is also clear to me that, on past performance, the management are well able to take forward the changes in a very difficult area of health care.
However, the proposals arise at a time when we are beginning to put in place the policy of care in the community, as enunciated in our White Paper’ Caring for People’.
Work on the development of joint planning between local authorities and health boards and the preparation of individual care plans has begun.
But more activity on those fronts is expected in the coming months.
The resources of the RSNH management team may not be sufficient to cope with the additional administrative burden of implementing simultaneously’ Caring for People’and the immediate transition to trust status.
Consequently, I have decided, in granting the application, that the start-up date will be April 1993.
To sum up, I have concluded that all three applications will lead to improved patient care; that all three will have the required management, including clinician participation, to operate free of health board control and that all three are sufficiently robust financially.
I shall therefore be bringing forward shortly the necessary orders to establish trusts at Foresterhill and South Ayrshire in April 1992 and at the Royal Scottish National hospital in April 1993.
The three units face a challenge, but one which offers the promise of improved patient care in their areas.
Whatever political differences exist on policy, I am sure that hon. Members on both sides of the House will wish to offer them every support in that endeavour.
Mr. Donald Dewar (Glasgow, Garscadden)
There is no justification for what the Secretary of State is doing.
Foresterhill, the South Ayrshire general hospital and the Royal Scottish National hospital should not be forced out of the main stream of the health service.
It is a betrayal — a victory for prejudice over common sense.
The Secretary of State has toed his party's line but undermined confidence in the health service.
He is once more distancing himself from the people of Scotland.
The Secretary of State claims that opting out is in the best interests of patients.
On what does he base that claim?
Does he know better than doctors, nurses and the other health service staff whose life work has been delivering the service?
Does the Secretary of State remember the response of the Grampian area medical committee, which expressed concern that the additional resources consumed by the trust will put at risk priority specialties such as psychiatry, geriatric medicine and physical disability?
The Secretary of State claims that the basis of opting out is to make hospitals more responsive to the local community.
How can that be so when today's diktat is a contemptuous dismissal of the community's united protest?
Did the right hon. Gentleman not canvass in Kincardine and Deeside?
How does he reconcile today's announcement with the fact that consultants voted against the opt-out scheme by 87 votes to two in Foresterhill and by 50 to nine in South Ayrshire?
Is it not reducing consultation to the level of farce when the responses to the consultation, together with the polling evidence, show overwhelming opposition?
In Ayrshire this July, Systems Three found that four out of five of those polled were strongly opposed to the scheme.
In Grampian, 80 per cent.
of general practitioners gave it the thumbs down.
Does the right hon. Gentleman recall the promise of Bill Fyfe, chair of the Ayrshire and Arran health board:’ the decision rests and has always rested with the hospital doctors.
It cannot be otherwise: self governing will happen only with the doctors' approval and only if they are convinced that patients will benefit.’
I do not mourn for Mr. Fyfe, but is he to be branded a dishonest man because of the Government's insensitivity in railroading through these unwanted applications?
Just a fortnight ago, on 14 November, Councillor Mike Hastie, who is the Tory leader on Aberdeen district council, was reported as saying that he could not believe that the Government would now push through the measures.
In his view — I quote him precisely —’ it would be an act of sheer folly and I do not believe Mr. Lang is capable of that.’
He knows better now.
Does the Minister not recognise the dangers of fragmenting the health service and destroying the planning framework; the cost of ever-increasing bureaucracy; the reduction in choice for the doctor; the fear that this is a road that leads to a two-tier system in which money comes first and the Health Service is relegated to a safety-net, fallback provision?
In detail, will the Minister give the capital debt figure that will have to be shouldered by these three hospitals?
What percentage of this, in each case, is public dividend capital and what percentage interest-bearing debt?
Will he announce now the external financing limit for each hospital?
Is he satisfied that the complications arising from the ownership of a large part of the Foresterhill site by Aberdeen university have been overcome?
It is a disgrace that the Royal Scottish National hospital at Larbert is included in this misbegotten scheme.
A hospital dealing with the mentally handicapped is by no stretch of the imagination a candidate for the market mechanism.
The postponement to 1993 simply to await the Government's belated funding of community care will overcome none of the difficulties.
Finally, may I make it unambiguously clear that Labour will reverse the decisions on these three hospitals announced today and will do so immediately after the general election?
The policy is fundamentally wrong.
It commands no support and will damage the Health Service.
This is vandalism, all the more wounding because it is authorised by the Secretary of State who is supposed to protect Scotland's interests.
The scheme will not survive this Government, and will, indeed, contribute to their downfall.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) has not had the advantage that I have had of studying these applications with very great care, and it is quite clear that he has not addressed the issue in any great substance.
He talks about the hospitals being forced out of the main stream of the Health Service.
That is precisely the kind of distortions and misleading implications that he and his party have placed upon this exercise throughout the consultation process, which have led to so many people misunderstanding what it is all about.
It is hardly surprising that the national opinion poll carried out in Aberdeen showed that 75 per cent.
of the people asked thought that it was about privatisation, and that in Ayrshire a Systems Three poll showed 74 per cent.
thought that it was about privatisation or opting out of the health service, because the Labour party was putting about pamphlets saying such things as’ Now the Government is forcing our hospitals to opt out of the NHS.’
That is simply not true.
We are not forcing them out of the NHS; they will remain in the NHS, and the services will remain free at the point of delivery.
Indeed, I am persuaded that the central criteria against which I have had to measure these applications will be met, and that patient care will be advanced very considerably.
Greater autonomy and greater local flexibility, greater local ownership and decision making, will be of advantage to the hospitals which are receiving trust status.
The hon. Gentleman asked me about the degree of support from medical staff.
In the case of Foresterhill, all the main clinical departments have given their support to the proposal — a proposal that has been drawn up by a multidisciplinary team.
In the case of Larbert, there has been support for the application from the Institute of Health Services Management, the Forth Valley college of nursing and midwifery and the National Board for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting.
In the case of South Ayrshire, there has been support from a majority of consultants in general surgery, orthopaedics and radiology.
As for fragmenting the health service, that is not true.
When the hon. Gentleman reflects on the fact that 97 per cent.
of the services of the trusts will be purchased by the health boards he will see how self-evident is the nonsense that he talks about fragmentation.
The hon. Gentleman talked about a two-tier system.
I have been looking at the Labour party document for health in Scotland,’ A
Prescription for Change’.
It says that Labour will’ continue devolution of management to unions within health boards.’
It will’ devolve budgets’
Hon. Members —
To units.
Mr. Lang
Yes, to units.
It will’ devolve budgets to units, giving them a significant measure of control over their own finances.
The budget will be flexed in order to take account of work done.’
If we are contemplating a two-tier service, so is the Labour party.
The fact is that we are contemplating not a two-tier health service but a better health service.
These proposals will help to achieve it.
Mr. George Younger (Ayr)
Is my right hon. Friend aware —
Hon. Members
Is he a Member?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
He is a former Secretary of State.
Mr. Younger
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in Ayrshire we are extremely proud of the new hospital which was built from start to finish within five years, a record for anywhere in the country?
We expect it to produce even better services in the future.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that his announcement today means that the hospital will be under more local management than it was?
Will he confirm also that it will remain entirely within the national health service and that anyone who needs treatment will get it, as now, free of charge?
In contrast to the irresponsible and negative remarks of the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar), whose responsibility in his party for destroying the consultation process is well known, will my right hon. Friend confirm that, in future, the objective of the new hospital will be to produce even better services?
He can be assured, if that is so, that even those who disagreed with his decision will work together to make it a great success.
Mr. Lang
I am most grateful to my right hon. Friend.
I agree entirely with absolutely every point that he has made so effectively.
Among the benefits to patients that will be derived from trust status for south Ayrshire, I envisage the improved use of facilities, mainly theatres, enhancing cost-effectiveness, increasing throughput and reducing waiting times, upgrading the facilities at Ballochmyle and Biggart, as well as investment, for example, in a CAT scanner and a short-stay surgical unit, and perhaps in the longer-term investment in phase 2 being brought forward.
Those are some of the improvements that can be looked forward to at South Ayrshire under trust status.
I entirely share my right hon. Friend's view that we are concerned about improving health care and benefits to patients, which I believe trust status at South Ayrshire will achieve.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce (Gordon)
Will the Secretary of State accept that there are those of us who have never made the point that trust status is about opting out of the national health service, but have said that it is about local accountability and the views of local people?
Is it not also about turning a caring service into a business?
Is not the Secretary of State misrepresenting the consultation process when he denounces the people who have submitted representations?
Indeed, all the consultants, doctors, local health councils and general practitioners have expressed their opposition.
Does not the Secretary of State recognise that there is no confidence in the community in the type of managers he proposes to put in control of the trusts?
He knows that they are regarded simply as Tory party stooges put there to do a job on behalf of central office rather than to represent the interests of the people.
Will he accept that in a democracy, when people say no, they mean no?
Mr. Lang
That was an uncharacteristic and, I have to assume, an unintended attack by the hon. Gentleman on the present management qualities of the Foresterhill group of hospitals.
I have a high regard for Foresterhill and what it has achieved in the last few years under this Government.
The aims of the trust will be to build on the achievements, to become more responsive, to build a closer local link with the community and closer links with the health councils and with the GPs, to upgrade wards and facilities in the hospital, to upgrade theatres and equipment and to build on the success of recent years.
Of course, it is about greater and more local accountability and greater flexibility — we have that in common — and that is what the trust will deliver.
I am confident that the quality of the people who will be running it will be excellent.
Mr. Robert Hughes (Aberdeen, North)
Is the Secretary of State aware that his scandalous decision will be greeted by outrage not only in Aberdeen and the surrounding area by everyone connected with the medical and caring professions but by everyone right across the political spectrum in the north-east of Scotland, including the hapless Marcus Humphrey?
Is he aware that his information is totally wrong and that nothing in the application shows that patient care and services will improve under the trusts?
Is he not aware that every specialty at the Foresterhill site, with the exception of laboratory services, voted overwhelmingly to reject the trust?
Is it not the case that the right hon. Gentleman's delay in coming to the House to announce his decision is because, when he looked at the facts, he was minded to reject the application but was told by the puppet master sitting next to him that he had to make a political decision?
Mr. Lang
I have taken the decision to approve the trusts.
It was my decision.
I was required to take it in accordance with the published criteria.
When I was considering the applications from Foresterhill and others, I made it clear that I would not approve an application unless I was personally persuaded that the criteria would be met.
I regard the most important criterion as an improvement in the delivery of patient care by the hospital in question.
After the closest and most detailed scrutiny, I am absolutely persuaded that that will be achieved.
I am perfectly happy to be judged on the performance of those trusts in the years ahead
Hon. Members
You will be.
Mr. Lang
Indeed, I intend to remain very close to the development of the trust and to its inception on 1 April to ensure that all that has been promised will be delivered.
Sir Hector Monro (Dumfries)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the structure of the health service in Scotland is somewhat different from that in England and Wales, and that our area health boards are very much closer to the hospital management than is the case elsewhere?
How has my right hon. Friend come to judge the weight of opinion between those who wish to stay but to move forward into an area of ever better care in those hospitals against those who want a move into a future of some uncertainty?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The health boards in Scotland are very close to the hospitals, which is why I set considerable store by the approval that had been granted to the applications by the Grampian health board in the case of Foresterhill and by the Ayrshire and Arran health board in the case of South Ayrshire.
Their approval and commendation of the applications has featured in my consideration.
My hon. Friend talked about the future, but we do not need to look into the crystal ball when we can read the book.
Some hospitals south of the border already have trust status.
In Yeovil, in the constituency of the leader of the Liberal Democratic party, the number of patients waiting for more than 12 months has been reduced by 45 per cent., and the total waiting list is down by 10 per cent .
Since April, that trust has received 53 letters of complaint and 1, 344 letters of praise.
I look forward to a comparable result for trust-status hospitals in Scotland.
Mr. Martin O'Neill (Clackmannan)
Does not the Secretary of State understand that the people in the Forth Valley health board area will greet his decision with great dismay, especially the families of the mentally handicapped patients in that hospital, who do not have a vote, could not be consulted and who are now greatly exercised by the prospect of being cast into the free market system?
Does not the right hon. Gentleman realise that there will be outrage tonight in my constituency and in that of my hon. Friend the Member for Falkirk, East (Mr. Ewing) at his betrayal of the trust that has been placed in that hospital by the people in its care?
Mr. Lang
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman is wrong, because the consultants and management were unanimous in their support for trust status for Larbert.
The possible developments that the trust could achieve include more emphasis on research, on training and education, on challenging behaviour, and on autism and brain damage.
The trust contemplates many benefits for patients, including continuing the systematic assessments and the reductions in institutional accommodation, and has plans to break up the large wards and to increase the staff-patient ratio.
Does the hon. Gentleman really want to set his face against the improvements that trust status could deliver?
Mr. Dennis Canavan (Falkirk, West)
How on earth can the Secretary of State justify his disgraceful decisions, particularly on the Royal Scottish National hospital in my constituency, where the application for trust status was opposed by virtually the entire community, the patients' relatives association and 96 per cent.
of the staff?
Is the Secretary of State so arrogant that he thinks that he knows better than the people who are actively involved in the care of the mentally handicapped?
Is he so politically inept that he virtually signals to the people of Scotland that the only thing which will stop this arrant nonsense is the next general election, when he and his cronies will be swept out of power and the interests of patients will be put before political dogma?
Mr. Lang
If the hon. Gentleman sincerely believed that, he would not show so much artificial outrage.
He ignores the views of the managers and consultants in the health service.
I can understand why some in the medical profession express anxiety.
They understand the status quo and do not like the uncertainty of change.
There was a similar reaction when we reformed GP contracts, but now, with experience of the contracts, that anxiety is disappearing.
There was anxiety about the terms and conditions of future employment.
I can reassure the hon. Gentleman that the terms and conditions of junior doctors will continue to be negotiated nationally.
I see for Larbert the prospect of all the changes that I outlined in answer to the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar).
If I did not believe that those changes would benefit patients, I would not have approved the application.
Mr. Bill Walker (Tayside, North)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that his decisions on these hospitals will be remembered by many?
As on so many of the decisions taken in the past 12 years, such as the sale of council houses and other matters which the Opposition opposed, they have had to change their tune.
They will do so on NHS trusts, with the passage of time.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that he will look equally thoroughly and carefully at any proposals from hospitals in Tayside?
Mr. Lang
Yes, I will.
Indeed, other hospitals have expressed interest in growing and developing.
I expect further applications to come in during the next year and, with time, a growing number of applications as the benefits are seen to come through.
Mr. George Foulkes Carrick (Cumnock and Doon Valley)
Did not Donald MacNeill, the chief executive-designate of the South Ayrshire trust, give the game away last week when he compared trust hospitals with’ those remaining within the mainstream NHS’?
Is that not the truth?
Are not trusts the first step towards privatisation?
Will the Secretary of State confirm that there were 226 submissions in Ayrshire, 215 of which were against trust status, including 33 from medical, nursing and professional organisations?
Why does he arrogate to himself the claim to know more about patient care than all those professionals?
Is he not handing over public assets to a few of his Conservative cronies?
That amounts to legalised theft and corruption.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is characteristically over the top.
I do not arrogate to myself a knowledge superior to that of the professionals, but I have had imposed on me the obligation to exercise a quasi-judicial function in assessing applications.
I have done that after the most careful scrutiny.
The hon. Gentleman mentioned the number of submissions.
I have had more submissions than he said about South Ayrshire, but mostly they were tear-out strips from newspapers and from people who had been —
Mr. Brian Wilson (Cunninghame, North)
That is a lie!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I say to the hon. Gentleman, who is an Opposition Front Bench spokesman, that he must withdraw that comment.
Mr. Wilson
But it is true.
Mr. Speaker
In this Chamber we keep our standards.
’ Lie’is an unparliamentary word.
Mr. Wilson
The statement of fact is that there were 226 submissions —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I am not interested in that.
Will the hon. Member withdraw that allegation?
Mr. Wilson
I want the opportunity to state the fact, in which case I will withdraw the statement.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman might have listened to what I said.
I said that there had been substantially more submissions than the number he gave.
The figure that I have is about 800 submissions, but most of them were tear-out strips from newspapers.
I expect that the people who made them were influenced by the Labour party's’ Standard No. 17’, which was circulated among people in the area.
It said:’ What would opting out mean?
It would mean our new South Ayrshire hospital leaving the NHS as we know it and would pave the way for a two-tier health service in Ayrshire.’
It is precisely that type of distortion — misleading and alarming people — that has led to the public reaction.
The trouble is that too many people in the Labour party are more concerned with scaring than with caring.
Mr. William McKelvey (Kilmarnock and Loudoun)
The people of Ayrshire will be bitterly disappointed by the Secretary of State's announcement from the Dispatch Box.
However, they will not be surprised, because they know that, from the beginning, the consultative process has been an absolute rigged farce.
It was undemocratic and the Government were not telling the truth when they said that they would look at all the submissions in a fair and honest manner.
At least the Under-Secretary of State had the guts to say that at the Dispatch Box.
Putting aside the postcards that were sent to the Secretary of State, how many of the 226 written submissions were of the quality that he desired?
Perhaps the five, six or seven which were in favour of trust status.
The Labour party will win the next election.
The South Ayrshire hospital will revert to its previous status.
Managers of trust hospitals will be judged on their ability to manage and not as apparatchiks of a political dogma.
Mr. Lang
It is the ability of the proposed applicants to manage the trusts which has been borne in mind among the criteria that I have had to consider.
As I said earlier, we are also able to look at the successes being achieved by other trust status hospitals elsewhere.
In Kingston, for example, the list of those waiting more than 12 months has been reduced by 77 per cent .
and 1,600 more patients were treated than was planned.
In the Northern General hospital NHS trust, six new consultants have been appointed this year and 95 per cent.
of patients surveyed are either’ satisfied’or’very satisfied’with the service provided.
That is my ambition for trust status hospitals in Scotland, and that is what I believe that we shall achieve.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
Does the Secretary of State for Scotland remember that on 16 March, in an interview published in The Press and Journal (Aberdeen), he said that the option for trust status existed if the local will were in favour?
How on earth does he now reconcile that statement with the fact that he has ignored submissions from wherever they may have come, be it consultants or pensioners, GPs or the disabled, the elected district or regional councillors or Members of Parliament?
Is it the case that he merely dismisses those submissions with which he does not agree and proceeds in an autocratic fashion?
How on earth is it that, in London, where teaching hospitals are so highly regarded, the issue of trust status has been postponed indefinitely, but in Foresterhill a key teaching hospital is being asked to take trust status?
How much money has his Department spent in conjunction with the health board on those applications?
How much money is being spent on future applications?
How many are in the pipeline and how many are on his desk?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Lady will find the answer to her question about expenditure in a written answer which has been published in Hansard.
She referred to some applications in London with which she is especially preoccupied.
I have responsibility for assessing applications in Scotland.
I have assessed each application individually on its merits, carefully, against published criteria.
It is by comparison with the published criteria and all the information available to me that I have reached a judgment.
It would be quite wrong if I were to base my view solely on submissions from members of the public who have been unduly influenced by misleading information from other quarters.
The hon. Lady will know that there is an attractive £60 million new hospital in Elgin — the West Grampian unit — and that may well be among those expressing an interest in trust status in due course.
I will give the same careful scrutiny to that application, if it reaches me, as I shall give to applications from Princess Margaret Rose orthopaedic hospital, from Lothian college of nursing, from the Victoria infirmary in Glasgow or from any others which express interest.
I am concerned to ensure that we continue to build on our excellent record of improving health care in Scotland.
Mr. Nicol Stephen (Kincardine and Deeside)
What view did the Secretary of State take of the outcome of the Kincardine and Deeside by-election in reaching his decision?
He will be aware that all five candidates in that by-election were opposed to the Foresterhill opt-out.
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that he is creating in Scotland a clear position of elective dictatorship?
The situation is opposed by Conservatives in the north-east of Scotland and he is showing contempt for the people of the whole of Scotland.
But he is taking one major step forward today, and that is a step towards the cliff of political oblivion for the Conservative party in Scotland.
What is to happen to the land and buildings owned by Aberdeen university on the Foresterhill site?
Does the right hon. Gentleman intend to compensate or confiscate?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman raised that final issue as a scare during the by-election campaign
Hon. Members
Answer.
Mr. Lang
The answer is that the ownership will remain the same.
The health board's interest will transfer to the trust.
No difficulty will arise over that.
I must tell the hon. Gentleman that, as a new Member of Parliament, he should be more concerned with the possibility of improving the delivery of health care to his constituents.
That is what I am concerned with, and that is how I have measured the application.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the Kincardine and Deeside by-election, in the campaign for which he said in his special health service circular:’ Opting out is a dangerous first step towards market economics and privatisation of our health service.’
I know, and I hope he knows, that that is not true.
Indeed, his party leader, the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) said:
’ I do not believe that the Government's intention is, or ever has been, to privatise the health service.
Indeed, I believe that those who insist on scaremongering have done themselves and the NHS no good by concentrating on the privatisation scare.’
If the hon. Gentleman will not listen to me, perhaps he will listen to his party leader.
Mr. Brian Wilson (Cunninghame, North)
Will the Secretary of State now recognise that his unworthy but all too predictable statement that the 226 representations on the south Ayrshire opt-out included newspaper forms was in direct contradiction of veracity?
Will he further recognise that his announcement today, while totally predictable — nobody ever believed that a genuine consultation process was taking place — represents one of the final death knells for the discredited band of brigands who represent the Scottish Conservative party?
Does the right hon. Gentleman appreciate that, in Ayr alone, the Conservative party is already being torn apart?
Does he further appreciate that, throughout Ayrshire, people recognise that any additional assets that are poured into the South Ayrshire hospitals to make them work will be at the expense of the national health service in the rest of Ayrshire?
Does the right hon. Gentleman mercifully recognise that none of this will come to pass because, within days of this misguided, ideological order — introduced at the behest of the arch-agent of prejudice sitting beside him, the Minister of State — coming into being, there will be a change of government and none of it will happen?
Will he also recognise that I have never believed that there are no Tories in Scotland, for one Tory has spoken for Conservative respectability in Scotland, and he is the hon. Member for Dumfries (Sir H. Monro)?
The further the Government depart from that line, the more their fate is sealed, and the more richly that fate is earned.
Mr. Lang
I give the hon. Gentleman the benefit of the doubt and assume that he did not hear what I said, not once but twice, perhaps because of the noise coming from his hon. Friend the Member for Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley (Mr. Foulkes), seated beside him, who referred to 236 admissions.
I said that I had had rather more than that, and I referred to having had about 800, the large majority of which were tear-out newspaper slips, and a large majority of those would have been influenced by the leaflet, the Labour party’ Standard’, with its misleading, scaremongering, alarmist nonsense.
Surely the hon. Gentleman, as an Ayrshire Member, is interested in a trust that may be able to upgrade the facilities in the hospitals in the trust.
Surely he is interested in a trust that is willing to carry out further investment, keen to achieve the further development of a quality programme involving multi-disciplinary, quality action groups.
Those are the tangible improvements in health care that can be achieved by trust status.
The hon. Gentleman should withhold judgment and hope that I am right, and that we shall succeed in achieving those results.
Mr. Alexander Eadie (Midlothian)
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that today's statement clearly shows that he is a prisoner of the right wing of his political party, which is responsible for the demise of his party in Scotland?
Is he aware that his announcement today is not a triumph for the philosophy of trusts but a blow against democracy, consultation and the will of the people?
Does not he realise that, in making his announcement, he has, to some extent, signed his political death warrant?
Mr. Lang
No, I do not, because I believe that the electorate will judge by results and that, even before the trusts are up and running, they will begin to see the benefits that will flow from the trusts.
The hon. Gentleman said that my statement was a blow against consultation.
There was a three-month thorough consultation period for each specific trust, during which detailed application forms were sent out extensively.
In the case of Larbert, they were sent out to every applicant who sought them.
I have looked carefully over a period of weeks at those applications, and have reached the view that they deserve to be granted.
I am proud to be a member of a Government who have increased health spending in real terms since 1979 by nearly 40 per cent., treated 900,000 more people in Scotland last year than in the year in which we came into office, increased the number of nurses by more than 9,000 and now pay them 41 per cent .
more in real terms than when we came into office.
The hon. Gentleman should look back at the Labour party's record in government before he starts to criticise ours.
Mr. John Marshall (Hendon South)
May I congrat-ulate my right hon. Friend on ignoring the scaremongering campaign conducted by Opposition Members?
Is he aware that a similar campaign was carried out by the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) against trust hospitals in England, which have now delivered more patient care, cut waiting lists and been innovative in the service that they offer to patients?
Is he surprised that the hon. Member for Livingston now spends less time talking about trust hospitals than producing racing tips for the Glasgow Herald?
Moreover, is not the hon. Gentleman equally bad at both?
Mr. Lang
All I can say on that is that, as regards the delivery of patient care in the areas from which we have received trust applications, we are on to a winner.
My right hon. Friend represents a seat in the south and he will know that the Guy's and Lewisham NHS trust intends to improve the pay of more than 1,200 lower-paid workers by 6 per cent., and that it will treat some 6,000 more patients than planned.
There are many other examples of health trusts in England that are already up and running a year ahead of those in Scotland, from whose experience we can benefit.
We can draw considerable encouragement from the improved quality of their health care.
Mrs. Maria Fyfe (Glasgow, Maryhill)
It is interesting that the Secretary of State does not claim that he has a majority of public opinion on his side but merely that the very large majority against trust status was ill informed and listened to Labour propaganda.
Can the Minister assure the House that, if a general election goes against his wishes and people cross their ballot papers having been influenced by Labour propaganda, he will accept that result?
Mr. Lang
Of course I will accept an election result, as anyone would.
That is rather a silly question on such an important occasion.
If Labour Members abandon the trusts, which, from the terminology that I have quoted, are so close to their own policy, would they but acknowledge the fact, it is not the Conservative party that would be the loser but the delivery of patient care in Scotland.
Mr. Hattersley
I will give three examples, all of which the right hon. Gentleman has rejected in the past.
First, there should be a sentencing council, which would bring some consistency to sentencing and prevent people from being sent to prison for unreasonable periods.
Secondly, there should be a real assault upon the incompetence and inefficiencies of our courts, which would result in a reduction of the time men and women are held on remand and reduce pressure in that way.
Thirdly, some categories of offence should be removed from custodial sentencing.
In my view, it is wholly absurd, for instance, that maintenance defaulters should end up in prison, making sure that, whatever else happens, maintenance is not paid.
I could give many other examples, but those are three which the Home Secretary might work on straight away.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
Two of my constituents were awarded by the courts compensation for damage that a burglar had done in their house.
Instead of paying that compensation, the person concerned served an extra week in prison.
Is it not an absolute absurdity that that person should spend an extra week in prison and my elderly pensioner couple should not get compensation for the damage that they suffered as a result of the burglary?
Mr. Hattersley
It is not only an absurdity but an absurdity that victims of crime resent.
One of the great arguments for sentencing within the community is the opportunity that it ought to give the offender to make restitution in some way for the damage or hurt that he or she has caused.
Whenever I talk about these things anywhere in the country, I find that people who have been burgled or mugged, or have had items stolen from their vehicles would much prefer the young man or woman who committed the crime to do something to compensate or repay them instead of spending a brief time in prison, with all the disadvantages that that involves.
It was the Strangeways riot that resulted in Lord Justice Woolf's inquiry.
His report reveals that, at the time of the the disturbance, that prison had certified normal accommodation for 970 prisoners, but held 1,647 prisoners.
That, the report concludes,’ would make it difficult to provide a constructive regime which would have helped to alleviate the dehumanising effects of the insanitary and unsatisfactory physical conditions within the prison.’
Even at Glen Parva, a modern prison, which rioted shortly after Strangeways, the CNA was 612 and the actual prison population was 778.
All the prisons which, having experienced riots, were examined by Lord Justice Woolf held more prisoners than the certified normal accommodation figure.
Yet the Home Secretary does not legislate to deal with the cause of disturbances.
Mr. John Greenway
I am not entirely out of sympathy with what the right hon. Gentleman is saying on this, but I would remind him that we have seen disturbances recently at the prison at Full Sutton, near York, which is not even full; there are still empty cells.
Mr. Hattersley
I am not saying that disturbances always have a single cause.
I am saying that Lord Justice Woolf, who produced an authoritative report on prison riots and the improvement of prison conditions — admittedly, a report that does not recommend the one thing that the Home Secretary has chosen to do, but a report which the Home Secretary wrongly described as comprehensive — draws attention time after time to the simple fact that all prisons that rioted in 1990 and were the subject of the inquiry were so overcrowded that many of the proper duties that prisons should perform were not being and could not be performed.
By dealing with the crisis in prisons by a Bill of this sort rather than dealing first and fundamentally with the overcrowding situation, the Home Secretary is attacking the symptoms, not the causes.
It is the sort of legislation that comes from a cosmetics salesman.
It attempts to paint over the blemishes rather than remove them.
The conclusion that this Bill is a pointless publicity exercise is reinforced by an examination of the way in which previous Home Secretaries — Conservative Home Secretaries, I might say — have dealt with the issue of prison mutiny.
In 1985, the Prior committee on prison disciplinary systems recommended that such an offence should be created.
However, a year later, the Public Order Act 1986, which applies as much inside prisons as outside, became law.
It created a statutory offence of riot — 12 or more people using or threatening violence for an unlawful purpose.
That offence carries a maximum sentence of 10 years, the same period as appears in this mutiny Bill.
It created other offences — violent disorder, affray and threatening behaviour.
The White Paper,’ The Prison Disciplinary System’, published in the following year, 1986, concluded that, because of the new offence of riot, a prison mutiny Bill was no longer necessary.
Indeed, it was explicit in its judgment that the Public Order Act had made a new offence of prison riot unnecessary.
A previous Tory Home Secretary wrote in the White Paper:’ Since the Prior committee's report was published, the Government's Public Order Bill has been put before Parliament Given the restructuring of public order offences in the Public Order Bill, the Government's view is that there is no need for a further public offence of prison mutiny.’
The Home Secretary has not even tried to explain why the Government have changed their mind or why he has rejected the published judgment of his predecessor.
The only possible explanation is that the new Bill is needed as a diversion, an event to divert attention from the real needs of the prison system, needs which the Government do not and will not face.
Clause 2 amends the Prison Act 1952 so as to increase the penalty for sending anything into prison with the intent to facilitate an escape.
That is presumably the product of what we now know about the Brixton prison escape.
We still do not know the full story of Brixton; therefore, we do not know the truth.
Since the Bill relates to that breakout, I take the opportunity to tell the Home Secretary once more that sooner or later he will have to be frank with the House and the country about what occurred at Brixton and about what he knew.
It is now established beyond doubt that special branch officers arranged for a prison officer to discuss escape plans with the two suspects who are still at large.
It is also certain that the Home Secretary knew of the special branch involvement by the time he made his statement on Judge Tumim's inquiry.
Yet he chose to keep it secret and blamed officers of the prison service for what happened.
I understand that another television programme, dealing directly with what the Home Secretary chose not to reveal although it was known to him, is to be broadcast on Thursday.
I warn him that the subject will not go away until he is frank with the House and the country.
Our confidence in the Home Secretary and in his ability to handle the crisis in our prisons might be slightly restored if, even at this late stage, he gave the House and the country the full facts about the Brixton breakout.
I doubt if he will accept my advice.
Instead, he will rely on Bills such as the one we are debating, at best irrelevant, at worst unreasonable —
Mr. Mark Wolfson (Sevenoaks) rose
Mr. Hattersley
This is my final sentence; then I shall sit down so that other hon. Members may take part in the debate.
I think the Whip wants to say something to me.
Interruption
Mr. Irvine Patnick (Sheffield, Hallam) indicated dissent.
Mr. Hattersley
No, the Whip does not want to say something to me.
I repeat that the Home Secretary will rely on Bills like this, which are at best irrelevant and at worst unreasonable.
The main casualty will be his already damaged reputation.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
We have come to expect that the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) will pour scorn on every idea which does not emanate from himself.
Her Majesty's Opposition are expected to oppose — that is their constitutional position — but they are not expected to oppose everything whenever, whatever and however it is put forward.
I should have thought that good sense would dictate that someone who opposes every measure begins to lose credibility.
The right hon. Member, who opposes everything so vehemently, has very little credibility left on this subject.
The right hon. Gentleman said that a reduction in the prison population was the way to improve the position in prisons.
I listened with great care to discover how his brilliant mind would explain how in a society so apparently lawless there was a brilliant way of reducing the prison population.
All that the right hon. Gentleman could come up with were three proposals.
The first was that fine defaulters should not be sent to prison; but very few are.
What sanction does the right hon. Gentleman suggest for those who persistently flout the view of the court that somebody is able to pay but refuses to do so?
Secondly, the right hon. Gentleman suggested that there should be a speedier process.
We all want a speedier process and therefore fewer remand prisoners.
The problem with recent miscarriages of justice has been that the police have not done a thorough enough job.
To do a thorough job, the police need more time.
Thirdly, the right hon. Gentleman suggested that in some miraculous way a sentencing council would relieve the pressure on prisons.
If a court has sentenced somebody to prison for an excessive length of time, there is already a sentencing council — the Court of Appeal, which can reduce the sentence.
If the right hon. Gentleman wants more and more bureaucratic institutions set up to do the work of existing institutions, he had better say so.
I was totally unconvinced that he, any more than anyone else, has a solution to the amount of crime and the necessity to send people to prison.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary on the Bill, which provides for tougher action against prisoners who wish to carry out their war against society after conviction and sentence from within — or worse, outside — the prison to which they have been sentenced.
The public are thoroughly fed up with prisoners smashing up prisones, which then have to be repaired at vast expense to the taxpayer, and with attempted escapes which cause injury to dedicated prison officers.
Still more are the public fed up with escapes which succeed, and they will be appalled to hear from my right hon. Friend that the cost of damage to our prisons last year exceeded £100 million.
The Bill is the latest in a long line of measures to protect society from criminals and to improve the penal system.
A succession of Conservative Home Secretaries have ensured that we now have the largest prison building programme this century, with nine prisons built and 4,000 places provided, and 12 new prisons on the way.
We appointed a superb chief inspector of prisons, Judge Tumim, and set up the Woolf commitee on prison reform, which has produced an excellent report.
As a result, we shall end overcrowding by 1995 and slopping out by 1994.
We are funding prison security much more excessively than in the past.
We have ended some of the petty things like routine censorship of letters, and we have increased family visits.
More to the point, we have considerably improved, by increasing their numbers, the service provided by prison officers.
There are 4, 700 more prison officers, with 1,600 on the way, and 3,000 fewer prisoners, so the prison population has risen by 7 per cent.
while the prison service has increased by 47 per cent.
We have a better staff-inmate ratio than France or west Germany, and if we include prison auxiliaries and night patrols, we do not compare all that badly with the Scandinavian countries.
If it becomes obvious that the first private prison at Wolds, which is to be run by Group 4, is a success, I hope that the burden on the prison system will be further lightened by the extension of private prison building and private prison management, certainly for remand prisoners as there can be no sensible objection to treating unconvicted prisoners better than convicted prisoners.
I think that we can all applaud my right hon. Friend for the other improvements in prison security about which he has told us.
In all these matters Government prison policy has been positive, constructive and beneficial.
We have no need to take lectures from the Opposition, who presided over the slashing of prison building by 29 per cent.
while the prison population rose by 14.5 per cent.
The Liberal Democrats, starkly represented by the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland (Mr. Maclennan), seem to concentrate on reducing the use of prison rather than on anything else.
Of course, there is still a considerable task ahead for Government in improving the penal system.
It is not much use improving the number and quality of the prison buildings if the prison management does not also improve.
There is clearly much room for improvement in a number of management areas, such as the co-ordination of intelligence within prisons and the co-ordination of response.
It is no secret that the governor of Brixton prison knew on 4 February 1991 that a breakout from the prison was being actively contemplated by IRA terrorists in the prison, yet they were not split up or moved.
It seems that they were not closely watched — and the inevitable happened.
I warn the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook — I hope that he will accept that I do so in the best possible spirit — not to be carried along by media representations of what happened at Brixton.
One of my constituents is the prison officer allegedly involved in those activities, and he strongly insists that the portrayal of what happened in Brixton in last week's Thames Television programme is totally wrong.
When the inquiry has been completed, we shall all know what happened, but in the meantime I warn the right hon. Gentleman that all is not as portrayed on the media.
To give the House another example of a fault in the management of the prison service, I remember taking part in a case several years ago involving a prison breakout.
Some convicted men went over the wall and the judge, who was born in that very prison, called for an improvement in security at the prison.
It was Brixton prison.
I do not know how many men have since gone over the same wall, but there have been several even recently.
Yet not very much seems to have been done to make that wall unclimbable.
That is not the fault of the prison governor; it is the fault of the prison service, for which my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary and his predecessors have the unavoidable responsibility.
There is something wrong with the management of the prison service when the Prison Officers Association has 70 disputes in 41 prisons.
Indeed, there is so much dissatisfaction with that union from within the prison service that another union, the Prison Service Union, is being set up and I understand that it has so far received 1,000 pledges from prospective members.
Mr. David Trimble (Upper Bann)
It is not recognised.
Mr. Lawrence
Indeed, the question is when my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary will recognise it.
I hope that the proposed union will receive more support not only from the Government but from the House, because not having a monopoly union in the prison service must be healthy, especially if the monopoly union brings about so many disputes.
Mr. Robin Corbett (Birmingham, Erdington)
As the hon. and learned Gentleman is asking questions about the management of our prisons, what has he to say about the management of a prison service in which, 12 months after a learned judge advises the Home Secretary to move suspected and convicted terrorists from Brixton prison, they are still there?
Mr. Lawrence
The hon. Gentleman makes a fair point, which is not very different from the point that I was making about what the governor of Brixton prison knew several months before those IRA terrorists broke out.
I accept that the hon. Gentleman has made a fair point.
Perhaps my right hon. Friend the Minister of State will respond by telling the House what she knows when she replies to the debate.
There are other examples of management failures.
Old Bailey barristers are being prevented from having conferences with their clients at Brixton prison by prison officers, the prison service, or both.
If one wishes to interview a client, one has to give notice about a week in advance, and sometimes interviews are cancelled at the last minute on the diktat of whoever is running Brixton prison.
That is outrageous, as judges at the Old Bailey have made clear, but judges have no power over the running of the Prison Service.
That again is a management failure, and improvements must be made.
I am therefore pleased that my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary has recognised the importance of such management failures and that he has appointed Admiral Sir Raymond Lygo to improve management in the prison service.
We can only hope that that review will be followed by sensible action.
It is worth noting that the Woolf report also drew attention to those management problems, as has the director of the prison service, Mr. Joe Pilling.
Management is at fault and we must clean it up.
I know that my right hon. Friend takes this matter seriously.
With regard to the Bill, after 30 years at the criminal Bar and 35 years in politics, I have been driven reluctantly to the conclusion that fear is a more effective motivator of human behaviour than anything else, especially when dealing with people of ill will.
I have seen too many offenders laughing at the courts for their weaknesses, too many malcontents exploiting the absence or inadequacy of the law, and too many criminals making the cool assessment that the risk of detection is well worth taking.
As a result, I share the preponderant view that shorter sentences are often worse than longer sentences.
It would be better for law and order if criminals were deterred by the possibility of receiving a longer sentence.
Mrs. Teresa Gorman (Billericay)
I entirely support my hon. and learned Friend's view that people should be afraid of the law and of being caught, but does he agree that boredom has played an important role in prison riots?
I hope that our reforms will make it possible for prisoners to do some useful form of work in prison.
That trend is growing in America.
It enables prisoners to pay off their debts to society by working hard and banking the money.
Mr. Lawrence
My hon. Friend is a charming relative newcomer to this place and we are delighted that she is here, but if she had been here as long as I have — getting on for 18 years now — she would have heard me banging on about exactly that point.
I am pleased to have her support.
It is necessary to turn our prisons into workplaces in which the inmates do not receive parole but can work their way out of prison by dedicated activity, which should be properly paid so that they can compensate those whom they have wronged and pay something back into the system.
I am pleased that the idea that we should turn our prisons into workplaces is slowly beginning to take hold.
The Woolf report gave some articulation to it.
Apart from anything else, if prisons were places where criminals had to work, fewer of them would want to go to prison.
Harsher sentences are necessary to make fear a dominant element in deterrence.
It might not be a wholly popular view among pundits, but I am sure that it will be wholly popular among the people that the Bill should provide the power to impose deterrent sentences.
Of course, not every would-be escaper would be deterred by the fear of a harsher sentence, but even now some prisoners refuse to go along with escape or mutiny plans due to fear of the consequences.
The Bill will ensure that many more prisoners will refuse to join or support others' plans to forgo the consequences of their offending.
Only the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook could describe that as a pointless publicity exercise.
I hope that the provisions will reach the statute book quickly.
Mr. Robert Maclennan (Caithness and Sutherland)
The hon. and learned Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) persisted in talking about the new harsher penalties that would be available under the Bill.
I believe that he was misleading the House and the country by those assertions, because the burden of the case of those of us who think that the Bill is completely irrelevant to the problems of our prisons which it purports to tackle is that the penalties already exist in the Public Order Act 1986, for which the Government can legitimately take credit.
The Bill does nothing to increase the powers of the courts if order should break down inside a prison, although it touches in a new way on some of the matters relating to aiding and abetting an escape outside a prison.
But that was not the burden of the case made by the hon. and learned Member for Burton, any more than it was the Home Secretary's case when he spoke in commendation of the Bill.
It was notable that, in his introductory speech, the Home Secretary devoted very little time to the content of the Bill and scarcely sought to justify it.
Mr. Lawrence
It is a short Bill.
Mr. Maclennan
That does not diminish the need to explain and justify the complete volte face by the Home Office.
Mr. Lawrence
It is not a volte face.
Mr. Maclennan
Yes, it is.
In 1986, the Home Office, under a previous Home Secretary, published a White Paper in which it explicitly rejected the proposal to introduce a new crime of prison mutiny.
I cannot understand why the hon. and learned Gentleman says that it is not so.
It is there in black and white.
It was recommended initially by the Prior committee that an offence such as we are considering tonight should be created.
The Government rejected it for precisely the reasons that I mentioned.
The instruments for punishing prison rioters were already available and the offence was unnecessary.
Like the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), I thought hard and long about why the Government had reversed their decision.
What change of circumstances had come about which made them take an entirely different view?
One recoils from the obvious answer, which is that the Home Secretary wants yet again to produce a cheap headline in the popular press such as’ Crackdown on crime’, by producing, as the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook said, a modest and short Bill.
The Home Secretary is receiving a disproportionate amount of attention from the press for the action that he has taken.
There might have been some other more rational explanation, but it was not furnished to the House by the Secretary of State.
I will deal with what he said in a moment.
The Secretary of State did not tell us that there had been a change in circumstances since the Government rejected the Prior report.
The change is in the procedures proposed for adjudication on offences in prisons by boards of visitors.
It may be argued that, in 1986, the Government rejected the idea of abandoning the adjudicatory role of the prison visitors board, which was part of the Prior recommendations, so, as they had gone some way to changing the internal discipline regime, they might reasonably look again at Prior.
But we had none of that from the Secretary of State tonight.
Instead, we had the bizarre suggestion that prison order was likely to be more easily maintained if, on entering a prison, prisoners were given a little package telling them the consequences of their actions if they stepped out of line.
An Act of Parliament is not necessary to do that.
I am not averse to packs of information on what happens when someone goes into prison.
It seems to be part of the Woolf proposal for compacts and for making prisoners fully aware of what is happening in prisons and what the plans are.
The provision of such packs of information is concomitant with that proposal.
However, if prisoners are at risk of sentence under the Public Order Act 1986, the pack of information can explain that just as easily as it can explain the contents of this miserable and irrelevant little Bill.
Once again, the Home Secretary has recognised that there is a problem.
He feels that he must do something about it.
He must persuade the public that he is doing something quickly, never mind the effectiveness of what he is doing.
When there were tragic cases of dangerous dogs assaulting young children, the Home Secretary had to produce a Bill overnight.
It was then withdrawn and another Bill was introduced, just so that we could have a crackdown on dangerous dogs.
So, when there are riots and problems in prisons, we have to have a speedy and instantaneous responses from the Home Secretary, which is presented as the solution to the problem.
Candidly, that will not wash.
The Bill is scarcely worth opposing.
I wholly agree with the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook that it would be inappropriate to oppose the Bill on Second Reading, but, like the right hon. Gentleman, I intend to look closely at what happens to it during its passage through the House.
It will have damaging consequences which willl flow from it not being targeted tightly on violent offences, as the Home Secretary suggested that it was.
Violent offences gave rise to the need in the Home Secretary's mind to introduce the Bill.
The word’ violent’does not appear in the Bill.
If a prisoner disobeys an instruction to place his laundry in a certain basket, he will be at some risk of being found guilty of mutiny under the Bill.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold) indicated dissent.
Mr. Maclennan
The Minister of State shakes her head.
It may be that, if the matter went to the Director of Public Prosecutions, he would take the view that the matter was not sufficiently serious to prosecute, but that is not the point.
The point is that the definition of the offence in clause 1(1) (b) is so wide that any stepping out of line could constitute prison mutiny.
As Lord Richard said most eloquently and correctly in another place, the only new element of the offence is that it is non-violent and is almost certainly conducted without conspiracy or the involvement or others.
In an intervention during the Home Secretary's speech, I asked whether he had consulted or heard from the Prison Governors Association about the Bill.
Perhaps the Minister of State will be kind enough to inform the House who was consulted before the Government introduced the Bill, and who approves of it.
We had some anecdotal evidence from the Home Secretary that one or two prison governors whom he happened to run into in recent weeks said that the Bill might not be a bad thing.
The Prison Governors Association has told me clearly that it opposes the Bill on the grounds that the measures that it contains are’ too draconian’— I use its exact words.
No one is more anxious that the penalties should be apt for the crime than those most immediately affected by prison disorder.
The prison governors have said that it is too draconian, and the Prison Officers Association has expressed the view that it is an unnecessary knee-jerk reaction to a deeply serious problem.
However, I recognise that the Prison Officers Association does not carry much weight with the Government at present.
Notwithstanding the scope of Lord Justice Woolf's inquiry, he did not recommend that the new crime of prison mutiny should be introduced.
I have not at any point heard Judge Tumim suggest that such a crime is appropriate.
I can only assume that, as the matter was extensively discussed earlier, they thought that the issue was dead and that there was no point in discussing it, because the arguments had been so effectively canvassed and dismissed that the Government would not contemplate introducing such an offence.
The extensive and widely approved report from Lord Justice Woolf said nothing about introducing an offence of prison mutiny.
The Government appear to be flying in the face of that report.
If the Government have received no recommendations that an offence of prison mutiny is necessary or desirable from anyone involved in the management of prisons, from what other organisations have they had such recommendations?
Have the Government considered the experience in Northern Ireland or Scotland?
Both countries have suffered prison violence, disorder and breakouts.
Indeed, in Scotland, the power of a governor to limit remission is about half the power of a governor in England.
Nevertheless, as far as I am aware, there is no pressure to align the law in Scotland with the Government's proposal.
The Secretary of State for Scotland has not introduced a measure of this type.
I wonder why.
I wonder whether the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland was consulted about his experiences.
The situation in the three separate parts of the United Kingdom is not so radically different that it is appropriate to establish different crimes as part of the panoply of the law for dealing with offences in prisons.
Mr. Lawrence
Is the hon. Gentleman in favour of reducing the age of consent in homosexual offences to 16?
If so, Scotland has a different approach to such matters from that of the rest of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Maclennan
That has nothing to do with the matter under debate.
I do not propose to get involved in what is clearly a diversionary tack.
That is a Conservative tactic: when faced with a difficult question, they invariably try to divert attention by mentioning another issue.
In the Bill, the Home Secretary has sought to divert the public's attention from the powerful recommendations in the Woolf report.
He has failed to give a timetable for the implementation of those proposals, to set out a schedule which would carry weight and to tackle the problems at base.
Instead, he has produced a little Bill which has no friends and which the House will not find —
Mr. Steve Norris (Epping Forest)
That is why no one is going to vote against it tonight.
Mr. Maclennan
As I explained to the normally silent Parliamentary Private Secretary, it is not appropriate to vote against a Bill of this sort at this stage.
Mr. Lawrence
The hon. Member seems to agree with it.
Mr. Maclennan
I think that my comments will be taken by a fair commentator as fairly hostile to the Bill.
I certainly hope that is the message that got through.
Clause 1(2) (b) is the part of the Bill which runs the greatest risk of causing mischief.
It is far too widely drafted.
If the Home Secretary does not want the Bill to do serious damage to internal discipline in prisons, resulting in matters that should be dealt with by internal disciplinary procedures going to court and taking up the time of the criminal justice system — making it far more difficult for prison governors to run their prisons — he had better look again at that clause and amend it.
He must tighten that clause and accept the argument that he claimed to be attempting to grasp, which is to target the offence on violent offenders.
The Bill will win few friends.
We shall wait to see what happens in Committee before deciding what our attitude to it should be.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
I give a general welcome to the Bill.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary telescoped his remarks.
I had hoped to intervene to ask him about the extent of the Bill, but he sat down very rapidly at the end of his speech.
An important issue in terms of the application of the Bill is contained in clause 3(3), which says:’ This Act extends to England and Wales only.’
Apart from the general belief of many constitutionalists that all Acts of Parliament should apply to the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland, that is a real mistake.
Some parts of the Bill are relevant to an attempted escape.
A trainer containing a weapon was sent from Northern Ireland to assist an escape quite recently.
The person receiving the parcel in prison could be prosecuted under the Bill, but the dispatcher could not be dealt with because the Bill does not apply to Northern Ireland.
This is a fairly modest and harmless little Bill.
We must get to the cause of the mutinies that have occurred, especially the mutiny at Strangeways, which was probably the most recent, and the savage mutiny at Gartree in my constituency not so long ago.
As the Home Secretary said, the Bill touches on one of the chief causes of the mutiny at Strangeways — shocking overcrowding.
There were 1,647 inmates in a prison designed for 970.
We must have more prisons, more staff, and better conditions for both staff and prisoners.
It must be Government policy to give the lifer some dignity.
Hon. Members have already discussed the Bill briefly, but I must mention clause 1(2) (a) again.
As has already been said, prisoners frequently’ engage in conduct which is intended to further common purpose of overthrowing lawful authority in that prison’.
There is a sound reason for rewording that clause, because that is too frequent an occurrence in day-to-day life in prison.
Clause 1(2) states that there is a mutiny’ where two or more prisoners while on the premises of any prison’engage in certain conduct.
Two is the obvious number, but in certain circumstances a case could be made for one prisoner or three prisoners.
The Woolf report referred to overcrowding, the need for more staff and, above all, the need for meaningful, educational training and a constructive programme of jobs for prisoners.
That is absolutely essential.
The security of any prison hinges on the attitude and conduct of prisoners.
If they are held in overcrowded conditions, unfit for a dog to live in, and have no meaningful occupation — I do not mean soulless, non-productive work — they have no alternative but to fall into mischief and cause trouble.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) referred to the need to give prisoners some work.
I agree, but it must be meaningful work.
The trouble is that that is not easily obtained.
It is all very well for us to say that we must ensure that prisoners are properly employed, but when the unemployment figures increase every month in the east midlands, there is resentment and resistance to prison inmates engaging in meaningful work as such work would probably take away jobs outside the prison.
We must get around that conflict.
The work must be meaningful, and it must satisfy the prisoners.
As my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton said that the work should ideally enable prisoners to earn a remission on part of their sentence, or it could earn money to pay compensation to victims.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton also referred to the need to maintain what he described as the quality of managers in prisons, and my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary has also spoken about that.
I have in my constituency the prison at Gartree and the young offenders centre at Glen Parva.
It has been noted at Gartree that the better the governor, the more quickly he goes.
If, as I understand, that is Home Office policy, an explanation is needed.
I speak from experience, having met many Gartree governors.
Some have been brilliant, others not so brilliant, but the more successful they are, the more quickly they seem to go, often within a year.
The Home Office may think it necessary on security grounds to make regular changes, perhaps believing that it would be undesirable for the routines of governors to be known to the general public.
Even so, the present policy seems to prevent our getting the best from some of the good male and female governors we have.
Need they be rotated so rapidly?
In 1987 there was an escape from Gartree.
Clause 2 recommends that the maximum penalty for assisting a prisoner to escape should be increased from five to 10 years' imprisonment.
I share the doubt that has been expressed about that change.
Some of those involved in the helicopter escape from Gartree would not have been deterred by life imprisonment.
Adding another five years to any possible sentence seems pointless, especially as some of those involved may already be serving that length of time.
The proposal seems no more than a window dressing exercise.
We learned some lessons from the escape at Gartree.
At the time, there was much unease in my constituency because, although Gartree is reasonably isolated, it is only two or three miles from the centre of Market Harborough, with its population of more than 15,000 people.
There was terror in the neighbourhood for a long time afterwards.
That made me realise how much we depend on the prison officers and the fantastic security systems that have been built up.
We depend on them and, by and large, they do their jobs brilliantly.
Mr. David Martin (Portsmouth, South)
It is a pleasure to follow the hon. Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe).
I do not agree with his analysis about the Government looking after number one and therefore encouraging people to commit crime.
I do not believe, first, that there was any less crime under a Labour Government — in fact crime increased under every Labour Government I can remember — or, secondly, that encouraging people to better themselves, to make decisions for their lives and to improve their economic position has anything whatever to do with dishonest methods of doing just that.
Although such a view is typical of some Opposition attitudes, it will never be accepted by Conservative Members.
I wish to continue in that uncontroversial strain by referring to one or two opening comments by the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), who described the Bill as being produced merely to catch headlines and as an illusion of activity.
If the previous Labour Government in which he served had only caught a few more headlines and been as active in prison improvements and new prison building as all Conservative Governments since 1979 have been, his comments could be taken more seriously.
I remind the right hon. Gentleman that, under Labour in the 1970s, the prison population grew by about 15 per cent., while capital spending was cut by 20 per cent. , a fact to which my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) referred earlier.
Mr. John Greenway
Hear, hear.
Mr. Martin
As my hon. Friend the Member for Ryedale (Mr. Greenway), who makes encouraging noises, has also said — and it is worth repeating — spending on prison buildings has risen by leaps and bounds, with many new establishments being opened, providing extra places, while fewer prisoners now share cells, and slopping out is being phased out earlier than anyone thought possible.
Those are facts, not just headlines or illusions.
Of course, the running of prisons and their security and good order rely crucially on the staff working in them.
It is self-evident that, without manpower of sufficient quality and in sufficient numbers, it does not matter how many technological advances or improvements there are.
The prison officer using his eyes and ears is the first security patrol.
I have been most impressed by the strength of this basic common sense at Her Majesty's prison in Kingston, which is in my constituency.
It is a category B prison.
It holds 150 prisoners, all serving life sentences.
It is a case of each to his own cell with no slopping out.
That has been the case for lifers since 1970.
There are particular challenges in running a prison which has only those serving life sentences in it, yet it was not until earlier this year that any escape from that prison took place.
It involved one prisoner who was recaptured soon afterwards.
From the outset, that prison has been well governed.
The first woman governor, Miss Muriel Allen, retired a little while ago and has been succeeded by Mr. Roy Merricks.
That prison has been well governed by both governors while I have been Member of Parliament for Portsmouth, South.
It has also been a tenet of good security that prisoners should spend the maximum time outside their cells being kept busy working.
Of course that makes sense, as hon. Members have said.
Plotting, planning and trouble-making are far less likely to take place under such a regime.
Many people contribute positively to the right atmosphere at Kingston.
Without their dedicated service, the prison would not be run so well as it is.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton referred to the 1,000 members of the Prison Service Union, which is seeking recognition from the Home Office.
I understand that the figure is now nearer 1,500, with more than 30 members at Kingston.
In the past two years, I have been in touch with my right hon. Friend the Minister of State and her predecessors on the recognition point.
I urge her to recognise that union without further delay.
It will not please members of the Prison Officers Association, who have kept me well informed over the years.
I do not dissent from much of what the hon. Member for Wakefield said about members of the Prison Officers Association.
Always on my visits to Kingston I am treated with courtesy and consideration.
As a result, I have always reported concerns to the various Ministers ultimately responsible for the prison and have obtained responses.
I refer not only to issues about manpower and conditions arising out of the implementation of’ fresh start’but to the clear opposition to privatisation of prison services, prisons or remand centres, on which I do not agree.
In my view, there is scope for such development.
I agree with my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton and my hon. Friend the Member for Ryedale on that point.
Those policies will be pursued by a Government who have proved beyond doubt to those working in the prisons their commitment to prison expansion and improvement as well as necessary increases and efficient practices in manpower.
That must be contrasted with what occurred under Labour, and no doubt will occur again should we ever be unfortunate enough to have another Labour Government.
Labour Governments are always constrained by cost considerations and by the financial disasters brought on by all the spending commitments that they claim are priorities and then have to jettison one by one.
Prisons would come well down the list of priorities should Labour ever be in government, and those working in the prisons would soon discover that, too.
Good industrial relations are in the interests of everybody working in prisons.
Without them, as the White Paper’ Custody, Care and Justice’says,’there can be no assurance that resources’— which means money, and I wish that people would say’money’rather than’resources’—’devoted to the prison service will be used effectively and efficiently in a way which fulfils the obligations of the prison service.’
Finally, in the interests of security, I welcome the Government's action as set out in the Bill.
Of course the Bill will not sort out all the problems — it does not pretend to do that — but I wish it well in its passage through the House.
Mr. Keith Vaz (Leicester, East)
I do not believe that the Government would have introduced the Bill had a Woolf not been at the door.
Of course we welcome the Woolf report and its careful examination of what happened during the Strangeways riot.
Like the hon. Member for Ryedale (Mr. Greenway), I am a member of the Home Affairs Select Committee.
I was not able to join the hon. Gentleman on his visit to Strangeways, but the Committee decided to initiate an inquiry and report into precisely what happened at Strangeways.
We were aware that, because of the Woolf inquiry, it was not possible to go into great detail into what happpened at Strangeways.
Like the hon. Gentleman, my impressions of what I saw are the recollections of a person who was shocked by the wanton destruction that occurred during the riot.
I visited the chapel at Strangeways prison to see the great destruction that had occurred, and I wondered whether human beings could have been responsible for it.
I was escorted around the prison by members of the Prison Officers Association.
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe), I pay tribute to the work of the Prison Officers Association.
I deplore the recent attacks by Ministers and others on the association and what it is doing.
It is putting forward the best possible case for the prison service.
Of course its members gain because they work in the service, but they put forward their views because they want to make sure that the service does not collapse under the strain and we do not have a repetition of the destruction that we saw at Strangeways.
I pay tribute also to the work of the newly appointed governor of Leicester's prison on Welford road, Gerry Ross.
I visited the prison four weeks ago, and I met him and members of the association.
I also spoke to prisoners.
Like many prisons in this country, Leicester prison is overcrowded.
The message that I received from the governor and from the hard-working members of the association who work at Welford road is that there is a need for more resources to be put into the prison service.
I look forward to the Home Secretary telling the Home Affairs Select Committee what he proposes to do with the prison service.
I put him on notice that we shall ask him what he has done to provide extra resources to the prison service.
We will ask him to justify the fact that so many prisons remain overcrowded.
We will want to know what he is doing to address the POA's concerns about the operation of’ fresh start’.
The right hon. Gentleman is smiling in anticipation of his forthcoming visit to the Committee.
However, I give him notice that these are some of the questions that we shall be asking him, because they are very important indeed.
Although the legislation before us will provide some elements and go some way towards meeting the criticisms of Government policy outlined in the Woolf report, it is important to realise that there is still a great deal that needs to be done.
I look forward to seeing the amendments that will be tabled by my right hon. Friend for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) and others when they look in a measured way at the Bill and seek to amend it to provide the support for the prison service that is so desperately needed.
I want also and in particular to draw attention to the grave concern that I and others feel about the number of young people being held in prisons.
If there is a need for legislation in areas of prison policy, surely this is one area that ought to be considered very quickly by the Government.
I refer the Home Secretary and the Minister to the article that appeared in The Guardian on Wednesday, 20 November, which gave the comments of the governor of the young offenders centre at Feltham in Middlesex.
Reacting to the death of a young man in custody, he said:’ I personally wish to say how abhorrent it is to have to deal with children, because that is what Geoffrey was — a child in a penal setting — and under the conditions in which I have to run Feltham, for want of staff.’
That is what the governor of that offenders centre had to say, and I should be very interested to know what the Minister of State has done since she read that report in the newspaper.
The governor referred to a system that was bankrupt of compassion.
Why that is so extraordinary is that governors of institutions of that kind tend not to want to give interviews to the press; they keep their views very much to themselves.
They may speak to Members of Parliament and Ministers on a confidential basis, but it is very unusual to come out in terms of that kind and say that sort of thing.
I hope that the Minister of State will provide information tonight that will assure the House that something positive will be done.
I am sure that hon. Members need no convincing by me that teenagers must be removed from the penal system.
The Home Secretary told me in an answer to a written question recently that he has no plans to remove young people from the penal system.
I think we are entitled to be told why.
What tragedies must occur before he and the Minister of State will change their minds?
I welcome the new Criminal Justice Act 1991, which provides for the ending of prison remand for 15 and 16-year-olds.
However, it is clear that sufficient places in secure accommodation do not exist to meet the need created by that change in the law.
In fact, there has been talk of it taking up to four years to give effect to this, during which time who knows how many young people will die, while the Home Office and the Home Secretary drag their feet?
I should be glad if the Minister would comment on the suggestions that have been made that there is wrangling with other Government Departments over who has to pay for these places.
While accepting that this lethal practice of placing 15 and 16-year-olds in prison must end for those on remand, the Home Secretary refuses to consider removing those serving sentences from the prison system.
Does the fact that they are serving sentences made their lives less valuable?
Apparently, 15 and 16-year-olds have to remain in prison while the Home Office argues with the Department of Health over what is to happen to them.
The Department of Health wants to place more of them in community care, while the Home Office wants to place more of them in secure accommodation.
Will the Minister of State confirm that young people will be placed in secure accommodation only when they represent a real danger to the public?
Will she also confirm that secure accommodation will also be available where local authority homes are not able to provide such accommodation because of lack of funds?
I hope that the Minister will address her comments to these important matters.
The Minister also told me in a written reply about the education and social opportunities that were available to young offenders.
Is she aware that the Feltham visitors' report, which I am sure she has had a chance to read, said that there were only 24 workshop training places for 256 young people?
Is she also aware that, for 500 unconvicted young people, there are no organised activities or education whatsoever?
These are very serious matters and I am glad to see that the civil servants are leaving the Box to find the answers.
I would expect the right hon. Lady to give us the answers, because she still has time to absorb what her civil servants have to tell her.
Today I have had a reply to a parliamentary question to the Minister, which tells me the latest figures of young people currently in young offender institutions.
Of 14 and 15-year-olds, there are 67 in such institutions; of 16 to 19-year-olds, there are 3,110; and of 14 to 19-year-olds, there are 3,177.
These are figures that the House is not prepared to tolerate.
We expect some firm proposals from the Minister tonight, or at least when we debate this matter in Committee, that will assure the House that something will be done about this very dangerous situation.
Finally, I pay tribute to the police service in Leicestershire.
I refer to figures published by the Minister on 12 November, in which she sets out the number of prisoners currently held in police cells.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook gave a figure, but I wish to top it.
The figures given to me show that there are 1,719 prisoners held in police cells.
Of these, 227 are in Greater Manchester, 36 in Leicestershire, 17 in Lincolnshire and 42 in Nottinghamshire — all east midlands constabularies.
These figures cannot be tolerated or justified, either in cost terms or in terms of the most efficient use of police resources.
The Minister will know that I and other Leicestershire Members from all parts of the House have continually asked for more officers to be allocated to Leicestershire.
I pay tribute to Michael Hurst, the chief constable, and his senior and other officers for the work that they are doing.
However, the plea continually made to us by senior police officers and members of the Police Federation and other organisations representing the police is that they do not have sufficient people.
It is no wonder, when so many police officers appear to be doing the duties which prison officers should be doing and so many prisoners are placed in police cells.
This means that police person power is being used on an issue and in an area where it really is not necessary.
What does the Minister intend to do about the 1,719 prisoners who are being held in police cells?
I do not want to know what she intends doing in a year's time or in 10 years' time, because she will not be in government then.
What will she do now, when it is her responsibility as Minister of State and the responsibility of the Home Secretary to do something about it?
Mr. Corbett
My hon. Friend protested when he was accused of barracking by the hon. Member for Ryedale (Mr. Greenway).
I sought to interrupt to confess that I was responsible.
There has been talk of a commitment to do away with slopping out by 1994.
What I wanted to get at was that we have had such commitments before.
Three successive Home Secretaries have stood at the Dispatch Box and pledged to do away with holding prisoners in police cells.
That is why I objected to the assurance with which the hon. Member for Ryedale was arguing that this would happen.
There is a wide difference between promise and performance.
Mr. Vaz
My hon. Friend is right.
We have had commitments from Home Secretaries and Ministers of State at the Dispatch Box, in Committee and in the Select Committee on Home Affairs, when they have promised to do various things, but they still have not done them.
They pick a year in the future when they know that there will have been a general election and that they will probably not be in the same job as when they gave the commitment.
The Minister of State will be under no time constraint this evening, and she will have plenty of time to tell us precisely what she will do about this serious subject.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield wondered why we had so many people in prison and in police cells.
The reason is that crime has increased dramatically under the Government.
The Minister of State turns away, but she and the Home Secretary have presided over the worst crime figures that the country has ever known.
When my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook was Home Secretary, he used to draft for us what he described as a crime clock.
He divided the number of crimes by the number of minutes in an hour to show how many crimes were committed in a certain time.
We do not have a crime clock any more; the clock broke because the figures were so devastating.
It is impossible to get sensible statistics from it.
It is no use the Home Secretary saying that the high crime rate is due to other factors.
The high level of crime and the resultant number of people in prison are due directly to the policies of the Government, which have created people who are greedy and selfish, a society where people are supposed to be on their own, a society which destroys the morale and the will of people who happen to be on benefits and on the poverty line.
If the Minister of State wants to see what that is like, she should go into the City tonight and look at the number of people who are sleeping in the cold because there is no accommodation for them.
It is no wonder that there are so many young offenders.
They have no future because of the policies of the Government.
Therefore, although we welcome legislation that deals with the serious issues, and although we have promised to consider it carefully in Committee, we cannot do anything about the crime figures.
Only the Minister of State and the Home Secretary can do something about them.
The Minister of State needs to address some important points.
She has probably written her speech already, but I hope that she will include these points in her reply.
First, the police must have additional resources to deal with the high level of crime; secondly, and more important, the Government have to change their policy, or there will be more people in prison.
We are told that their slogan is the power to choose and the right to own; however, it has become the power to take and the right to steal.
We want positive policies, and we want them now.
Mr. Peter Kilfoyle (Liverpool, Walton)
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe), I have a prison in my constituency; indeed, it almost had two.
I am not as familiar with Walton prison as my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Broadgreen (Mr. Fields), but I have visited the prison and I have seen the conditions under which prisoners and staff have to labour.
I mentioned that we almost had two prisons in Walton.
What happened is instructive about the attitude of the Government.
They proposed to locate a second prison in Walton, barely a mile and a half from Walton prison.
It was to be a category B prison and it would have been the length of a cricket pitch away from the neurosurgical unit in Fazackerley hospital.
Hon. Members can imagine how inept the Government must be to believe that overlooking a prison yard, floodlit day and night, would be conducive to the recuperation of neurosurgical patients.
Because of local opposition and the intervention of my predecessor, Eric Heffer, and my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), the Home Office was persuaded that it would not be wise to go ahead with that prison.
I was dismayed when I heard the Home Secretary's statement.
I had the pleasure of spending some years in Queensland, Australia.
During that time I had the misfortune to visit the infamous Boggo road gaol; I stress that I was a visitor.
I saw at first hand what a regressive prison regime does to prisoners.
They were completely intimidated — but even under that very strict regime there was nothing to compare with the suggestion that if two or more people refused to get up from the dining table they might be liable to a 10-year prison sentence.
Like many hon. Members, I am receiving increasing amounts of mail from prisoners about simple matters — the right to exercise, the right to decent food and the implementation of the prison rules as they stand.
We all know that, because of a lack of resources, a lack of foresight and a lack of a coherent strategy for dealing with the prison population, those matters are not being dealt with.
Reference has been made to commitments about ending slopping out.
I recall a commitment not so long ago to reduce the number or prisoners, yet the Home Secretary told us that there was an unexpected increase of 3,000 in the prison population.
What effect does that have on prisoners?
They become disaffected.
I am talking about prisoners who do not want problems in serving their sentence; they want to serve it in a civilised fashion, where that is possible in any prison regime.
Prison officers are equally prisoners of the system.
The prison service does not have the staff or the resources to provide the rehabilitation that prisoners need and which many prison officers misguidedly joined the service to provide.
My constituents who are in prison — I hope not for too long — are becoming increasingly disaffected.
Unless there is drastic action based on the Woolf report, rather than the sort of band-aid solution that we have heard about today, I fear that there will be an increase in disturbances, especially if there is yet another unexpected surge in the prison population.
Mr. Vaz
I agree entirely with my hon. Friend, but does he agree that we require a firm commitment from the Government that more resources will be provided for the prison service?
Instead of attacking the Prison Officers Association, the Government should spend more time ensuring that the money and resources are available that will enable the prison service to work; otherwise, the result will be the wanton destruction that occurred atStrangeways.
Mr. Kilfoyle
That is absolutely right.
We need more resources, but they must be properly targeted.
I do not believe simply in throwing money at the prison service for the sake of it.
Building new prisons, for example, is not necessarily the answer.
We must have properly trained staff and we must provide some incentive for the prisoners themselves.
I recently received a letter from a prisoner who was seeking my help.
He was in Long Lartin prison when he wrote to me, but by the time that I was able to make contact with him, he had been transferred to Winson Green prison.
I telephoned that prison only to learn that he had been transferred to Risley.
When I telephoned Risley, I was told that the prisoner had been returned to Winson Green.
My office rang that prison today and was told that the prisoner has now been transferred to Walton prison.
Is that a useful deployment of resources?
The man has two months of his sentence left to serve.
A properly organised Department would have ensured that that man could be transferred immediately to his home prison for release.
Such tales are legion —
Interruption
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
Order.
I apologise to the hon. Gentleman.
I had just taken over the Chair and I thought that he was making an intervention.
I hope that I have not put him off.
Mr. Kilfoyle
You will have to forgive me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I have now lost my thread.
Another prisoner wrote to me recently, and I am now seeking to get him transferred to a prison nearer his home in Liverpool.
That man was being transferred from Dartmoor to the Isle of Wight.
The problem was that I could not get a response from anybody in the Department.
I seemed to go round in circles, and I am sure that that has happened to many hon. Members.
Mr. Vaz
My hon. Friend has raised an important point about the ability of prisoners relatives to travel around the country.
Does he share my concern about some prisoners being put in prisons that are so far away from their families that it is a difficult and expensive business for the wives and chilldren — especially if there are young children — to travel half way round the country to see their fathers or relatives?
It seems to be the families that are being punished for what has happened.
Mr. Kilfoyle
Again, my hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Prisoners are often transferred so far away from their homes that the social problems become immense and the difficulties are exacerbated rather than diminished.
It is the local authorities that must pick up the bill for those problems.
Prisoner after prisoner has complained about the arbitrary way in which the prison regulations are enforced.
It is not just a question of prison visits and of people being shifted far away from their homes, because telephone calls can also be a problem.
A prisoner wrote to me stating that, although he was worried about his father's health, he was not allowed a telephone call.
He was told that, if he behaved himself in the segregation block where he was being held, he would be allowed to make a call to his father who was seriously ill.
Telephone calls are being held out as bait for good behaviour.
That incident led to the man absconding from the prison just weeks before his sentence was due to end.
That is no way to run a prison service.
On the subject of Walton prison and the conditions there, I must pay credit to all its staff who work extremely hard.
However, two of my constituents entered the prison service with the idea of working eventually in Walton prison, but they have ended up working in London.
The families are now split up.
The prison officers cannot afford accommodation in both places — in fact, they cannot afford accommodation in either — and they are contemplating leaving the prison service for what will probably be a life on the dole.
That is happening simply because the prison service has been so badly mismanaged that the staff are disaffected.
I regret that we hear continual attacks on members of the Prison Officers Association.
As far as I am concerned, it is the only body that represents the prison officers, who work under great duress.
We must recognise that they are getting a raw deal and are being victimised by the Government.
The prison officers have been seen as one of the major reasons for, not one of the victims of, the mismanagement of the prison service.
I sincerely hope that we shall have a change of Government in the not-too-distant future, and that my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparbrook will be able to rectify the wrongs that have been so obviously perpetrated by the Government on the prison service during the past 12 years.
Mr. Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield)
When I reply to debates, it is my custom to have heard all the speeches that have been made, so it is unfortunate that pressing circumstances outside the House have led me this evening to commit the grave discourtesy of not being in my place to hear as many speeches as I should have liked.
I apologise to the House.
The Opposition have grave reservations about the Bill.
Our concerns go far beyond those that we anticipated in our debates on the Gracious Speech, which took place before we had sight of the text of the Bill although even at that stage we had our fears about its final form.
At that time, our views were expressed eloquently by my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparbrook (Mr. Hattersley).
At that point, we believed that the Bill would be an irrelevance and unnecessary given that prisoners can already be charged with a wide range of criminal offences, including offences under the Public Order Act 1986.
We believed that the Bill would be totally inefectual in terms of deterring rioters.
That was our opinion before we had read the Bill.
Now that we have seen the text, our suspicions and fears are confirmed.
I shall turn later to my perception of what the Home Secretary said earlier, and what some of his hon. Friends have said in his defence and aid.
Much of what has been said by Conservative Members today seems to be a rearguard attempt to protect the Home Secretary and his sinking reputation.
I will not call the Home Secretary any names, but I repeat the point made by many of my right hon. and hon. Friends.
When the right hon. Gentleman came to that office, he had the opportunity to grasp the nettle of prison reform.
Indeed, he had a unique and historic opportunity because the Strangeways riot had already occurred, and the Woolf-Tumim inquiry was in progress.
If he had had any foresight, when the Woolf-Tumim report was published, the right hon. Gentleman would have said to himself,’ Here is a unique and historic opportunity for me to make my reputation as one of the great Home Secretaries of the 20th century.’
Those of us concerned with criminal justice matters are disappointed that the right hon. Gentleman did not seize that opportunity.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook said earlier, we have seen only a few small and rather insignificant measures that do not add up to a large impact on our criminal justice system, which is crying out for fundamental change.
As I shall seek to argue, the opportunity was there; and the Home Secretary's failure has been that he did not grasp it.
He will carry disappointment with him for the rest of his political career and, indeed, to the end of his days.
Instead of seizing the opportunity to become one of the great Home Secretaries of the 20th century, he remains a rather shaky party politician.
Our view of the Bill has been expressed most clearly by the Government themselves in their White Paper,’ The Prison Disciplinary System of England and Wales’, which was published in 1986 in response to the Prior committee report.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook referred to that, and it does not harm us —
Mr. Kenneth Baker
There is no one else here.
Mr. Sheerman
The Home Secretary is worried about my declining audience.
We shall see what audience his right hon. Friend the Minister of State has when it is her turn to speak.
I quote from the Government's 1985 report.
It is a quotation to which the Home Secretary should listen to which his right hon. Friend the Minister of State should reply:’ Since the Prior Committee's report was published, the Government's Public Order Bill (now the Public Order Act) has been brought before Parliament.
Clauses 1, 2 and 3 create new statutory offences of riot, violent disorder and affray, with maximum penalties of 10, 5 and 3 years respectively.
Clause 4 creates an offence of threatening or insulting behaviour which replaces the offence in Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936.
All these offences can be committed inside a prison establishment.
Accordingly the use or threat of violence in connection with a prison mutiny can be dealt with under the general criminal law.
Given the restructuring of public order offences in the Public Order Bill, the Government's view is that there is no need for a further specific offence of prison mutiny.’
I hope that the Minister of State will tell us why the Government's policy has changed since 1985.
I can perhaps anticipate what the Minister will say.
She might say, and I would not blame her for saying, that the Strangeways riot and the riots associated with it have given cause for a total and radical rethink.
In some ways, she might be justified in using that argument.
However, Lord Justice Woolf was asked to inquire into Strangeways and the other riots.
He produced a report which is highly regarded.
I have heard no demur from the opinion that the Woolf report is the finest document for 100 years on what is wrong with our prisons and the penal system and how to put it right.
Everyone agrees that it is the report, and that there is no point in having a royal commission after Woolf.
It is a brilliant report.
Everyone who has knowledge of the criminal justice system says that Woolf is where it is at, and that, if the Home Secretary implemented Woolf within a reasonable timetable and with reasonable resources, he would have done what was needed.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook said, in his wide range of recommendations Lord Justice Woolf rejected a special measure to deal with prison riots and disturbances.
The many days spent not only taking oral and written evidence but taking part in the interesting innovation of seminars in which all the participants in the criminal justice system could come together and discuss the issues convinced him that there was no call and no advocate for the creation of a specific offence.
The Home Secretary said that he had found prison governors who were in favour of the Bill.
I hope that his right hon. Friend the Minister will name some of them.
Certainly, the Prison Governors Association is not in favour of it.
It is the time of year and the period of political history when many of the great campaigning organisations in penal reform have their anniversaries.
The Prison Reform Trust recently had its 10th anniversary party.
The National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders recently had its 25th anniversary.
They were pleasant occasions, at which the Home Secretary was present.
He would not find anyone among the people celebrating those events who was in favour of the legislation except his own Parliamentary Private Secretary who was also present, but that is to be expected.
When the public think of prison mutiny, they have in mind events such as those at Strangeways, when prisoners attempted to overthrow legitimate authority in a violent manner.
That is the very event envisaged in clause 1(2) (a).
If the Bill had stopped there, we would have supported it as an unnecessary but reasonably harmless measure, but it goes far beyond the type of incident about which we are all deeply worried.
Clause 1(2) (b) defines a mutiny as where two or more prisoners’ collectively resist, impede or disobey any exercise of lawful authority in the prison in such circumstances as to make their conduct subversive of order in the prison.’
That is amazing.
Who drafted it?
I do not know who pays the salaries of the people who drafted it.
It is an astonishingly broad remit.
Presumably we shall have a good chew at the clause in Committee, but if it remains in that form we shall certainly be unable to support the Bill on Third Reading.
I said today to my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook that if the Oliver Twist story were translated from the workhouse to a prison, the person who drew the short straw and was sent to protest about the food would come within the net of the Bill.
It would be necessary only to produce evidence of the drawing of straws and some sort of conspiracy to send Oliver Twist to ask for more.
It is ridiculous.
Many protests in our prisons are about food, which is extremely important to the prisoners.
They protest when the food is not up to standard or of the quality that they have come to expect.
Mr. Merlyn Rees (Morley and Leeds, South)
I rise to speak briefly — principally, like so many others, because of my high regard for my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner) and his family, whom I know, including his father and mother.
But that would not be enough, and I wish to make two further points.
In recent years — since the televising of the House, I suppose — people have asked me, as they have asked other hon. Members, why the House of Commons behaves so badly, like a bunch of yobs.
One tries to explain that it happens on the odd occasion, at Question Time, which is not a great parliamentary occasion, and that is what the media pick up.
What the media, whether television or the press, never pick up is an occasion such as this, when the House of Commons is at its best in terms of the relationships between people in all parts of the House.
I wonder to what extent this debate will be reported.
If we were all shouting at one another, the media would be here.
What the hon. Member for Leicestershire, North-West (Mr. Ashby) has done tonight, and what other hon. Members on both sides of the House have done, although in this respect principally on the Conservative Benches, is to their credit and to the credit of Parliament.
My second point is this.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West has had his name in all the newspapers, and in one newspaper in particular.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Solicitor-General will be dealing with the question of contempt.
I hope that he will not forget the newspapers, in particular.
I wonder how many of them will fill their pages tomorrow or the day after in the way they have done in the past few weeks.
There is a great deal of talk about freedom of the press.
When I think of what went on in eastern Europe, and in fascist Europe before the war, when I was younger, I am glad that we have a free press.
Ms. Short
We do not have a free press.
Mr. Rees
We have a press that is free in one sense: it engages sometimes in the most scurrilous reporting and colours it up under the heading of a free press.
I wonder what the press will do about this matter in the next few days.
With a few exceptions, I suspect that it will do very little.
Mr. Patrick Cormack (Staffordshire, South)
I am delighted to take part briefly in the debate.
The hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner), whom I am pleased to call my hon. and learned Friend, and I entered the House on the same day, and we have been friends ever since.
We worked together to form the committee for the release of Soviet Jewry, of which he was the first secretary and I the first chairman.
We have not always agreed — I think that he was profoundly wrong on war crimes — but we have always respected and liked each other.
I was as appalled as anyone at what happened in recent weeks.
It was a terrible ordeal for my hon. and learned Friend and for his family.
I endorse everything that has been said from both sides of the House in support and admiration of him and of the courage and fortitude that he and his family have displayed.
I should like to address my few brief remarks to something else.
I am sure that my hon. and learned Friend will endorse what I say.
It has already been mentioned that those who serve in the House have an opportunity to put wrongs right.
My hon. and learned Friend was able to apply for an Adjournment debate.
When it was not appropriate to have it last week, my hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West (Mr. Ashby) made the facility available this evening.
Had he not done so, another hon. Member would have obliged, and we would have had the chance to debate the matter and to make the points which have been made with such eloquence and fervour on both sides of the House.
What would have happened if the man who had been traduced and vilified had been a village schoolmaster?
What if he had been a vicar, a Methodist minister or a rabbi?
He would not have had this forum.
He would not have had the opportunity to command the attention of the media.
Although I endorse totally what the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) said and have doubts about how much of the debate will be reported, nevertheless, we have this privilege and opportunity, but our constituents do not.
Let us imagine the unspeakable agonies of horror that would have been suffered by someone in — I will not say a less exalted — a different position who had been similarly vilified.
Perhaps in a moment of desperation he would have written to his local newspaper.
Perhaps he would have gone to his Member of Parliament.
As a result, there might have been some minor publicity, but how right my hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns) was: people would have talked about there being no smoke without fire.
Mud would have stuck.
A career of public service in a quiet and restricted environment might have been ruined.
There is something wrong with a law that allows that to happen.
What we must do because of this horrific and terrible example — I use those words deliberately — is put the law right.
In the high court of Parliament, we have a unique opportunity to put the law right.
I look forward to a positive and enthusiastic response from my right hon. and learned Friend the Solicitor-General.
Even though I did not draw even 15th in the ballot and can offer neither blackmail nor whitemail, I hope that there will be a firm commitment from my right hon. and learned Friend, endorsed by the Opposition parties, that the law needs to be amended, not to restrict in any way the freedom of those who are innocent until proved guilty but to prevent the vile calumny which we are discussing from being perpetrated again.
If that happens, the sufferings of my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West, of Myra and of his family, whom many of us know and admire, will not have been in vain.
This case will produce something that all of us want to produce — a positive improvement in the law.
We can expect no more than that, and we can certainly ask for no less.
Mr. Alex Carlile (Montgomery)
I can but echo the tributes that have been paid to my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner).
He is a man of determination and enthusiasm, whose integrity and will power have crossed party lines.
I for one value the friendship that he has given me in the eight and a half years that I have been a Member of the House, despite the fact that we are in different parties and disagree on many issues.
Mr. Beck is an evil man.
Perhaps more to the point, he is a corrupt man.
Several hon. and hon. and learned Members who are present, some of whom have already spoken, have, like me, had the opportunity over the years in their professional lives to meet corrupt and evil people and to examine and sometimes cross-examine them in court.
I am sure that those who share my professional experience will agree that those who have trodden in the mire of corruption all too easily become corrupt to the core.
They cease to recognise the difference between what is good and what is bad and between what is honourable and what is corrupt.
They turn, like Mr. Beck, easily to more corruption and try to wheedle their way out of their own previous corruption — and that is what has happened in this case.
That is why my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West was slandered with dreadful calumny by Mr. Beck.
That is why it does not surprise me in the least to hear from my hon. and learned Friend about the letter that he received yesterday from Mr. Beck's erstwhile cellmate.
It is common for such evidence to appear, but all too often only after a great deal of harm has been done.
I believe in jury trial and that, however evil they are, people should be entitled to present their defence to a jury if they wish to do so.
Mr. Beck would have been extremely well advised to plead guilty.
He would have been well advised not to drag the name of my hon. and learned Friend through the courts and an undiscriminating press.
He would have been well advised not to compel — because he did compel — his own lawyers to regard what he said about my hon. and learned Friend as part of his case.
However, he chose to do so.
I suggest to the Solicitor-General that a clear intellectual distinction can be drawn between evidence that relates to those who are parties to a trial and those who are not parties to a trial.
I can see the hon. and learned Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) in his place across the Chamber.
I know that he has shared my experience many times of being involved in what we lawyers call’ cut-throat’trials.
Those are trials in which the one defendant makes accusations against the other, and the other often makes even worse accusations against the one.
The distinction between those cases and this is that the lawyer for the other can immediately attack the one — there is somebody there to protect the reputation of each defendant who is in the court — but in a case such as that which has affected my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West, there is no such opportunity to defend oneself.
There is not even, as we have heard, any opportunity to make a realistic and meaningful statement in public, not even in the House, for to do so might affect the outcome of the trial.
Within the past few years, we have witnessed a case in which a senior Minister made a statement during a trial in which the defendants were convicted.
In consequence, those defendants had their convictions quashed on appeal.
It was a trial of the greatest public importance, involving alleged IRA terrorism.
It demonstrated clearly to all Members of Parliament the dangers of making even inadvertent and mild statements about a trial while it is taking place.
Therefore, I respectfully suggest to the Solicitor-General that a clear and simple change can be made to the law which would protect those who are not the parties to a trial — third parties outside a trial.
It would in no way inhibit the right of a defendant to make his defence, however dishonest.
It would in no way inhibit his right to instruct his solicitors, however egregiously.
But it would prevent the press from publishing calumnies which cannot be answered, as in the Beck case, sometimes until weeks or even months after the allegation is made in the public arena of a court.
I hope that we shall hear the Solicitor-General tell us shortly that such an amendment has the approval and support of the Government.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
It is most unusual for an Adjournment debate at this hour, at the end of which there will be no vote, to attract so many Members into the Chamber.
Come to think of it, it is most unusual at any hour for so many hon. Ladies and hon. Gentlemen in the Chamber to remain seated when I rise to speak.
If the debate had started at 10 pm when it was scheduled to start, and if the normal business of the House had continued, many more hon. Ladies and hon. Gentlemen from both sides of the House would be here tonight.
The reason why so many of us are here is the immense regard which we all have for the hon. and learned Member, our friend, for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner).
We have immense regard for the way in which he conducts himself not only in Leicester but in the rest of the United Kingdom and on behalf of the United Kingdom abroad.
He is a famous personality.
The number of people to whom he is a friend, if not because he has met them but because they know of the good works that he has done not only in Britain but throughout the world, must run into many hundreds of thousands.
It is precisely such a person who can be brought lowest by the hateful things that may be reported about him in a court of law.
The matter that has given me most cause for admiration is the way in which he has conducted himself while the horrible events have gone on and been reported in the press.
That shows an inner strength which must be the result of his deep religious conviction.
We all have reason to regard him, the causes that he espouses and his beliefs highly.
We must address what can be done to stop this kind of thing happening again.
It is difficult and probably impossible to allow people thus abused to make statements in the press which can only interfere with the process of justice by which someone is tried.
However mean, miserable and undeserving a defendant is, he is entitled under our system to a fair trial and not to be the subject of attack, however justified, from someone who has no particular connection with the issue in the case, even if the defendant brought it on himself.
It would be almost impossible to ban such remarks in a court of law, but there is no reason why a judge should not be empowered to say that, in an appropriate case, the name of the person maligned should not be repeated in the press.
There does not have to be a statutory ban — it can be left to the good judgment of the court.
As in so many other matters, the judge should be given the discretion to tell the press that they may not publicise the name of a person, because to do so would be in contempt of court.
I know that my right hon. and learned Friend the Solicitor-General is giving urgent consideration to the matter.
Will he seriously consider whether that sort of amendment would be acceptable to everyone?
I urge him not merely to consider the matter but, because of the strength of feeling shown here, to take action as soon as possible, so that our hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West and his family will not have suffered in vain.
Mr. Roland Boyes (Houghton and Washington)
Before I became a full-time politician, I was assistant director of social services in a large authority.
Wicked episodes were often brought to my attention, but nothing either then or since has been as evil as the man Beck.
In this short speech, I wish to think for a moment about all the youngsters who were so badly damaged and hurt by that evil man.
He well deserved the sentence he got, but to many of us five life sentences do not seem quite enough for what he did to our youngsters.
Our hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner) was also caused grave hurt.
Having known him in this country and having travelled around Israel with him, I know that he is tough and resilient.
I have a high regard for him, and I pay him tribute.
I think especially of his family.
When we come here, we know what we are up to, but our families, hundreds of miles away, suffer the most.
We can rationalise and fight our way out, but they are often deeply hurt.
I am sure that all hon. Members in the Chamber will be thinking not only of my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West but of his wife and children.
Mr. John Marshall (Hendon, South)
My hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) has asked to be associated with my unusually brief remarks.
I am happy to count the Janner family as friends.
I congratulate them all on the quiet dignity and courage that they have displayed in recent weeks while vile, vicious and baseless allegations were made by a proven liar.
The fact that such allegations could be made under the cloak of privilege, and the victim has had no right of redress or to cross-examine those making them, has been a blot on our system of justice.
I hope that that basic injustice can be tackled.
If it can, good will come out of the traumas that our colleague has suffered and that will be for the good of potential victims.
We have been through a ghastly situation, and I hope that some good can come of it.
Mr. Derek Foster (Bishop Auckland)
I rise to break my Trappist vow of six years to say how honoured and privileged I have been to attend and take part in this debate.
We cannot always say that.
Indeed, as Whips we must sometimes sit through long and tedious debates
Hon. Members
No.
Mr. Derek Foster (Bishop Auckland)
Many of my hon. Friends will take revenge on me for making that remark, because the Whips hijack hon. Members into taking part in, and thereby lengthening, long and tedious debates.
However, this has been a very special debate.
I wish at the outset to thank the hon. Member for Leicestershire, North-West (Mr. Ashby) for initiating the debate.
It was a generous gesture on his part.
Adjournment debates are hard won and precious to Back-Bench Members.
We thank him sincerely for his generous gesture in allowing this debate to take place.
It being Ten o'clock, the motion for the Adjournment of the House lapsed, without Question put.
Motion made and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Foster
It is a reflection on the unusual nature of relationships in the House that a member of an opposing party can make such a generous gesture.
Again, we thank him deeply.
I have rarely seen the House so unanimous in warmth and affection, and especially in its understanding of the severe ordeal that one of our colleagues and his family have had to endure for many months.
A Chief Whip is in a special position to be able to understand the many strains in the lives of colleagues that are unheard of beyond the bounds of Westminster, and often unheard of except within very small circles in this place.
The strains of being a Member of Parliament are extremely great from time to time.
The strains on families are also great, and their sacrifices are rarely known.
The way in which our hon. and learned Friend the Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner) has conducted himself has been a model for all of us to follow, though we hope and pray that most of us will not have to undergo that sort of ordeal.
If we do, we now have a model and can say that he and his family have been through it and have borne it with great fortitude, resilience and courage — as has been said, only through their deep religious faith — and that that has been a great lesson to us all.
A powerful case has been made for a change in the law.
I am sure that the Solicitor-General will address himself, as only he can, to those remarks.
My right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition would have liked to be here this evening because I know well that he has been a tremendous support to my hon. and learned Friend and his family in many small and touching ways, which I know have been deeply appreciated.
Mr. Janner indicated assent.
Mr. Foster
If the Opposition could facilitate a change in the law — it would be widely welcomed, as is clear from what has been said in the debate tonight — I am sure that my right hon. and hon. Friends would be willing to do what they could to assist.
The Solicitor-General (Sir Nicholas Lyell)
It is absolutely clear that my hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West (Mr. Ashby) has done the House a service by raising this matter.
I associate myself with the remarks made by hon. Members in all parts of the House about the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner), who has been through an ordeal that none of us would wish to share.
I associate myself also with the remarks made by the Opposition Chief Whip about the dignity with which the hon. and learned Gentleman has borne himself in adversity.
When the House is unanimous on a subject, it is a moment to think deeply, particularly when profound principles are involved.
As on so many occasions when we discuss matters in the House, we are faced with a conflict between principles, each of which is important, and with the question of how properly to resolve such a conflict.
This is not the first time that this issue has reached the public domain, or will it be the last time that the House is asked to focus on the rights and duties of citizens in circumstances — from time to time inevitable circumstances — when the interests of one individual or one set of individuals necessarily impinge on and potentially damage the interests of others.
We have heard speeches not only by my hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West, who initiated the debate, and the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West but by the hon. Members for Leicester, East (Mr. Vaz), for Rutland and Melton (Mr. Latham), for Harborough (Sir J. Farr), for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns), for Staffordshire, South (Mr. Cormack), and for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall), my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) and the right hon. Members for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) and the hon. Members for Crewe and Nantwich (Mrs. Dunwoody), for Houghton and Washington (Mr. Boyes), the hon. and learned Member for Montgomery (Mr. Carlile), and the Opposition Chief Whip.
The speeches by and in support of the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West raised important questions of principle that govern three important matters: first, the need for open justice; secondly, the provision of proper opportunities for the defence in criminal proceedings to deploy the case on which the defence relies; and thirdly, the issue on which we focused most, the effect of the existence of those rights on third parties who necessarily can play no part in the proceedings and who consequently have no immediate opportunity to defend themselves or their reputations.
The principle that justice should, as far as possible, be open is central to our system of criminal justice.
It is a fundamental requirement of any democratic and just society that the process by which individuals are accused, tried and, where appropriate, punished should be open, and exposed to public scrutiny and comment at an appropriate moment, other than in wholly exceptional circumstances — for example, where on grounds of national security the court must receive evidence about matters of security or intelligence; or where, for purposes of the administration of justice, particular matters must be dealt with concerning informants.
The rule that criminal proceedings are conducted in open court would be hollow unless those proceedings could be freely reported by the press and television, and the media in general.
For that reason, both Houses of Parliament deliberately built into the Contempt of Court Act 1981 a robust declaration of the right to report proceedings in open court, subject to one limited exception.
Section 4(1) of the 1981 Act provides:’ Subject to this section a person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule in respect of a fair and accurate report of legal proceeding held in public, published contemporaneously and in good faith.’
The only exception is where it appears to a court that the reporting of the proceedings before it might prejudice the administration of justice in other proceedings imminently pending in another court, or shortly to follow thereafter.
Even then, there is no power to prohibit reporting of proceedings.
All that the judge may order is a postponement until the risk to the administration of justice has passed.
The law does not permit the right of the press freely to report proceedings in open court to be fettered, notwithstanding that such reporting may be or would be embarrassing, damaging or inconvenient to an individual who has featured in the case.
That would be a major inroad into a constitutional safeguard and would expose the courts to the risk of pressure from interested third parties.
Mr. Cormack
Are we not dealing with something a little more serious than inconvenience?
I respect what my right hon. and learned Friend is seeking to say, but surely no true freedom would be properly fettered if there were an inhibition on the publication of names.
The Solicitor-General
We are certainly dealing with matters much more serious than mere inconvenience.
Perhaps I should have reordered my remarks and said’ inconvenient, embarrassing or damaging’— sometimes deeply damaging.
To take my hon. Friend's point, I ask the rhetorical question: is it possible to solve this grave difficulty simply by suppressing a name or ordering the press not to publish it?
Hon. Members
Yes.
Mr. Cormack
I hear a number of my hon. Friends saying yes, but I invite the House to reflect cautiously before interfering in what seems to be a small particular in the right of the press to make a fair and accurate report.
Mr. Patrick Nicholls (Teignbridge)
The press?
The Solicitor-General
Yes, the press or television.
Let us reflect on the matter for a moment.
If one suppresses the name, one does not suppress the rest of what is reported, so it is reported that someone, or perhaps more than one person who has been defamed, has done something in the course of the case and it may be that he or she is not known to the public and is of no interest to the public.
So far, I am happy to say that in the case of children — I was about to come to that exception — and in the case of rape victims, the balance that Parliament has chosen, in that it has granted exceptions in those cases, has proved to be an effective one.
However, once we start to distort the operation of open justice and the consideration of the matters, we may very well, through the operation of rumour and all its insidious effects that are so damaging in libel cases — the only justification that I know for the high damages granted in such cases — inflict more damage on justice than we realise.
Mr. John Marshall
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that in cases of blackmail one refers to Mr. X. Surely in a similar case such as this one, it would be fairer to the individual involved to refer to him or her as Mr., Mrs., Miss or Ms. X.
The Solicitor-General
I ask my hon. Friend to reflect that, if Mr. X were a Member of the House, or Mrs. X were a member of the nobility
Hon. Members
Lady X.
The Solicitor-General
If she were a Lady, she would still be referred to as Mrs. X. If the person were a member of the nobility or someone in whom the press had an interest, rumour would start to circulate, and damage could not be avoided.
I have acknowledged the great damage done to the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West.
Mr. Burns
Will my right hon. and learned Friend give way?
The Solicitor-General
No; otherwise, I shall not finish what I have to say.
I apologise for not giving way, but I am sure that the House will understand.
When one conceals matters, one does not necessarily quieten them.
The law does not permit the right of the press freely to report proceedings in open court to be fettered, notwithstanding that such reporting would be inconvenient, embarrassing or damaging to some individual who has featured in the case.
That would be a major inroad into a constitutional safeguard and would expose the courts to the risk of pressure from interested third parties.
Anyone who has prosecuted in the criminal courts — I see a number of such hon. Members here — will know that, in case after case, it is necessary to bring in damaging things about third parties.
They may be co-accused who have never been tried and are entitled to the presumption of innocence, or they may be people against whom the defendant has a grudge of any nature.
Are all those names to be kept from the press?
Is it always to be Mr. X or Mrs. X?
I suggest — I put it no higher, and we shall resolve nothing tonight — that we should think very carefully indeed.
Parliament, which has considered the matter carefully, has decreed that the only exceptions should be children involved as victims and the victims of rape.
The law of contempt is a doctrine of wide scope which manifests itself in a variety of types of contempt.
Their common feature — if I can capture the interest of hon. Members — is that they seek to ensure the efficacy and integrity of the judicial process, which is of concern to us all, so that justice may be administered to all without interference from any quarter.
Proceedings for contempt of court are the means by which obedience to orders of the court and adherence to undertakings are ensured.
Those minded to take reprisals against witnesses on account of the evidence that they have given can also be punished for contempt.
Those who disrupt proceedings or undermine public confidence in the administration of justice by scandalising the judiciary are also liable to be dealt with for contempt of court.
The media are also required, when reporting matters which are relevant to imminent legal proceedings, to ensure that their reports do not give rise to any substantial risk of prejudice.
Ms. Short
The mood of the House has changed since the Solicitor-General started speaking, and a mood of exasperation is now spreading widely.
Has the right hon. and learned Gentleman anything positive to say to us, or will the rest of his speech simply seek to justify the status quo and say no to everything that has been put before him tonight?
The Solicitor-General
It sounds as though the hon. Lady has made up her mind.
Ms. Short
I think that we should look at the question.
The Solicitor-General
What I am putting before the House are serious considerations about the balance between the rights of individuals, which may be damaged in the course of a case but where the record can subsequently be put straight, the rights of those who are before the courts, accused, to deploy their defence, and the rights of the public at large to scrutinise that process.
I ask the House to be careful when it has one of its own Members in its charge.
We are right to sympathise with the hon. and learned Member for Leicester West.
Mr. Cecil Franks (Barrow and Furness)
It is the principle that matters.
The Solicitor-General
Exactly.
My hon. Friend is entirely right: it is the principle that matters, and the ultimate principle is that there should be justice and that justice should be seen to be done.
Mr. Franks
There are many lawyers in the House, including myself, and we take a completely different view.
I speak not as a lawyer but as a politician.
It is just not good enough if the House does nothing.
I have the greatest sympathy for hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West (Mr. Janner), but there is a principle involved and it is about time that my right hon. and learned Friend stopped speaking as a lawyer and started acting as a politician.
The Solicitor-General
I hear what my hon. Friend says.
I have had many pleasant discussions with him, but I must say to him and to the House in all firmness that to ask us to talk about justice as politicians is to go down a very dangerous road.
When we consider justice, we stand back as politicians and invite independent courts and wholly independent juries to consider hotly contested matters.
Right hon. and hon. Members are failing to remember in how many criminal trials it happens, often necessarily, that allegations are made by the prosecution or defence which are damaging to persons who are not immediately before the court.
Mr. Franks
Let us deal with that point.
The Solicitor-General
My hon. Friend says that we ought to deal with that point.
The suggestion before the House is that, in such cases, it would be right and proper not to publish the names of the persons involved.
The House has not focused its mind yet on whether any name should be published, or whether only some names should or should not be published.
Ms. Short
The right hon. and learned Gentleman will not even consider that point.
The Solicitor-General
I ask the hon. Lady to relax for a moment.
I am not saying that the country should not consider the matter.
It will undoubtedly be one for public debate, and rightly so.
My hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West and the ordeal suffered by the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West will make it a matter, rightly, for public debate.
Nevertheless —
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South) rose
Mr. Ashby rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I believe that the Solicitor-General does not want to give way.
The Solicitor-General
I will give way to my hon. Friend the Member for Leicestershire, North-West, who initiated the debate.
Mr. Ashby
I appreciate that one must approach the matter with considerable caution, and that we cannot go at it in a bull-at-a-gate fashion.
It is important to hear the arguments on both sides, and to consider them carefully.
I am grateful to my right hon. and learned Friend for replying to the debate in the way that he is doing.
I accept everything that has been said so far, but is it really necessary for the persons in question to be the subject of media coverage?
I cannot see how it aids justice one iota for that to happen.
The Solicitor-General
What is reasonable and what the law should forbid are not necessarily the same.
We have a very wide press in this country, and we count that as one of our freedoms.
However, it embraces a whole spectrum — from a deeply responsible press that is extremely careful in what it publishes and which tries to balance one thing with another, to an element that many people regard, perhaps rightly, as frequently scurrilous or simply aimed at making a profit.
I suggest, however, that that is part of a free society.
Although it has disadvantages, it is a great deal better than the kind of society in which there is no free press, or in which the press is gagged by more and more complex and frequently unworkable rules.
I must move on, because there are one or two other points and safeguards that I want to mention.
As I said, safeguards apply in the case of children and of rape victims, and they seem to have worked well.
The judge also has the power, where the reporting of one case may affect the interests of justice in a subsequent case, to postpone the reporting of the earlier case.
Mr. Burns
Will my right hon. and learned Friend give way?
The Solicitor-General
I shall not give way to my hon. Friend, as I believe that I have done so once already and I have only a little time left.
Professional safeguards apply to those who appear for the prosecution and the defence.
The Bar code of conduct requires that those who appear should use their powers as responsibly as the interests of justice may reasonably allow.
Paragraph 610 of the Bar code provides, first:’ Counsel must not make statements or ask questions which are merely scandalous or intended or calculated only to vilify insult or annoy either a witness or some other person; counsel must if possible avoid the naming in open Court of third parties whose characters would thereby be impugned; counsel must not suggest that a witness or other person is guilty of crime, fraud or misconduct or attribute to another person the crime or conduct of which his lay client is accused’
Hon. Members
What about this case?
The Solicitor-General
’ unless such allegations go to a matter in issue (including the credibility of the witness) which is material to his lay client's case and which appear to him to be supported by reasonable grounds.’
I hear hon. Members saying,’ What about this case?’
I am on common ground when I remind the House that this case was immensely serious.
If someone is to be tried for matters as serious as those for which Mr. Beck was tried and to receive the condign punishment that Mr. Beck received, it is essential that he should have a fair trial and that he should be given every opportunity to deploy his defence.
Hon. Members are saying,’ We all agree, but what about the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West?’
I must remind the House of another important principle.
If I may say so, I acquit the hon. and learned Gentleman of the misguided approach that some hon. Members are taking.
He has deported himself with great dignity.
That is the way in which we should deport ourselves.
He was not on trial.
His opportunity to answer necessarily had to be deferred until the trial was over, and he has now had an opportunity to be heard.
I hear the point that other people do not have the same privilege as hon. Members.
Interruption
The suggestion is not that we should lift the laws of libel, which would be one other possible step to take, because if we were to do so witnesses would be inhibited and the opportunity for justice would be damaged.
Mr. Lawrence
Will my right hon. and learned Friend give way?
The Solicitor-General
No, I am sorry, but I must conclude.
The hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West is not on trial.
He has had an opportunity to make his point, and I wish to end with one important point.
As a result of a number of miscarriages, we are scrutinising our system of justice.
I hope that the House will never forget that no one is guilty of an offence unless they have been duly tried and convicted and that everyone is entitled to the same presumption of innocence.
Mrs. Llin Golding (Newcastle-under-Lyme)
Tell that to the press.
The Solicitor-General
I do tell that to the press.
If I may speak for the Law Officers of the Crown, we are scrupulous in bearing that vital principle in mind.
We are right to be scrupulous to maintain our system of open justice, to require that people be tried for charges the purport of which is known, and in courts which are open to the public and to the press and can be fully and fairly reported.
Despite the undoubted hardship, not only to the famous such as the hon. and learned Member for Leicester, West and other hon. Members, but to those who are known only to their families — I know from correspondence that many ordinary people suffer hardship because of what is said and done in court cases — I suggest to the House that we interfere with this at our peril, and at peril to our liberties and system of open justice.
I commend that principle most sincerely to the House.
The motion having been made at Ten o'clock, and the debate having continued for half an hour, Mr. Speaker — adjourned the House without Question put, pursuant to the Standing Order.
Adjourned at half past Ten o'clock.
Public Expenditure (Scotland)
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a statement on public expenditure in Scotland.
In his autumn statement on 6 November, my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced his public expenditure plans.
I should now like to tell the House how I have decided to allocate the £12.4 billion available for Scotland among the various spending programmes.
As usual, a table summarising my decisions is available in the Vote Office and will be published in the Official Report.
Full details will be included in my departmental report, which will be published in February.
Overall net spending plans for the Scottish Office and associated Departments total £12.4 billion in 1992-93.
In addition, there is £0.1 billion for the Forestry Commission.
Those are significant sums.
Of that, £7.2 billion will be spent directly by my departments or as capital expenditure by local authorities.
That provision is 9.2 per cent.
higher than was planned for 1991-92, and the increase is twice as high as inflation.
The remainder comprises grants to local authorities totalling £5.2 billion in 1992-93 and the external financing limits of the nationalised industries.
Earlier this year, I announced that local authorities would receive aggregate external finance of £5.13 billion.
After allowing for the community charge grant, which is now part of aggregate external finance, that is almost £300 million more than this year — an increase of 6.1 per cent.
In the light of our success in containing inflation, it is a very fair settlement.
It is £50 million more than the formula consequences of the England settlement, with the result that I have that much less available for other programmes.
My hon. Friend the Minister with responsibilities for industry and local government announced last week a further reduction of £60 million in business rates next year.
That is £14 million more than previously planned, reflecting the importance that I attach to this policy.
Again, that reduction will make a call on the resources that I have available to increase our programmes.
I shall announce shortly details of rate poundages and the level of industrial derating for next year, but this reduction will ensure a cash decrease in the average poundage in Scotland, compared with an increase of 4.1 per cent.
in the national non-domestic rate for England and Wales.
I have increased resources for local authority non-housing capital expenditure to £620 million next year — an increase of more than 18 per cent.
on this year's planned figure.
Total resources available to Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the local enterprise companies will be £531 million in 1992-93, compared with this year's planned total of £489 million.
That is an increase of 8.6 per cent.
Of that total, the Scottish Enterprise network will be able to spend £453 million and the Highlands and Islands Enterprise network £78 million.
These figures include £21.4 million for the employment action programme, which will be operated by the local enterprise companies in Scotland.
The total includes additional resources for Scottish Enterprise of up to £25 million to help deal with the industrial problems of Lanarkshire.
I intend that Lanarkshire Development Agency should continue to receive special additional funding in subsequent years.
I am also providing additional funding to Highlands and Islands Enterprise specifically to tackle the effects of the winding down of the Holy Loch naval base.
This level of provision represents a very substantial commitment of resources to the enterprise bodies and it should be sufficient to enable them to carry through the wide range of tasks expected of them and to build on their excellent first year of operation.
I have been able to give particular priority to spending on the health programme.
Next year the programme will amount in gross terms to more than £3.7 billion.
This is more than 10 per cent.
higher than the plans for the current year and will provide for further expansion in health services.
It will also mean that gross expenditure on the national health service in Scotland in 1992-93 will be as much as 44 per cent.
higher in real terms than it was in 1979-80.
Within the total health figures, recurrent expenditure on hospital and community health services in 1992-93 is planned to increase by £230 million over this year.
When planned savings from increased efficiency are taken into account, the year-on-year increase in resources will be 11 per cent.
Further increases in health expenditure, to over £4 billion, are planned by 1994-95.
The resources devoted to my law and order programme will be substantially increased.
Provision will rise to £406 million in 1992-93, an increase of 17 per cent.
over planned expenditure in the current financial year.
This increase underlines my commitment to improvements across the whole range of law and order programmes, consistent with the undertakings outlined in the recently published’ Justice Charter for Scotland’.
I have also been able to make significant extra resources available to safeguard the environment, on which expenditure is planned to increase by more than 27 per cent.
next year compared with this year's plans.
I intend to launch Scottish Natural Heritage, which will combine and enhance the functions of the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland and the Countryside Commission for Scotland, with a starting budget of £34.6 million, an increase of more than 28 per cent.
over the combined budgets of its predecessor bodies this year.
I also secured a special addition to the block to help fund improved water quality and sewage treatment standards.
Planned provision in 1992-93 will be £221 million, 33 per cent.
higher than that for the current year.
I have substantially increased the roads and transport programme by nearly £40 million or 10 per cent.
next year compared to this and made further increases which will bring the programme to over £450 million in 1994-95.
Our investment level next year will be 50 per cent.
greater than it was four years ago.
I have been able to boost the Scottish roads programme at both the national and local level.
This will be welcomed by all those who are concerned to see an improvement in Scotland's infrastructure.
It enables continued good progress on the A74 and further improvements to the M8 and other trunk roads and local roads.
My plans for 1992-93 provide for an overall increase in my education programme of some 15 per cent.
over that for 1991-92.
I announced in the House on 26 November my plans for recurrent and capital expenditure on grant-aided colleges.
These measures will allow for almost one in three of all young Scots to enter universities and colleges next year.
My plans also allow for an additional £30 million to be spent over the next three years on improving our school buildings, an increase of 17 per cent.
over previous plans for these years.
On housing, I have increased Scottish Homes' grant in aid next year by £27 million compared with 1991-92 planned expenditure — excluding repayments to the national loans fund — more than double the rate of inflation.
I have also made available to local authorities resources to enable the level of expenditure per council house to be maintained and to enable further measures to be taken to tackle the problems of homelessness and dampness in council housing.
Local authorities will also be able to sustain their expenditure on improvement grants this year in real terms.
The provisions I have announced today will allow us to continue the progress we have made in our important public services.
Public spending has to be at the level the taxpayer can afford, but through our prudent management, we are able to increase spending for 1992-93 by more than the rate of inflation, allowing significant improvements in health, education, law and order, transport and the environment, amongst others.
I look to those responsible, including local authorities, to use these resources wisely and to improve the value for money in the services they buy.
I commend the proposals to the House.
Mr. Donald Dewar (Glasgow, Garscadden)
When the Secretary of State made the equivalent announcement a year ago, I congratulated him on his promotion to the Cabinet.
I remember welcoming in particular his pledge to’ dialogue and accord’in Scotland.
A year on, I cannot repeat that courtesy.
Dialogue and accord have been translated into government by diktat.
Dialogue with the Scottish Office is dialogue with the deaf, as yesterday's statement on the health service underlined.
Planned public expenditure for the next financial year is up by 7 per cent.
in cash terms over this year's estimated outturn.
In real terms, that represents an increase of 2.4 per cent.
Does the Secretary of State accept that the real-terms increase across the United Kingdom on the same basis in the next year is 3.5 per cent., which is a considerably higher figure?
Is that not the real measure of the Secretary of State's influence in the Cabinet?
There is apparently some good news.
I always give due credit.
The Scottish Natural Heritage figure is up over the grant in aid for 1991-92 for the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland and the Scottish Countryside Commission by 21 per cent.
in real terms.
Laughter
However, as the Secretary of State will understand, there are substantial start-up costs, and conservation interests will be disappointed because of the enhanced responsibilities that they are taking on board and the increased staffing to which they are committed.
Will the Secretary of State specifically consider protecting the new body's budget against the extraordinary awards made recently to landowners for not planting trees on sites of special scientific interest?
That has reached the proportions of a scandal and those non-trees give a new meaning to the term’ invisible assets’.
Does the Secretary of State accept that, if the special measures designed to help Lanarkshire and the Cowal peninsula are discounted, there is in real terms a cut of £7.6 million — or 1.6 per cent.
— in the budgets of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
It is little wonder that Crawford Beveridge, the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise, when searching his heart for charity, described his network's provision for next year as’ broadly the same level of resources as this year.’
It is at best a standstill and does not measure up to the problems of dereliction and rising unemployment.
With regard to the industry budget as a whole, there is a cash cut of £16 million in real terms between the net planned outturn and planned spending for the coming year.
In real terms, that is a cut of £40 million, or 7.2 per cent.
A further cut is planned for 1993-94.
The Secretary of State surely cannot justify a cut in the industry budget when, in the past year, unemployment has risen by almost 30,000.
This is bad news for the Scottish economy.
Does the Secretary of State agree that the individual totals announced today do not in all cases stand up to comparison with real-terms increases south of the border?
The Secretary of State made a particular point about the health service budget.
Looking at the figures, I understand that the increase in real terms in England is 4.8 per cent.
between the net outturn and planned expenditure.
In Scotland, it is only 4.2 per cent.
From what the Secretary of State has implied about the performance of opting-out hospitals, I take it that there is likely to be a weighting in their favour.
If that is true, those figures bring little consolation to the national health service as a whole.
Yet again, housing is the main sacrificial victim.
The cut in cash terms is £65 million on the same basis of comparison that I have used throughout my comments.
In real terms, it is £93.1 million, or 13 per cent.
Even allowing for the technical adjustment for repayments to the national loans fund that is mentioned in the footnote, that is a depressing story.
The Secretary of State rather coyly referred to the increase in Scottish Homes' total funding, but not to the overall position.
I am not surprised by that.
Does not the right hon. Gentleman have any appreciation of the problems of dampness, the reduction in choice and the spiralling and ever-increasing tragedy of homelessness?
A total of 34,521 families and single people have applied to the local authorities under the homelessness legislation in 1990-91.
There is no hope for them in today's announcement.
The only good news and the only real cheer that I can take from today's events is that this is the last occasion on which such an announcement will be made by this Secretary of State or by a Conservative Government.
Mr. Lang
We have just heard the usual mixture of muddle, confusion and gloom to which we have become accustomed from the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar), who tries every year to prove that more equals less.
Year after year, he tries to compare like with unlike.
He should be comparing planned expenditure last year with planned expenditure this year.
If we look back at what was spent in 1978-79 under the last Labour Government, we find that it was £3.7 billion, but we are now talking about a budget for next year of approaching £12.5 billion, which is a real increase of 19 per cent.
The hon. Gentleman asked me a number of specific questions.
The Scottish Natural Heritage budget is being increased by 28 per cent.
over the combined budgets of its two component parts.
By anybody's standards, and even by the rather disorganised measurements applied by the hon. Gentleman, that is a substantial increase.
It includes provision for any obligations that may arise as a result of the management agreements relating to the sites of special scientific interest.
The hon. Member for Garscadden then considered the Scottish Enterprise and the Highlands and Islands Enterprise budgets and, because that was good news, he immediately tried to take the Lanarkshire component out of it.
However, to a large extent, the Lanarkshire component is part of that budget, and it would be wrong to take it out.
Our proposals for Scottish Enterprise and for Highlands and Islands Enterprise for the next year amount to an increase of £37 million, or 8.8 per cent., above the planned expenditure for a year ago.
That is a substantial increase by any criteria.
That figure contains substantial provision for the needs of Lanarkshire.
On the industry budget, regional selective assistance, which is led by demand on the part of applicants for assistance, is expected to be down next year, which is only to be expected in the present economic circumstances.
However, the budget will increase from £619 million in 1991-92 to £636 million in 1992-93.
The hon. Gentleman made comparisons with south of the border to try to imply that we have somehow done less well in Scotland.
However, the fact is that the bulk of the budgetary figures flow from the formula consequentials arising from the statement of my right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
As I said at the outset, spending plans in Scotland are 8.1 per cent.
higher than a year ago.
The hon. Gentleman may like to know that spending per head in Scotland will be 22 per cent.
higher than in the rest of the United Kingdom.
The hon. Gentleman then referred to housing, which he regarded as a depressing story.
If he wants a depressing story, he should look back to the housing expenditure of the last Labour Government.
In 1974-75, the last Labour Government spent £1,425 million in real terms at 1991-92 prices; by 1978-79, that had fallen to £918 million.
That means that there was a cut of 35 per cent.
in real terms under the last Labour Government, whereas in the past 12 years there has been an increase of more than 19 per cent.
in the housing budget.
In addition, we are making provision for an increase of 10 per cent .
for Scottish Homes next year to provide more money to cope with dampness and homelessness.
We shall be spending more than £1 billion gross on the housing budget.
The figures that I have announced today represent very good news for the people of Scotland.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Yesterday, I was able to call all the Scottish Members because there was little pressure on the subsequent debate.
That is not the case today.
As there is a great deal of pressure on our subsequent debate, I shall allow questions on the statement to continue for half an hour, until 4.20 pm, but we must then move on.
I ask hon. Members to ask brief, not multiple, questions, please.
Sir Hector Monro (Dumfries)
Unlike the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden, who made a typically miserable response, the people of Scotland will realise that this is an excellent statement.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the emphasis that he has given to housing, bearing in mind the homeless problem, and to Scottish Enterprise, will be valuable in terms of employment?
The additional money that he has given to health and school building and repairs will also be welcomed by the people of Scotland.
I wish my right hon. Friend's plan every success.
Mr. Lang
I am most grateful to my hon. Friend.
Of course, the reason why we are able to increase those programmes is the efficient way in which the economy has been run.
We have reduced inflation and enabled the economy to grow and yield the necessary revenues in taxation, even at the lower level of taxation imposed by the Government.
Thus we are able to devote increased resources to various deserving programmes.
Mrs. Ray Michie (Argyll and Bute)
It is a matter of regret, indeed something of a disgrace, that the spending plans have been announced today in the House when there is still no Scottish Select Committee to scrutinise what the Scottish Office is doing.
Mr. John McAllion (Dundee, East)
And no Scottish Parliament.
Mrs. Michie
Indeed, as the hon. Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion) says, the spending plans should be announced in a Scottish Parliament.
May I ask the Secretary of State specifically about the extra resources to compensate for the running down of Holy Loch?
I welcome the money that he announced the other day.
Could he use his influence with the Secretary of State for Defence to persuade him to hand over the Ministry of Defence buildings so that the money that the Scottish Office has allocated is not used to pay for them?
That would be a great help.
I am disappointed —
Mr. Speaker
Briefly, please.
Mrs. Michie
I am disappointed that the statement does not contain a commitment to get rid of the poll tax in Scotland a year earlier, because it was inflicted on Scotland a year before everyone else.
One other point, Mr. Speaker.
I am also disappointed at the amount that has been given to Scottish Homes for housing.
Perhaps the Secretary of State is not aware of the severe problems, particularly in rural areas and in Rothesay in my constituency.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Lady suggested that a Scottish Select Committee could scrutinise the figures.
During all the years that the Scottish Select Committee existed, I do not recall it undertaking that task.
However, I am grateful to the hon. Lady for welcoming the announcement that we have made of increased resources for Holy Loch, following the withdrawal of the American navy.
It has not been possible for the American navy to leave behind the assets that it had developed there, but my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Defence will certainly take note of the point that the hon. Lady raised about Ministry of Defence assets in the area.
On the community charge, the funding for local authorities has been increased by 6.1 per cent.
for next year — well above the rate of inflation.
That should enable local authorities to maintain sensible spending programmes without any need for a real increase in community charge levels.
The hon. Lady may not have heard what I said about Scottish Homes.
I announced an increase of grant in aid of 10 per cent., roughly two and a half times the present rate of inflation.
That will be valuable to that body.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn (Perth and Kinross)
Does my right hon. Friend know that I gave up the opportunity of becoming a solicitor like the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) because accountants put the losses on the right and the profits on the left?
The hon. Gentleman appears not to understand the vast opportunities that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has announced today and the profits that Scotland is getting.
Those of us who are citizens of the United Kingdom who live north of the border have benefited from my right hon. Friend's sagacity and influence in the Cabinet and are vastly privileged by the statement that he has made today.
Mr. Lang
I am most grateful to my hon. and learned Friend.
Soliciting's loss was clearly advocacy's gain.
He was absolutely right to welcome the substantial increases that I have announced today for a range of programmes.
My hon. and learned Friend will be glad to welcome the 16.7 per cent.
increase for the law and order programme.
There has also been a 10.1 per cent.
increase in the health programme, a 15 per cent.
increase in the education and sport programme, an 18 per cent.
increase in the environmental services programme, a 20 per cent.
increase in the agriculture programme and an 18 per cent.
increase in the local authority capital non-housing programme.
Those are examples of some worthwhile increases in the spending programmes in Scotland.
Mr. William McKelvey (Kilmarnock and Loudoun)
How much has Strathclyde regional council asked for to improve the roads programme, how much has the Secretary of State given, and how much has been earmarked or ring-fenced for the extension to the A77 to meet the M8?
Mr. Lang
We have made provision within Strathclyde's budget for funds to enable it to undertake development of the A77.
How those resources are apportioned is a matter for the council.
Within the increased roads programme that I announced today — a road programme which will have increased by 50 per cent.
in a four-year period — I have also included provisions to enable work on the A77 Ayr road route to start within the planning programme period.
Mrs. Maria Fyfe (Glasgow, Maryhill)
Will the Secretary of State join me in congratulating the 200 people who will be sleeping out in Glasgow on Friday night to highlight the plight of the homeless?
Does he realise that, on every working day last year, 84 Scottish young children became homeless?
Would he mind spelling out precisely what he is going to do to help the homeless?
He failed to do so in his brief statement from the Dispatch Box.
We would all like to hear about a far larger programme than any he has managed to announce since the Government came to office; otherwise, they stand convicted of hypocrisy and bad faith.
Mr. Lang
We made special provision for the homelessness problem last year, and my hon. Friend the Minister with responsibility for housing will be making a further announcement in the next day or two about the homeless figures for which we are making additional provision in the current year.
One has to acknowledge that homelessness is not merely a housing problem but is also a social problem, which requires not merely money but an approach to discourage and prevent young people from becoming homeless.
Mr. Alexander Eadie (Midlothian)
Would the right hon. Gentleman consider a proposition that would increase public spending in Scotland without costing the Government anything?
We are a signatory to an EC agreement which Germany, France and Spain have honoured — the grants given by the EC to areas of industrial dereliction, especially mining areas like Midlothian, which would qualify for such grants.
There is £100 million available for grants in mining areas.
Why does he not convince the Cabinet to be good Europeans and to obey the rules like France, Germany and Spain?
Then that money could be made available to areas in Scotland where coal mining has contracted, such as Midlothian.
Mr. Lang
The Government have an unrivalled record of achievement in securing grants for Scotland under the various European Community schemes.
If anyone needs to be convinced about the need to release the money for grants, it is the hon. Gentleman's right hon. Friend, Commissioner Millan, who is now attacking the additionality rules that he defended when he was Secretary of State for Scotland.
He should face up to the need to release those much-needed funds for Scotland.
Mr. Gordon McMaster (Paisley, South)
Is the Secretary of State aware that, by the admission of his hon. Friend the Minister responsible for Scottish industry, the Paisley postcode area lost 76 per cent.
of its manufacturing jobs between 1979 and 1989?
Is he also aware that further job losses are in prospect at Coats' in Paisley?
In that situation, why is he not taking the chance to make an announcement on a special economic initiative for Renfrewshire?
As part of that, the European social fund could have been used to give twice as much money to the area, because that is what Commissioner Millan wants to do, using the additionality provisions.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Member will know that Renfrewshire is within Strathclyde and therefore within the Strathclyde integrated development operation, which is the largest single area for assistance identified by the European Community.
For a number of years, the Government have secured substantial funds for the area.
He will also be aware of the fact that the Inverclyde enterprise zone is within Renfrewshire, and will be aware of the existence and extreme competence of the Renfrewshire enterprise company.
All those bodies are able and available to help meet Renfrewshire's problems, using the resources of central Government, which will be substantially increased as a result of my announcement.
Mrs. Irene Adams (Paisley, North)
The Secretary of State said in his statement that he would maintain the level of spending on council houses and would make extra funds available to combat homelessness and dampness.
Is he aware that, in Renfrew district, the council estimates that, during the next five years, it will need £300 million to bring houses up to a tolerable level?
Will he put a figure on the amount that he intends to make available to deal with homelessness and dampness?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend the Minister responsible for housing will make an announcement about that figure shortly.
It will be in addition to the £9.5 million that we made available to deal with homelessness and dampness last year.
That figure will be part of a programme through which we will spend more than £1 billion on housing next year.
We might have been able to put more into housing this year, but we had to put £50 million out of the block into local authority spending.
Had I not had to do that, to meet the high spending levels of local authorities, that £50 million could have been available for housing.
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
When will the Secretary of State wake up to the realities of public finance in the United Kingdom?
Is it not the case that his departmental budget is increasing less quickly than that of any other major spending Department?
Can the right hon. Gentleman explain why the Department of Transport, whose budget has increased three times the rate of that of the Scottish Office, can find £1.5 billion for additional railway improvements in the south of England, but cannot find £80 million to electrify the Edinburgh-Aberdeen railway line?
When will public finance in the United Kingdom stop being a ramp for the subsidy junkies of the south of England?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is wrong if he seeks to characterise the Scottish budget for next year as somehow lower than the spending increases for other Departments.
The increase for the Scottish Office will be 8.1 per cent.
higher than the current year, and spending in Scotland will be 22 per cent.
higher per head than that in England.
If the hon. Gentleman wants a level playing field between Scotland and England, he will have to face up to a substantial drop in spending by central Government in Scotland.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
If that sentiment was intended to sound like the deathbed conversion of Scrooge, I am not sure that it was entirely convincing.
The Secretary of State mentioned roads, but he did not refer to the A1.
The right hon. Gentleman now has figures available that reveal that the A1 in East Lothian is carrying as much traffic as the A74, so when can he make an announcement about the timetable for dualling the A1?
Mr. Lang
We shall be making an announcement on more of the detail of our roads programme in due course.
In the meantime, I hope that the hon. Gentleman will welcome the £38 million increase in the roads programme next year — an increase of 10 per cent.
Within that programme, it should be possible to make allowances for work at Tranent and on the dualling to Haddington onthe A1.
Mr. Robert Hughes (Aberdeen, North)
Why did the Secretary of State keep using the qualifying phrase:’ I have less for other programmes’in his budget?
What is he trying to hide?
On the distribution of moneys, can the right hon. Gentleman assure me that resources for the health service will not be skewed towards the new NHS trusts as a bribe and a reward to those who took the bids?
Mr. Lang
Leaving aside the phrase that the hon. Gentleman attributed to me in the early part of his question, I can reassure him that the budget for the health service will be £3.7 billion, an increase of £342 million, or 10.1 per cent.
Earlier this year, his hon. Friend the Member for Strathkelvin and Bearsden (Mr. Galbraith) called for a £500 million increase in the health budget.
Since then, we have increased it by £225 million and have now raised it by a further £342 million.
We are already spending, or propose to spend, more than the Opposition have called for.
Those resources are equivalent to a 44 per cent.
increase in real terms since 1979; that is why we are able to deliver such improved health care in Scotland.
Mr. Calum Macdonald (Western Isles)
The Secretary of State mentioned school buildings.
Is he aware that Western Isles is contemplating the closure of as many as five secondary schools next year because of the revenue shortfall faced by the council?
The right hon. Gentleman properly mentioned the difficulties faced by Holy Loch.
Is he completely insensitive to the economic, social and financial crisis that now threatens to engulf the Western Isles?
Mr. Lang
Certainly I am not, which is why I gave it consent to borrow such a substantial amount of money.
We have committed ourselves to increase the programme on school buildings by 16 per cent.
for each of the next three years.
I believe that that will be welcomed throughout Scotland.
Mr. Gummer
No, I will not give way again.
The only thing that would be worse than uncertainty would be to be given duff information.
I certainly will not do that.
However, I can tell the hon. Member for Banff and Buchan what I am seeking to achieve.
I wish to remove the proposals that discriminate against larger farms, against the United Kingdom, against northern farms, against specialists and against the position in, for example, Spain, Portugal and eastern Germany.
That is the first area that must be put right.
Secondly, all the members of the Community have agreed — I think without exception — that there will be no agreement on anything until there is agreement on everything.
It would not be proper to start talking about such matters in their final form until we know about olive oil, sugar and wine and the other products about which there are real issues to be raised.
Thirdly, there is a concern to explain to the Community that if there are to be compensations, we cannot create a whole new system of compensatory payments which will last for ever at a price which will never be able to be paid.
I am sure that the hon. Member for South Shields will be pleased to hear that I agree with him on that.
In a document which contained precious little about what he would do for the future of British agriculture, he had one crumb of comfort for the farmer.
I point it out because it is hidden away in a lot of business about freedom of information and other issues about which he is so keen.
In the middle of the document, he says that if the MacSharry proposals were accepted — he says that they would be — they would not last very long because they would be too expensive.
That is why they must not be accepted.
They would cost far too much and would be impossible for the future.
That is why many countries, including, for example, Italy, are so deeply opposed to the proposals.
Of course, I cannot go into detail about what we would seek to do, but I shall give one or two indications because that is only fair to the House.
In the arable sector, it is clearly important to reduce the end price and to ensure that farmers are able to continue to look after the land.
That means that we must have a set-aside system.
However, it would be wrong to have a system which meant that some countries set aside land so that other countries could produce more.
Therefore, we seek a system which will share out the burden of set-aside between the major producers in particular and will not exclude some countries while laying the burden on others.
It is also important that we do not allow many farms to be excluded on the ground of their size.
To have a set-aside system which applied only to farms in the north of Europe would discriminate considerably.
I am happy to have a de minimis figure which would avoid the bureaucratic nightmare that we do not want.
However, it would have to be a de minimis figure and not one inclined to exclude very large numbers of producers to the small number.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
When considering the regulations for set-aside, which is a very valuable tool in the present negotiations, will the Minister make them rather more positive by enabling farmers who have land set aside — especially, perhaps, for one year — to use the year to clean the land rather than merely to cut it?
In that way, when the land eventually came back into production farmers would use fewer chemicals which would be even more environmentally friendly.
Mr. Gummer
I am certainly open to my hon. Friend's suggestions.
I am not keen on one-year set-aside schemes.
I do not think that one can be sufficiently environmentally friendly from one year to another.
The longer scheme is widely thought to be better and I should like it to be more at the centre of the proposals, as I want the environment as a whole to be at the centre.
However, I shall certainly consider whether her suggestion could be included and I am sure that she is right to suggest the positive rather than the negative.
As for the beef regime — a second area that we have not yet discussed — there is another reason why it might be thought that the hon. Gentleman was a little premature in suggesting that we had already agreed these matters.
We are about to have our first discussions.
The Commission's proposals on beef are absolute nonsense.
They do nothing to solve the problem.
Indeed, they do not begin to face the problem.
They only make the problem worse in certain areas, not least in Scotland.
I do not understand how we are supposed to have a system which deals best with the most difficult parts of the Community but which makes matters worse in Scotland and Wales, but that is what the scheme does.
It does not work because it does not meet the problems of intervention.
We must reduce the degree to which intervention plays a part and increase that to which the premium plays a part, and I am negotiating along those lines.
I hope that we can find an answer.
The spokesman for the Liberal Democrats will probably agree that to go into further detail could make it less easy to get the type of consensus that we want.
It will not be perfect, it will not be what I should like, but it will be better than what is before us — better in terms of our particular problem — and I hope that it will deal entirely with the discrimination.
It is unacceptable to have headage limits for sheep — I do not mean new headage limits, but the present ones — because they do not deal with the problem.
It is not the number of ewes that a particular unit has which causes the problem; it is the increase in the production of ewes generally.
That is a wholly different argument and it is therefore important to concentrate on it.
My priority is to get rid of discrimination and we shall have to find out which of the various possibilities will be the best alternative to that which is now proposed.
I should not like to commit myself too closely to any one of them because my priority — in negotiating one must be clear about one's priority — is to get rid of discrimination.
That is the one thing that really matters in the House and we must not undermine it in our negotiations.
On the cost to the European Community budget, I do not believe that it is sensible to have a system that costs more.
We must have a system that uses what we spend more effectively.
If, for example, we reduce the share of the system taken up by intervention in beef, we should be able to get that money more directly to the farmer.
Locking beef up in a cold store, paying the storage man to look after it and then paying more to export it is not a sensible use of Community money and it does not reach the farmer.
That type of change would enable one to say honestly that a redirection of the money already spent could do a great deal to improve the situation of farmers.
Mr. Eric Martlew (Carlisle) rose
Mr. Gummer
I am sorry, but I shall not give way.
I must end because other hon. Members wish to speak.
We are determined to ensure that —
Mr. Martlew
It is important.
Mr. Gummer
There is a great deal that is important, but the hon. Gentleman may catch your eye later, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
In trying to negotiate we must give considerable credence to the particular problem of the most difficult areas.
Therefore, I commit myself in the negotiations to support the special financial help for farming in the less-favoured areas.
Even though hon. Members disagree on many issues, I believe that the House will agree that I have tried to make that a priority within the narrow band of the 17 or so per cent.
of my budget which I control directly.
I have tried to do that year in, year out because I believe that in environmental terms — if in no others — keeping people, their sheep and their cattle in the hillsides is essential if the hillsides are to be kept as they should be.
I am sure that hon. Members will have noticed that in the recent announcement of environmentally sensitive areas — especially those in the Lake district, Exmoor and Dartmoor — I have clearly taken that view, with regard to not only hillsides but moorland areas.
I shall continue to do that.
I also believe that the common agricultural policy must be much more centred on the environment.
It is not satisfactory to change a policy such as that which we have at the moment, and to have add-ons for the environment.
That is not sensible and I seek to move the Community in the appropriate direction.
In the negotiations, as in so many other matters, the British attitude is in advance of others.
We are the most environmentally friendly Agriculture Ministry in Europe and we continue to bring others behind us.
They are copying our proposals and schemes.
I hope that we shall be increasingly successful.
It would be possible and proper to provide aid for people who are especially disadvantaged by the changes — for example, the very small farmer in Portugal who wants to get out and to join his land to that of his neighbour.
I want to help him to do that.
I see no reason why we should not have a pension scheme connected to restructuring, but the aid is supposed to affect the very small farms directly.
It would obtain to the person who had gone out and not to his heirs and successors and it would involve his going out and someone else taking on his land.
That would be a restructuring aid.
It is also important to ensure that attention is paid to other areas.
We cannot have a discriminatory system in milk which works so badly against the British dairy industry.
We do not need the new cow premium.
It would be better to operate on the present system and to get that right than to have a discriminatory cow premium.
It is important to ensure that, whatever happens, it applies throughout the Community.
The tobacco regime should be properly restricted.
I cannot believe that it is sensible to spend as much as we do at present per hectare on tobacco.
I find it odd when it is suggested that it would be better for other people to grow the tobacco and for us to import it — as though that would help the health of the Community.
I do not accept that, but we should look more carefully at the way in which we spend money on tobacco.
It is important to ensure that the negotiations take account of the whole Community and not simply the northern products that have been put on the table first.
To accept those when we do not have a deal on a range of other things would not be a satisfactory result for those of us in the north.
I wish now to consider the timetable for negotiations.
It is difficult to see how a sensible start can be made on the discussions if we do not know the outcome of the GATT round.
If we do not know what we have committed ourselves to in the GATT round, it is difficult to know how to decide the reforms.
Signore Goria, the Italian Minister, has shown a remarkable grasp of those issues throughout the debate.
He made a powerful intervention claiming that we must know where we are before we can take decisions, or we shall be paying twice — once in respect of the negotiations and then for the GATT round.
That would not be satisfactory.
I cannot tell the farming community that this will be a short negotiation.
Some Opposition Members might claim that the negotiations have already ended.
I would love to have short negotiations because I am deeply conscious of the serious position in which the farming industry finds itself because of its lack of knowledge of where we are going.
However, to pick the wrong answer — even if it was a quick answer — would be devastating for British agriculture.
We cannot agree to something which starts off by being so fundamentally discriminatory that, year by year, it becomes even more discriminatory.
What begins by looking just a little off parallel might become wildly different.
Anyone who considers what has happened with regard to the sugar and milk quotas or to anything else about which we felt that we should have had a different package but could not achieve it will be aware of how dangerous it is to allow the negotiations to proceed quickly when a longer discussion might result in a better solution.
I do not claim that the outcome will be perfect.
However, it is the duty of the United Kingdom Government and the Minister responsible to argue the issues one by one until we reach an acceptable answer.
The answer will not be perfect, but it must be acceptable.
I regret that I cannot spell out part by part and line by line exactly what I want to achieve.
However, I do not believe that any hon. Member would expect me to do what no other negotiating Minister has done, is doing or will do.
Can anyone expect Mr. Kiechle to stand up and explain everything that he is looking for?
Would Mr. Mermaz do that?
Of course they would not, because just like me they are trying to find an answer that is as close as possible to what is best for their nations and for Europe as a whole.
I hope that the House will support the motion.
That would help to show the universal determination of all parties in the House to achieve an answer that will provide a proper future for British agriculture and enable me at least to be able to tell my companions in the negotiations that there are things that matter so much to us that we will sit there until we achieve them, even if it means that we will sit there for many more months to come.
Dr. David Clark (South Shields)
As always, the Minister tried to be statesmanlike, but ended up being his usual partisan self.
He accepted very little responsibility for the state of British agriculture.
While we would not want him to show his full negotiating hand at this stage, he gave us very little information.
The Minister's speech was one of little substance —
Mr. Home Robertson
And of great triviality.
Dr. Clark
Indeed, and one of great triviality, as my hon. Friend has said.
Listening to the Minister today, it was hard to appreciate that the Conservatives have been in government for 13 years.
He tried to say that Labour would not negotiate.
Tragically, we cannot negotiate at the moment, but that will be put right before too long.
It is rather disingenuous of the Minister to extrapolate the logic that, because someone has described a situation, that means that he necessarily agrees with it.
Whether the Minister likes it or not, I believe that it is probable that MacSharry's notions will be accepted.
That does not mean that I or the Labour party agree with those proposals.
We do not and I hope that the Minister will accept that we have stated repeatedly that we do not believe that the MacSharry proposals are good for British or European agriculture.
Mr. Gummer
If that is the case, would it not have been better for the hon. Gentleman to keep his own counsel when he stated publicly that we were bound to fail in our negotiations?
Would it not have helped British farmers if he had said that he was determined to support us and ensure that we succeeded?
That is not being disingenuous: that is asking for the kind of conduct that used to be normal on both sides of the House.
Dr. Clark
I made it plain that we oppose the MacSharry proposals.
I hope that the right hon. Gentleman will accept that.
That does not mean that we accept all the Government's negotiating stances.
We believe that the negotiating position has not been particularly clever.
Contrary to the Minister's partisan approach, I want to begin by taking a consensus view.
British agriculture is in crisis.
That is argued by the National Farmers Union, the Farmers Union of Wales, the National Farmers Union for Scotland and all informed farming opinion.
The Minister said nothing today that will reassure the farming community.
We need only consider the scene.
The Minister avoided all the details.
Every day last year, 19 farmers and 14 farm workers left the land.
Nineteen farmers voted with their feet every day last year and left their occupation.
That is not a happy position.
Farmers' incomes are at their lowest level, but the price of food to consumers is not falling.
Modern agriculture requires investment to survive, but investment has fallen by more than half since the Government took office.
The Minister made great play of environmental issues.
However, the Government's own Institute of Terrestrial Ecology produced figures in October which show that’ hedgerow removal between 1984 and 1990 is greater than that in the period 1978-1984.’
In addition, as much as 10 per cent .
of our total stock of hedgerows was destroyed between 1984 and 1990.
So, the economy of agriculture is in dire straits and the environment is suffering, but I am afraid that the position on animal health is even more dire.
In September the Minister's own chief veterinary officer painted an optimistic scenario of the problem of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, with the result that the farming press ran the banner headline,’ Goodbye to the BSE scourge’.
Tragically, I have to wish that that was the case because today's figures do not give us much ground for comfort, but, as long as the Minister continues his present style of trying to hype up and to trivialise every issue, that is what will happen to our agriculture.
Far from the BSE scourge easing, exactly the contrary is happening.
The number of confirmed cases of BSE until November of this year totalled 15,698, whereas for the whole of last year they amounted only — I use the word’ only’relatively — to 14,322.
The total number of confirmed cases of BSE is now in excess of 41,000, despite the Government's estimate in 1989 that the cumulative total would peak at 20,000 cases.
We still await the peak.
It does not do any good to try to run away from reality or to trivialise these issues.
Blue ear disease in pigs has been allowed to run unchecked by the Government who in September closed their veterinary investigation centre in Lincoln, which is where work into that type of disease was carried out.
Sheep dipping has been decontrolled by the Government and self-notification has been introduced.
The result is that farmers are not dipping their sheep.
Scab will increase.
It is not really surprising that animal diseases are increasing when we consider the Government's deliberate run-down of their veterinary service.
In 1979, 580 veterinary officers were employed by the service, but there are now only 337.
That is a decline of 42 per cent.
As a result, we had to import 402 vets last year.
I repeat that, as a result of the Government's policy, we had to import a vet every single day of last year to try to keep on top of animal diseases.
The legacy for agriculture of 13 years of Tory government is little short of disastrous in the economic, environmental and animal health areas.
’ Never have I known a time when farmers were more fearful of the future, and never has that fear been more justified.’
I thought that those were wise words when I read them and was delighted to find that they had been written by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the hon. Member for Penrith and The Border (Mr. Maclean) in The Lake District Herald only this week.
He was right.
There has never been a time when our farmers have been more fearful of the future.
I found it strange that those words had come from the Parliamentary Secretary because, when I read them, I thought that they had been written by the Labour candidate, John Metcalfe, because there was no other indication that that article had been written by a Minister of the Crown who is responsible for this country's agriculture.
When Ministers are faced with such unpalatable facts — and they are facts — they tend to blame the common agricultural policy, but those are domestic decisions.
Every one of those decisions affecting British agriculture was taken by the Government.
At the EC level, and after 13 years in power, the Government cannot escape responsibility for the operation of the CAP.
After all, the Minister is always returning to the House to tell us what a wonderful deal he has got for the British farmer and consumer.
He has done it time and again—
Mr. David Nicholson (Taunton)
Yes, my right hon. Friend has got such deals time and again.
Dr. Clark
I hear mutterings from the Conservative Back Benches to the effect that the Minister does return with good deals, but if one asked the British farmer, that is not the message that one would hear.
Mr. David Nicholson
Before the hon. Gentleman gets stuck into the CAP, on which matter I hope that he will be as robust as my right hon. Friend in defending the interests of the British farmer, may I advise him that I was interested to note that he began his speech by talking about animal diseases and BSE?
Does he think that he is helping our farmers in their genuine plight by highlighting such diseases in this debate?
Although the beef market is now in a better position, does not the hon. Gentleman realise the damage that he has done to beef consumption and to our farmers in the past year by constantly highlighting that issue on radio and television?
Dr. Clark
We do not solve problems by refusing to acknowledge them.
Indeed, if the Government had faced up to the reality of BSE earlier and had accepted the Opposition's proposal for 100 per cent.
compensation for suspected cases instead of being dilatory for 18 months, the problem would have been contained much more quickly.
I must advise the hon. Gentleman, however, that the phrase in Big Farm Weekly,’ Goodbye to the BSE scourge’was not mine, but that of the chief veterinary officer.
If the hon. Gentleman is seeking to make a charge against me, he must make that charge equally against the chief veterinary officer for raising that issue in the first place.
I should appreciate being allowed to return to the issue of the CAP.
I begin by reminding hon. Members of the reforms that the Minister has brought back to the House.
It is because of those reforms that it is right for us to be sceptical about some of the claims that the right hon. Gentleman has made today.
I recall that in February 1988 the then Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), went to Brussels to discuss agriculture and returned to the House trumpeting the reforms that would radically change the CAP.
In our debate on that, the hon. Member for Wealden (Sir G. Johnson Smith) challenged me for daring to challenge the Prime Minister about whether the system would work.
I expect that not only can the hon. Gentleman remember that, but that he will recall that we warned at that time that the reforms were illusory and would not work.
We have been proved right.
The reforms have failed.
The CAP still takes up two thirds of the EC budget, but only £1 in every £3 gets through to the farmers.
The whole point of those reforms was to get rid of the food mountains.
Conservative Ministers told us that they would disappear, but they have not.
Indeed, those mountains of food are continuing to grow.
At the end of October, there were 494,000 tonnes of skimmed milk powder in intervention; 446,000 tonnes of butter in intervention; 850,000 tonnes of beef in intervention — the amount is growing — and 15.5 million tonnes of cereals in intervention.
The overall position now is worse than in 1988, yet we were assured by the Government in 1988 that we should leave it to them.
They said,’ We have got you a good deal.
The problems will be solved.’
Those problems have not been solved — just as we said that they would not be — because the Government did not take the issue seriously enough and did not press as they should have pressed for the substantial reforms that were needed.
Furthermore, the right hon. Member for Finchley had the opportunity to do just that because at that time she had the right of veto.
I am afraid that the right hon. Lady sold this country short on that occasion.
Mr. Gummer
How does the hon. Gentleman square his enthusiasm for the right of veto on that occasion with the decision of the leader of his party that he would give way at Maastricht on all the issues that are now being discussed?
Is it still true that the hon. Gentleman is an anti-European although his party is now pro-Europe?
The House must ask that question, given that the hon. Gentleman is asking about vetoes while his party is in favour of lying down and being rolled over.
Dr. Clark
It is no good the Minister, whenever he is found to be wanting and to be wrong, starting to hurl abuse across the Chamber or making allegations that have absolutely no substance.
My right hon. Friend the leader of the Labour party has never said what the right hon. Gentleman has suggested — and the right hon. Gentleman knows that that is the case.
One of the key mechanisms of the Conservative party's CAP reforms was set-aside.
At the time we warned that it would not work.
It has not worked.
When the Minister announced the scheme I described the measures as’ no more than damage limitation measures.
They seek merely to tackle the effects of surpluses, not the causes.’
That is what the Labour party said in 1988 and we have been proved right.
The mere concept of set-aside is wrong.
Even though land has been set aside, production of cereals has increased.
It increased by 2 per cent.
last year, even though over 131,000 hectares have been set aside in the United Kingdom.
The simple reason for that is that farmers put their most marginal and least productive land into set-aside.
One has only to travel by train from the north-east of England to see the land which has been set aside, squeezed between the railway lines, to realise what the farmers are doing.
Last year in its official report the EEC confirmed the failure of set-aside.
It said:’ the land left fallow in almost all Member States was of very low productive level.’
Yet, in spite of that, set-aside is one of the key points of the MacSharry proposals.
The operation of set-aside is even worse than the concept.
In a parliamentary answer to me the Minister told me that he’ had identified 18 serious irregularities and a number of additional cases involving minor breaches of the scheme rules.
Payments were withheld or recovered in full or in part in 39 cases.’
The Minister's Department now concedes that it cannot check every farm in every year.
The problem that we identified is only the tip of the iceberg.
They were only the cases that have been uncovered.
We do not know the extent of the abuse or misuse.
I fully accept the point that the Minister made about The Sunday Times.
I accept his statement as the word of a right hon. Member of this House.
He said that The Sunday Times journalist made a fraudulent claim and forged the heading of a Ministry letter.
The matter is serious because if one inspects the photocopy of the letter one sees that he forged not only the heading but the’ Dear Dr.
Rufford’.
Mr. Gummer
I made the matter clear and I do not want anyone to misunderstand.
I explained exactly what happened.
The letter was the standard letter that would have gone out if the claim had been entertained.
The letter was prepared but would not have gone out until the land had been seen.
Therefore, the letter was on plain paper.
What has been added is the heading’ Ministry of Agriculture’.
Hon. Members
’ Ah!’]
No, I made it clear.
Hon. Gentlemen should be clear about it.
I made no claim other than that.
It is a serious matter to add a letter heading because it hides the fact that the document was a draft letter which was ready to go out if the claim was entertained.
The claim was not entertained.
The land could not be inspected because Dr. Rufford did not own it so he made sure that the land was not inspected.
Dr. Clark
I am grateful to the Minister for that intervention.
This is a serious issue.
I hope that, if there was a fraudulent claim, the Minister will prosecute.
If he does not, he will bring the scheme into disrepute.
May I check with the Minister his actual words, which I have in front of me?
He said:’ That letter was reproduced in The Sunday Times under a faked Ministry letterhead.’
The Minister agrees that that is what he said.
If the letterhead was faked, surely, as he says, not only was the story fabricated but the application was fraudulent.
I hope that the Minister will take the necessary legal action.
Certainly, the Opposition will be only too pleased to support him in that respect.
The reason why I take such a strong line on the set-aside scheme is not merely that it is right so to do.
It worries us that many farmers appear to be paid for doing nothing.
The public are worried about that.
They regard it as a racket.
How can we justify rich landowners taking public handouts while making their farmworkers redundant?
It has been estimated that one farmworker loses his job for every 750 acres of set-aside.
The farmworker receives only a pittance in pay-off — perhaps £2,000 in redundancy pay — whereas the owner of the land may receive thousands of pounds for several years.
That does not seem equitable.
The list of those who receive set-aside payments in The Sunday Times article reads like the pages of’ Burke's Peerage’.
Will the Minister confirm that at least one Government Minister receives money from the set-aside scheme?
Was The Sunday Times right in that assertion?
That part of the story, not the fake letters, is the key point.
Mr. Robert N. Wareing (Liverpool, West Derby)
On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
I am sorry to intrude on the debate in this way, but, before the speech of the right hon. Member for Selby (Mr. Alison), the House was addresed by the hon. Member for Ceredigion and Pembroke, North (Mr. Howells).
I believe that it is a convention of the House that, when a Member speaks, he waits to listen to the subsequent speaker.
There were five Liberal Democrat Members present, including the hon. Member for Ceredigion and Pembroke, North.
Has the Liberal party broken a convention, or was it merely a display of bad manners that they left the Chamber immediately after their spokesman had finished?
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
I consider that a genuine point of order.
I would have wished that the Liberal Democrats might have remained in their place, especially as their amendment is now before the House for debate.
I am pleased that the hon. Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) has brought the matter to the attention of the House.
I hope that it will be noted by those who read the Official Report tomorrow.
Mr. William McKelvey (Kilmarnock and Loudon)
It will probably be understood that I wish to make my remarks in the context of the Scottish agricultural scene.
Under the MacSharry proposals Scotland would suffer disproportionately to not only other EC countries but other countries within the United Kingdom.
Before I take issue with the quantities on which the subsidies within the MacSharry proposals are based, may I remind the Minister of what farming means generally in Scotland.
The gross output of farming in Scotland in 1990 was £1.5 billion.
Around 50,000 people are engaged directly in farming and a further 140,000 work in the support and service sectors of Scottish agriculture.
Agriculture accounts for 14 per cent.
of the value of Scottish non-oil output and 6 per cent.
of employment.
Those who know the geography of Scotland will understand that the latter percentage is much higher in rural areas where there is no other employment.
The figures show that agriculture represents a major industry for Scotland.
Like all other areas of Great Britain which are involved in agriculture, Scotland has seen a slump of 10 per cent.
in farm incomes this year on top of a massive 21 per cent.
slump last year.
The MacSharry proposals, if implemented in anything like their current form, would decimate Scottish agriculture because Scottish farms are generally well above the average size of farms in the EC and in the rest of the United Kingdom, for historical but mainly geographical reasons.
Compensation is based on the small farmer or the peasant farmer in the EC.
To find out how it affects Scottish farmers one need go no further than my constituency.
Although Kilmarnock is an industrial area, there is a large rural area in the constituency in the heart of Ayrshire.
All hon. Members will know the reputation of the Ayrshire farmer.
About three quarters of dairy herds in EC member states qualify for full compensation.
In Ayrshire, with some world-famous herds, the larger farms would receive less than 5 per cent.
of the compensation.
The same problem applies to the new proposals, which are based on compensating flocks that are far lower than the Scottish average.
The Scottish Agricultural College did a survey to find out what would happen if the MacSharry proposals were to be implemented in the Borders region.
The in-depth research programme showed that farm incomes in the region are likely to suffer a direct loss of between £6 million and £6.5 million per annum, depending on how responsive farmers are in meeting the stocking density limits.
The table which the college provides shows clearly that half the losses would be experienced by cereal farmers, a quarter by sheep farmers and the rest by farmers with beef, suckler cow and dairy herds.
The grain trade in the Borders region is very important not just for the region itself.
The turnover is about £6.5 million per annum.
At current prices the cereal farmers will experience a £2 million per annum contraction immediately and there will be a further contraction as farmers reduce output in response to lower prices.
There will be a knock-on effect.
United Distillers distils some of the finest whiskies in Scotland and supplies Johnnie Walker whisky to my constituency, where we have the biggest bottling plant in Europe.
The whisky is bottled there and dispatched abroad, earning a great deal of money for the coffers of the Chancellor.
It is company policy to buy barley in Scotland.
It would all be from Scotland if there were sufficient supplies of appropriate barley.
The barley which is grown in the Borders is particularly useful to the whisky industry because it has a high starch and low nitrogen content.
Its abilities to germinate are exactly those required for the mashing of our marvellous golden liquid.
We could not afford to allow the Borders farmers to suffer the terrible experience of stopping farming or reducing drastically their supplies of barley to the whisky industry.
I have read with interest some of the Minister's statements.
When the Secretary of State spoke to the House on 14 February he opposed the MacSharry proposals vehemently.
On that occasion he used the example of their effect on Welsh farmers.
The Minister has told us today that he does not want to let us know what his proposals will be when he goes into negotiations.
No poker player will sit with a man at his back or show his hand, but nor will a poker player have a cocky attitude to the game.
Sometimes at the Dispatch Box the Minister displays not just a cocky attitude — on occasions I could be accused of that myself — but almost an arrogant attitude.
Such an attitude often hardens the attitude of those with whom one negotiates.
Sometimes the negotiating game can be played a little more skilfully.
We hope that the Minister will get the best deal that he possibly can to protect our farmers and we would support him in achieving that objective.
But the deal must be seen to be fair to all farmers in the United Kingdom because their circumstances vary depending on the country and the area in which they farm.
It is important that the negotiations should be successful.
I do not know whether the Minister will come back with the news that the farmers want.
As has been said before, there is a general gloom about the farming industry.
They have suffered tremendous losses in income.
I often speak to the farmers in my area and they are seriously concerned about whether they can continue.
Moreover, their sons are loth to follow their fathers into farming.
If they do not go into farming, there is real reason for gloom because it could well mean the end of the Scottish farming industry.
Therefore, their spirits must be lifted.
It is not me who distrusts the Minister's ability to negotiate, but the farmers I met today who doubt whether he can deliver the goods.
Because of that, the National Farmers Union of Scotland gave me a lengthy and accurate brief.
I do not wish to take up much time other than to remind the Minister of the five-point agenda with which the NFU would like him to be armed in the poker games of Europe.
It says:’(1) The British Government must stand by its anti-discrimination pledges — no second thoughts.’
There must be no letting up.
It goes on:’(2) The CAP negotiations must build on reasonably broad agreement on the principle of resource withdrawal in the shape of arable set-aside. (3) The negotiations must also develop constructively the common thread of agreement on the environment, and on the need for permanent measures to compensate for the disadvantages of farming in Less Favoured Areas.
(4) Import policy must not undermine sensible CAP reform.
The Minister of Agriculture has said that he is not going to have land set-aside in Britain so that the rest of Europe can produce more'.
He's right.
But the logic must not stop there.
Land set aside in the EC must not be the green light for imports from other countries either — whether from countries in the GATT negotiations, or from Eastern Europe.
The Minister has also said that it' is no good raising standards here so that our farmers pay the cost — while others use the old methods and flood our markets with crueller but cheaper food'’.
I support that.
The NFU and the Opposition want action to deal with Britain's £6 million trading deficit in food and drink which, rightly, concerns the Government, the farmers and the British producers and certainly concerns me.
The fifth point says:’ There must be detailed negotiations on how we would be affected by the detailed introduction of new commodity support arrangements.’
In other words, farmers must know the results of the negotiations and must not be left to wonder in some kind of vacuum how the negotiations will affect their income.
There can be nothing worse for those employed in any industry than to have their incomes drastically reduced for two years on the trot and then be left twirling their thumbs wondering whether at the end of the next year they will still be in business — whether they can continue to be farmers and produce the food that Britain can use.
Milk produced throughout Scotland can be consumed in Scotland.
Therefore, I agree with the milk producers that there is no need to reduce the production of milk in Scotland.
The Minister of State must make the Minister aware of the state of Scottish agriculture and of its importance to the Scottish economy.
I remind him of the disproportionate harm that the MacSharry proposals would cause and seek his assurance that he will bear in mind the Scottish farmers and all those elsewhere in Britain when he represents the interests of the British Government and the British farmer in Europe.
I am as aware as all Scottish farmers that reform is needed.
They understand that reform is needed, but they wish to ensure that overproduction is halted and that EC farmers are ready and able to compete in world markets when the Uruguay GATT round is finally resolved.
We are also aware of the need to halt the environmental degradation that overproduction brings in its wake.
I understand the desire to protect the small rural communities which rely on agriculture.
However, the MacSharry proposals look only in the most narrow, blinkered way for solutions.
I offer the Minister the NFU's five-point agenda, of which I hope he has taken note.
It will stand him in good stead when he comes to argue against the MacSharry proposals.
Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith (Wealden)
I was interested to hear about the state of the Scottish agriculture industry.
As a frequent visitor to Scotland I have formed a great admiration for the Scottish farmer's skills, particularly in animal husbandry and the attention that he pays to the production of a crop of whose product I am a not infrequent consumer.
I hope that all that goes well.
The problems reflected by the hon. Member for Kilmarnock and Loudon (Mr. McKelvey) are part of the general pattern of agriculture, not only in Britain but elsewhere.
The French do not revolt because they have nothing to revolt about.
We may not like the fact that they stop exports — they affect some of the exports of my constituency — but they are bloody-minded because they think that they, too, are getting a rotten deal from the CAP.
So do we all.
That is why during the next few weeks we shall be embarked on considering the extent to which we can change it to the benefit of all.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and my hon. Friend the Parliamentary Secretary on their able work.
My right hon. Friend is on the right lines.
I mean no disrespect to the hon. Member for South Shields (Dr. Clark), but, apart from his whinge against my right hon. Friend's personal qualities, I did not detect that he would do anything fundamentally different were he in my right hon. Friend's shoes.
However, as usual when one is in opposition, particularly close to an election, one has to shout and scream trying to pretend that there is a big difference when there is not.
We heard nothing particularly constructive.
If we were in opposition we would do exactly the same.
I heard the hon. Gentleman at 6 o'clock this morning and he was just as bad then as he was this afternoon.
When he was told that what he had said was all very well but a bit negative, he fell back on the 13 wasted years that he has been in opposition.
He had not a clue.
Agriculture is not like defence — a matter of being privy to private information; it is splattered all over the journals.
However, he tried to give as good as he got.
He is a fair-minded bloke on occasions — at least he has been to me.
I want to concentrate on my constituency, but before I do I shall make two points.
The first concerns something that we can do ourselves.
We all recognise that the British farmer is having a rough time.
I do not want to dwell on it; we know it to be true.
In my constituency we have a sad picture to paint.
But there is one thing on which all can agree.
There is a tremendous deficit between what we import and what we export.
My hon. Friend the Member for Gloucestershire, West (Mr. Marland) paid tribute to Food From Britain.
He said that it is doing a good job.
I believe that it is.
It promotes the idea both in this country and abroad that we should consume British food, but some people think that what Food From Britain does is enough and that the rest will follow.
No one will buy British food because somebody tells them that it is better than their own.
Sometimes they do not believe it and, if they believe it, how can they get hold of it?
They would also want to know who markets the food and its price.
Twenty five years ago I became the Member of Parliament for East Grinstead.
Its name has now been changed to Wealden.
At that time I had some interest in advertising and marketing, so I decided to get people I knew in some of the big stores to come down to one of our towns.
I managed to get local National Farmers Union branch members to come to listen to what they had to say.
Their message, 25 years ago, was the same message as today:’ We won't be able to sell your goods unless you market them to us properly.’
Again and again we hear the cry go up,’ We must get down to marketing.’
Good Lord!
How many more years shall we have to wait before we have as up and running and as efficient a marketing system for British products as they have in France, Holland and Denmark?
A few co-operatives have been set up during the last 25 years.
Some companies are doing very well.
Farmers have got together and specialised, with the result that there are some very good success stories.
That is typical of Britain.
We hear about good success stories in manufacturing, but I am talking about the broad base.
There are not sufficient people who are good enough at organising the sale of their products.
I wish my right hon. Friend luck in his negotiations over the common agricultural policy, but I do not believe that if it were modified, as a result of my right hon. Friend's efforts, to suit all our needs, the British farming industry would be able to take sufficient advantage of the improved conditions if its own marketing arrangements had not also been improved.
That is one reason why we look forward to some progress being made with the Milk Marketing Board so that it becomes a real marketing institution.
I do not believe that that has anything to do with the Government.
It has everything to do with farmers and those involved in the food industry.
My right hon. Friend knows that set-aside has been regarded primarily as a restraint on production.
That is why it is criticised.
People do not like to see land set aside, with someone appearing not to be doing very much with the land set aside and getting paid for it.
My right hon. Friend said today that he would like set-aside to be much more environmentally based.
I am sure that he is right.
The Ministry is due shortly to take over the countryside premium scheme.
I hope, therefore, that it will look at the opportunities for expanding the scheme.
The most important problem, however, that set-aside presents us with — I know that my right hon. Friend will relish tackling it — is that Mr. MacSharry must be told that any reform of the common agricultural policy must ensure that set-aside takes environmental factors much more into account.
I wish him luck in the negotiations that he will vigorously pursue towards that end.
The ordinary man in the street looks to farmers to combine production of food with care of the countryside.
I do not believe that there needs to be any inherent conflict between those aims.
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will continue to encourage the reconciliation of agricultural environmental objectives through a combination of advice — which is obviously needed — regulation — which is also needed — and incentives.
However it may be modified, the common agricultural policy will be the biggest single influence on farming practices in Europe.
Some of the funds that are now flowing from the CAP — not always put to as good a use as we should like — should encourage rather than discourage environmentally friendly farming.
If my right hon. Friend succeeds in gaining enough support for his efforts, the European Community will set up a framework of support and it will be up to individual countries to decide, within that framework, how they wish to use the funds.
My constituency, Wealden, includes the High Weald which extends beyond my constituency eastwards into Kent.
Sussex land is heavy; much of it is clay.
Sussex is hilly.
There are few big fields.
There are lots of hedges that need to be clipped.
There are copses and woods.
It is a heavily wooded county.
It provides a great contrast to many other parts of England.
Sussex probably has more trees per acre than any other county.
It is not, therefore, the easiest land to farm.
In the 18th century the trees were used for shipbuilding and in the iron ore industry.
Dairy farms predominate.
Farmers grow some wheat and barley for their cows.
Many of those farmers have gone out of business.
I understand why.
The quota system did it; there was a milk glut.
Other countries have had to face up to that problem.
Some of the farms have been split up into smallholdings.
They are used for a bit of horticulture and, increasingly, for a bit of’ horseyculture’— and the horses do not half make a mess on the ground!
There is also the livestock.
Some farmers have beef cattle, some for breeding purposes or for showing purposes.
A few wealthy people do that.
It is a drain on their resources.
Others do it on a very small scale.
It is a hobby for local gentleman farmers.
That is what they like to do with their few acres and it is of some benefit to us.
Many farmers are now engaged in rearing sheep on a commercial basis.
I do not know how long that will last.
All this takes place in an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Not all of it is beautiful, but the countryside as a whole looks attractive.
That has not prevented diversification.
The Government have encouraged farmers to diversify.
One finds that a barn has been converted into a smart office where a chap is working hard on his word processor; he has a nice set-up with computers.
I visited one farm that obtained permission to convert a barn for use as a place to pack boxes.
Voluntary workers help to supervise mentally handicapped people to pack the boxes.
That provides them with some work and pocket money.
They are extraordinarily good workers.
That enlightened policy is much to be welcomed.
As it is an area of outstanding natural beauty, much of the diversification can take place only in limited areas — close to the towns and bigger villages.
It is not surprising, therefore, that incomes have dropped severely during the last few years, with the result that we are now beginning to see signs of dereliction.
I do not like to see thistles growing in the fields.
I do not believe that the people who own that land have set it aside.
I think that they have just opted out; they cannot afford to look after their land.
That is worrying.
The spread of weeds can have a very serious effect on neighbouring farms.
There is an alternative.
A nice piece of land could be cleared.
People in London want to play golf, but there is a shortage of golf courses.
We have one of the newest and finest championship courses in the land, developed on 250 acres.
There are two 18-hole golf courses.
I forget how many golf courses there are in my constituency, but there must be about 10.
At the last count, 15 planning applications were outstanding.
We cannot go on like that.
The county has a view about golf courses — that if there is to be such a development it is better for them to be sited not on good farming land, or in naturally beautiful areas, but on the outskirts of towns.
There is a limit, therefore, to what can be done in that respect.
We must try to help ourselves to come to terms with the changes in farming, but if the present position persists, farmers in rural areas will not be seen to be working in line with the avowed aim of my right hon. Friend the Minister of a good environmental policy mixed with good farming.
Therefore, I should like to make a suggestion, which I know will be regarded as special pleading.
The Government recently announced the establishment of a further dozen environmentally sensitive areas, which included one close to my constituency on the south downs.
That area is not as tough as areas of Scotland or the Welsh hills but it is hard farming land.
My plea is that if the Government want to maintain its environmental quality and ensure that people work it they will consider including the High Weald as an ESA.
Such a policy of extensification would avoid food mountains and ensure that our land was properly looked after by farmers who want to work and who expect a reasonable return for their efforts.
I received a letter this morning from a farmer about the MacSharry proposals.
He said that there would be preference funding for smallholdings.
He believes that the proposals discriminate against the bulk of United Kingdom agriculture.
He adds these words, which I ask my right hon. Friend to pass on to our right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer:’ However, there is a recognition that some responsibility for securing fair competition lies with the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
To take two examples, the French farmers receive some £90 per acre for set-aside land whilst we receive less than £50.
Italian farmers can claim a 50 per cent.
grant to buy machinery for conservation uses.
Such discrepancies can only be bridged by national funding.’
I do not know whether that is the answer but, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Selby (Mr Alison) said, in too many cases the playing field is not level enough.
Finally, I should like to mention my friends on the Milk Marketing Board, to whom I pay tribute for their efforts to reform the board's structure.
They have told me about the effect that price cuts can have on the dairy sector.
The stocking density hurdle would exclude 30 per cent.
of dairy farms in England and Wales from receiving any compensation.
Since 1983, we have had to reduce our milk output more than many countries that are far more self-sufficient than we are.
We have achieved self-sufficiency of 90 per cent., but other countries have achieved more.
I hope that if my hon. Friend the Minister has time he will deal with those points in replying to the debate.
If he cannot do so, perhaps he will drop me a line.
Mr. Eric Martlew (Carlisle)
I always enjoy listening to agriculture debates and especially to Conservative Members, because that is the only time when we do not hear any free market claptrap.
We hear about farm subsidies and the social wage.
Interruption
The hon. Member for Cambridgeshire, North-East (Mr. Moss) shakes his head.
I shall happily give way if he wishes to intervene.
The problem is that Conservatives are not consistent in their policies.
I understand that 500 jobs losses have been announced by Bass breweries today.
The situation is drastic, but I suspect that we will not hear special pleading for Bass workers from Conservative Members.
I accept that we need to keep people on the land.
That Conservatives are free-marketeers on everything but agriculture can, at least, be said in their favour.
The milk industry is in a terrible position.
We have some of the most efficient dairy farms in not only Europe but probably the world and an effective milk-processing system; so we should have, because we have good climatic conditions and, perhaps with the exception of New Zealand, the best pasture in the world.
Our serious problems have been caused by the deals that have been negotiated by the Government.
Milk quotas are not working in the United Kingdom's favour.
There has been much debate on the imbalance in food and drink.
I think that it was £6 billion last year, or £15 million every day that the Minister has been in office.
The United Kingdom is only 86 per cent.
self-sufficient in milk and dairy products.
We know that the Minister will negotiate another cut in the quota.
What will that do to the imbalance?
We shall be down to 80 per cent.
self-sufficiency, or perhaps less.
That will depend on how good he is on the day.
I hope that he is better that day than he was today.
Milk quotas do not work, and in some ways a bit of market forces might have helped the United Kingdom because we are efficient producers.
Hon. Members have expressed deep concern about the plight of the sheep farmer, especially the hill farmer, on whom milk quotas have a direct effect.
A farmer friend — I do have some — said to me,’ You realise that as soon as the quota was introduced dairy farmers put more sheep on land that previously was used for cows.’
We are a major exporter of sheepmeat because of the quota.
Hill farmers, who could not change to dairying because their land was unsuitable, are suffering because of such distortions.
I am glad that the Minister does not appear to be accepting a quota system for other products, but how will he deal with our not being self-sufficient?
Will we get more milk from France?
Previously, the Minister has said that we still have a surplus of dairy products, which is true, but there is not a steady weekly or monthly supply of milk.
There is what one calls a flush in the spring — that could upset those who do not understand dairy terminology — which always leads to a surplus.
That will be overcome only if the industry has enough confidence to invest in plant to find new milk products to sell.
As there is no confidence in the supply of milk, the dairy processing industry is looking for new ways of selling dairy products.
More of our ice cream is being imported from France, not because of the quality of our product but because of the shortage of milk.
Mr. Salmond
I ask my hon. Friend to think of any reason why detailing the savage discrimination of the MacSharry proposals and their impact on Scottish agriculture would weaken the Minister's hand when negotiating.
I should have thought that detailing the effects would have strengthened his hand.
How on earth would it affect his negotiating position if he were to give the net farm income figures on the impact of his own proposals set out in’ Our Farming Future’?
Mr. Welsh
My hon. Friend sets out the reasons why I wish we were negotiating in Europe, not the Government.
If the Minister were to detail the matters, he would strengthen his position in Europe by showing the massive discrimination and harm that would be done to the Scottish agricultural industry.
I should have thought that, given the clear unfairness involved, that would strengthen his case when arguing for improvements in Europe.
However, the Minister's silence is ominous and unfair on our farmers.
If the Minister does not know the details, I direct him to the NFU survey on the Borders.
It showed that the £90 limit would lead to a loss of £250,000 income and the compulsory cereal set-aside proposals would lead to a £2.8 million loss.
Does he not know that?
Can he not tell us that?
Outlining those figures in Europe would strengthen his negotiating hand.
The NFU survey shows the devastating loss of a total of £6 million to our agriculture as a direct result of the MacSharry proposals.
They would lead to an estimated 135 redundancies among farms in the Borders alone.
The Minister does not know the figures, but I shall tell him what farmers in Orkney found when they made simple inquiries.
They found that the proposals would result in net farming incomes falling by an estimated £11,000 or £12,000.
They expect that overdrafts would rise an average of about £15,500 upwards.
Those are the figures that the NFU found on making simple inquiries.
Why do we not hear of the Government's estimates, even of their own proposals, never mind the MacSharry proposals?
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Curry)
I have never heard anything a pathetic as this form of statistical necrophilia.
The farmers want to know that we are fighting the proposals.
It serves no earthly use to recapitulate the damage that they do, and which we know they do.
We have as many figures as we need to prove that to Brussels, and we are doing so.
The hon. Member for Angus, East (Mr. Welsh) is merely parading the great terror in front of the farmers for his own purposes.
I have never heard anything so irresponsible and silly; he does a great disservice to farmers, who rightly put their confidence in the Government, not him, to get it right.
Mr. Welsh
The Minister has brought the matter into the open.
He is accusing the farmers of being irresponsible and silly, because the figures I have given are the farmers'.
If the Minister had bothered to listen to the submissions made to him or if he cared one iota for the industry, he would know that the figures come from the farmers.
I hope that, from up in the Gallery, farmers will notice how little the Government care.
The Minister's talk of statistical necrophilia shows that the Government document is not about our farming future but sadly, in many cases, our lack of farming future because of his lack of action.
The proof of the pudding will lie in the deal that he wins in Europe.
If he argues there as he does in the House, heaven help our farmers.
The final deal must take into account every sector of an all-industry package, because every sector of the industry is affected.
The package must treat the hills, uplands and lowlands as an integrated unit — one complete industry.
I look for medium and long-term planning, not the short-termism that we have seen too often, and I shall happily support the amendment.
The Scottish larger herd and flock size must be paramount.
Employment and keeping people on the land, in rural districts and in family farms must be paramount in the negotiations.
I want us to achieve increased secondary value for existing products, not to lose any of our market share.
When we have a £6 million food and drink deficit, it is no use reducing Scottish production to replace it with cheap imports form eastern Europe.
There is no sense in helping eastern European farmers while reducing and destroying our own industry.
There should be no major reconstruction of the industry while we are in the middle of a recession, which is the worst time for such a reconstruction.
All we would do is transfer people from rural districts to the ranks of the unemployed in urban ones.
I do not wish to see reconstruction through bankruptcies.
Our environmental goals should be an opportunity for us, not a hindrance.
We should not rely simply on price mechanism alone, but reduce output and link it to markets to balance supply and demand.
Scottish farmers have shown the Minister how he should negotiate.
I hope that he will listen to their submissions, and, for once, do something.
I have seen the results that he has achieved on fishing, and I am disgusted by them — I hope that they do not set a precedent.
There is no single solution, no quick fix; we need a balanced package of measures across the whole of agriculture.
The future of our agricultural and rural districts is at stake; we simply must get it right this time.
Mr. Geraint Howells
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
Earlier in the debate, I was rightly pulled up by Madam Deputy Speaker because I left the Chamber after moving the amendment.
I apologise to her, to the Chair and to all hon. Members.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
I thank the hon. Gentleman for that apology.
Mr. Christopher Gill (Ludlow)
I suspect that I am not the only hon. Member in the Chamber with a sense of de ja vu when we debate European affairs.
We have setpiece debates on the European Community budget — we had one in only 90 minutes last week, which worked out at a rate of about half a billion pounds per minute of our debate.
The extraordinary factor in such debates is that at the end of them we get the feeling that there is little that we can actually do to alter the course of events.
We receive the Court of Auditors' report — a well-presented and well-documented publication — and all sorts of platitudinous noises are made about it, but little action results.
Tonight we are having another ritual debate on the common agricultural policy.
We also have many other futile debates on directives and regulations.
At all times we have a sense of not being able to achieve any change of direction on how the European Community conducts its affairs.
More and more, hon. Members will have responsibility for these matters without the direct authority to do anything about them.
Is that the shape of things to come?
If we advance to a single currency and monetary and political union, will we, as Members of Parliament directly answerable to the electorate, have responsibility without authority?
Perhaps some hon. Members will be quite content to say to their constituents that they understand their problems and sympathise, but that there is nothing that they can do about them as the matter is out of their hands.
That prospect does not appeal to me.
I entirely reject it because I want to be able to help my constituents to achieve their natural and legitimate aspirations.
Above all, I want to help my farmer constituents towards a prosperous future.
Such a prosperous future will not be possible under the common agricultural policy, which is fundamentally flawed and incapable of the satisfactory reform that the Government would like to see.
I can certainly see no future prosperity while there is intervention and absurd support for beef under the special beef premium scheme, which is simply a further incentive to produce what the market does not want, either in quantity or quality.
There can be no progress while for sheep there are headage payments which simply prop up our less efficient competitors in mainland Europe.
Milk quotas which deny Britain the opportunity to be self-sufficient in milk and dairy products are also a hindrance, as are FEOGA grants which accelerate the progress towards overcapacity.
I had hoped that there was some special significance in holding the debate in Advent.
It is usually held in October or November and I thought that holding it today perhaps heralded better news or that we were on the brink of a breakthrough or a decision.
I was quite sad to hear my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food say that he was prepared to sit in the negotiations for months.
My concern about that prospect is the effect that it will have on our erstwhile healthy, prosperous and progressive British agriculture.
That period of uncertainty and the postponement of decisions that are vital to farmers will have a debilitating effect on United Kingdom agriculture.
On a more positive note, I remind the House that my right hon. Friend said that he sought the redirection of money and that available funds should be much more centred on the environment.
The objective must be to achieve a solution that satisfies the public about the way in which the countryside is preserved and maintained.
It must enable farmers to continue to do the job that they are trained and best qualified to do, which is producing essential food for the nation, at a price that the taxpayer is prepared to pay.
I should like to hark back to a comment by my hon. Friend the Member for Cambridgeshire, North-East (Mr. Moss) who instanced how, in other European nations, the amount of money provided by the national Government to domestic agriculture was very much greater than in this country.
He gave the amounts per annum, which were:
France £8.5 billion; Germany £3.2 billion; and the United Kingdom somewhere below £1 billion per annum.
I welcome the Minister's recent announcement about a new environmentally sensitive area in my constituency which will be known as Shropshire hills.
It will be greatly welcomed by farmers and the general public.
It holds out worthwhile prospects in that lovely part of Shropshire.
I urge my right hon. Friend to study the interesting proposals by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
They cover the whole spectrum of agriculture and forestry and deal with the necessity to arrive at a situation where we no longer talk about a common agricultural policy but a common rural policy.
I agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Suffolk, Central (Mr. Lord) about the common agricultural policy.
The CAP cannot survive because it is totally unrelated to the realities of a free market.
I am sure that Opposition Members will be delighted to hear me speak about the free market because they were in some doubt about whether it would be possible for Conservative Members to mention that.
I am proud to do so, because it holds out very much more opportunity for resolving our problems than the centralist control of which the Opposition are so fond.
The second reason why the CAP cannot survive is that all practical considerations are subordinated to political expediency.
The regime is abstract in concept, political in intent and largely insensitive to practical consequences in a highly practical industry.
Mr. Alan W. Williams (Carmarthen)
It is a pleasure to follow the hon. Member for Ludlow (Mr. Gill), who launched a scathing attack on the common agricultural policy.
I noted that several hon. Members, not only Opposition Members, were highly critical of the CAP and called for urgent reform.
We all know about the crisis in agriculture which has been well described by many hon. Members.
Yesterday's issue of The Guardian stated:’ farmers saw their incomes in real terms plummet 21 per cent in 1990 to their lowest position for 50 years.
Yesterday, the NFU warned that 1990 figures would reveal a fresh 10 per cent.
cut.’
I do not follow The Guardian's statement about farm incomes being at their lowest for 50 years, because many farmers whom I know now have two cars, quite tidy houses and a reasonable lifestyle.
However, during the past three or four years there has been a gross deterioration in farmers' incomes.
It has occurred at a time when expenditure on the CAP is again almost out of control and increasing all the time.
It poses an appalling dilemma for us all, because more and more money is spent on the CAP but the people at the receiving end do not seem to be any better off.
It is a black hole into which the consumer, the taxpayer, is pouring more and more money.
I am glad that, under the pressure of the GATT negotiations, there is now serious talk of fundamental reform of the CAP.
We believe in trade.
Britain invented world trade when we had an empire 100 or 200 years ago.
We were the big trading nation, and even today we are the second largest by way of the percentage of GDP exported and imported — we are second only to West Germany.
We believe in trade and in the aims of the GATT negotiations.
If it is possible to free trade in agricultural produce we must strongly support the negotiations.
The side effects of the CAP in its present form include the dumping of surpluses on third-world countries, which undermines their economies.
Let us hope that we can bring that to an end through GATT.
Under the pressure of the GATT negotiations, the MacSharry proposals have been produced.
They have been severely criticised by almost all hon. Members during the debate.
I am not quite so hostile to them as other hon. Members are.
They have some good features, especially the principle that in dire straits, where there is hardship and cuts are to be made, the broadest backs should carry the greatest burden.
The cuts under the MacSharry proposals would fall most heavily upon the very big millionaire farmers — we do not have those in Wales.
Furthermore, there would be protection for small farms.
That principle is right, for social and environmental reasons, because small farms are more environmentally friendly.
My main criticism of the proposals is that the reforms that they suggest are far too complacent and conservative.
I understand that at the GATT negotiations, for example, we may eventually settle for a 30 per cent .
cut in export subsidies.
The United States initially demanded 90 per cent.
If we are to move towards freer trade, all those export subsidies must go, yet in the negotiations we are compromising.
The reform is not sufficiently dramatic.
The other aspect of the MacSharry proposals is that the compensation terms are incredibly generous.
It is amazing that, although agriculture in general faces cuts, if the proposals were adopted the CAP could cost more over the next seven years than it does now.
That is an appalling position.
I do not know whether fundamental reform of the CAP will ever come about.
We need to change its structure and I agree with the hon. Member for Ludlow about the need for fundamental reform — indeed, there was a strong contribution to that effect from another Conservative Member.
There are too many vested interests among the 12 countries.
Perhaps the Franco-German axis is too strong for us on this issue.
We must start thinking in terms of reform for Britain — national and regional variations on the best way forward.
The interests of Britain are different from those of France, Germany and Italy, and even more different from those of the southern European states such as Spain, Greece and Turkey, which are joining as the Community expands.
Agriculture is different from making videos, cars or whatever.
Manufacturers of those can build their factories in Portugal, south Wales or Germany, and the product will be the same.
But in agriculture, because the climate, crops and farm sizes are different, we should think in terms of national variations of the MacSharry plan — a national and regional flavour to any reforms.
In our proposals we mention subsidiarity.
That is an important principle in all our discussions in Europe — at Maastricht, and so on.
We pass on only the powers that need to be passed on.
We keep as much power as we can in Britain and we devolve as much of that as we can to our regions.
The interests of Wales, Scotland and other regions are different because our geography, the nature of our agriculture and the size of our farms are different.
The principle of subsidiarity means that we should build into the reform of the CAP a large dimension of national freedom.
As the hon. Member for Ludlow said earlier, in France and Germany there is substantial national support for their systems of agriculture.
We do not have that in Britain and we need to build it into any changes.
The other major factor in reform of the CAP must be the environment.
We now realise the importance of hedgerows, of small fields, of clean rivers and of less intensive agriculture.
We must move towards environmentally friendly agriculture.
Over the next 10 years, we need to move away from a production-based support mechanism to a mechanism that supports environmental protection.
If the support for farmers — £2 billion or £3 billion a year or whatever we need — went to finance green premiums, to help the environment or to help less intensive agriculture, the consumer would support it.
The British people are willing to pay something towards preserving an attractive landscape.
I want the size of holdings in Britain to be preserved in their present form.
The amalgamation of farms has gone much too far in Britain — much further than it has in any other European country.
We need to preserve our present structure and ensure that it is viable.
Support mechanisms should be based on environmental protection rather than on production.
Mr. Alan Amos (Hexham)
There is no doubt that agriculture is going through a difficult transition period, continually hampered by a serious lack of direction and strategy from Brussels.
The incomes of my hill livestock farmers are under real pressure.
British farmers are the victims of their own success.
They are the most efficient in Europe, and they supply good quality produce and make a large contribution of £3.5 billion to the balance of payments.
We are 75 per cent.
self-sufficient.
Food prices have consistently risen less than the retail prices index.
Farmers' activities, which are the backbone of the rural economy, are vital to the survival of whole communities.
However, there are now real problems and the solutions to them can no longer be delayed or fudged.
The CAP budget, already two thirds of the total EEC budget, is again about to breach its strict guidelines.
The application of technology and over-generous subsidies, together with a decline in demand for some commodities, such as red meat, have led to levels of surplus whose financial and structural consequences for EEC farmers must now be addressed.
There is a need for a number of immediate short-term palliatives, as well as for a radical and bold long-term solution.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on fighting his corner with such determination, vigour and success for British farmers.
Let us consider what he has achieved, for example, for my farmers in the less-favoured areas.
First, the green pound has been aligned with our market exchange rate.
The elimination of the green pound and the absurdity of monetary compensatory amounts, which tax our exports and subsidise our imports, was a major achievement which brought considerable financial advantages to my farmers.
No longer will Northumberland farmers be at an artificial competitive or financial disadvantage.
Secondly, the level of the suckler cow premium was raised to the maximum allowable under EEC rules.
That money goes directly into farmers' pockets.
Thirdly, there is strong support for the hill livestock compensatory allowances, amounting to £142 million in a full year.
Again, that money goes directly into the farmers' pockets.
Fourthly, for the second year running, there have been two advance payments of the annual ewe premium, including the whole of the 4 ecu per ewe supplement which is worth £39 million in the less-favoured areas to help farmers' cash flows.
Fifthly, there is marketing.
The Select Committee on Agriculture, of which I am a member, is about to launch a major inquiry into Britain's food trade gap, which is estimated to be about £6 billion.
Over half of that can be eliminated by buying British, so marketing can produce considerable improvement and it takes on a new and dramatic urgency.
The high level of import penetration of high value added products, such as Danish bacon, can be halted and reversed.
At a recent meeting with some of my local farmers, I was most encouraged to see that they gave a far higher priority to and had a greater awareness of the need for better marketing.
Their role is wider than just being producers of good-quality meat.
They have to widen their skills to sell and market their produce.
The market is one of growing complexity, dynamism and openness.
The industry must become more responsive to consumer needs.
We need an imaginative and flexible response in a situation where there are few automatic markets left for British produce.
Therefore, the Government's recent announcement of £5.4 million of new grants to encourage the formation of producer marketing groups to help them get closer to the market, and the establishment in the Ministry of Agriculture of a new market task force, are to be warmly welcomed.
In that regard we must ensure that food labelling throughout the food chain from the farm gate to the supermarket contains the country of origin so that British consumers can buy British.
Sixthly, on environmental controls, I congratulate the Government on their more sensible and practical approach.
Unlike the Liberal and Labour parties, which would suffocate my farmers to extinction with an endless stream of unnecessary and unreasonable controls over every aspect of production, thereby putting many of them out of business, the Conservative Government have appreciated the need to protect the environment while giving proper priority to the needs of the agricultural community to remain economically viable.
Payments to upland livestock farmers through hill livestock compensatory amounts and proposals for an improved farm woodland scheme are two examples of the Government's common-sense approach.
If society is to impose extra burdens on farmers' costs of production in order to preserve or go back to an idyllic view of the countryside, which may never have existed anyway, it must pay for it.
As always, the Liberals try to have it both ways, but they are up against canny farmers.
They will have to choose between pretending to be friends of the farmer and lackeys of the environmentalist.
There are areas that deserve further consideration, in particular, the problem of fallen stock, the costs of which are falling heavily and unfairly on farmers.
The problem might be covered by environmental grants.
Also, with the present demographic structure of farmers, together with their greater willingness to consider such matters, an early retirement or outgoers scheme would address the problem of over-supply, as well as allowing for mobility within the industry, and would encourage more young people to enter farming.
On the maintenance of a flexible and dynamic industry, reform of the agricultural tenancy legislation is overdue.
In Northumberland, half the farmers are tenant farmers and we need a greater supply of land for rent to ensure the continued prosperity of the tenanted sector, with new entrants being able to come into agriculture.
The farm business tenancy is a helpful way forward.
Of course, a number of measures must be taken while more long-term structural reform is implemented.
For example, assistance might be given for diversification into tourism, to which Northumberland is ideally suited, as tourism is dispersed, small-scale, labour-intensive industry.
The farm and conservation grant scheme and the farm diversification grant scheme are both helpful measures, as is the new farm woodland premium scheme.
Equally, if farmers are to be more subject to market forces, the planning system must be flexible and sensitive enough to enable farmers to diversify.
The planning process must not be used to stifle sensible development.
Another important aspect of diversification is the need for retraining in which the agricultural training board has a dynamic role to play.
Extensification also has a limited role and the pilot beef and sheep extensification scheme is a useful start.
Set-aside schemes must be voluntary and must facilitate the entry of young people into the industry.
No scheme will be worth much if farmers are allowed merely to give over their least productive land.
Quotas by definition rigidify and distort the market, so we must resist absurdities such as nitrogen and other input quotas which merely serve to raise the cost of production and undermine our ability to compete.
Our job is to harness technology, not to prevent farmers from being able to sell their products.
No discussion of reform of the CAP can ignore the likely outcome of the GATT talks which may involve price cuts of at least 30 per cent.
Nor should we ignore the fact that in the not-too-distant future eastern Europe and Russia will be able to realise their massive agricultural potantial once they have become fully harnessed to a market economy.
Reform of the CAP will be difficult, but there must be reform.
The Government's policy statement’ Our Farming Future’is a serious attempt to outline the ingredients of a prosperous British agriculture industry, which is part of the United Kingdom economy and the United Kingdom way of life.
Successful reform will include elements of continuity and change.
Only fundamental and radical reform of the CAP can stem its rising and unjustifiable cost.
Any system that costs the British taxpayer more than £2.5 billion, only half of which reaches farmers, is an absurdity and must be abolished.
However, the aim of the reform must include four key elements.
First, EEC agriculture must be made more efficient and competitive, with the objective being to get down as near as possible to the marketplace and world prices, however they are defined.
We must face up to the harsh fact that the present social and economic pattern of farming in the EEC can no longer be maintained.
Although many people do not like talk of market forces, the plain fact is that in the real world we simply cannot ignore them.
It is precisely because market forces have in the long run caught up with the operation of the CAP, as they inevitably would, that we are in such trouble.
Only an agriculture industry set free within the framework of market forces operating more closely to supply and demand will have a secure and prosperous future.
The GATT talks make that abundantly clear.
We can neither perpetuate excessive levels of support, nor penalise the most efficient producers.
The CAP costs the taxpayer and the consumer more than it need, through excessively high taxes and prices.
It does not protect the farmers since so many are now in difficulties and the long-term trend has been for many to leave agriculture altogether.
CAP reform must cut costs and prices and encourage structural rationalisation.
The fundamental problem with the CAP is that, in an attempt to keep farmers on the land, the price mechanism has become so distorted that none of its objectives is now being realised, and at a high cost.
There is still gross confusion in the pursuit of the CAP's conflicting objectives.
We must clearly separate the CAP's economic, social and environmental aspects.
On the economic side, there is no doubt that price support must be reduced to nearer world levels.
On the social side, the desire to keep farmers on the land should be dealt with via a direct income support or other aid measures, such as voluntary set aside, which do not distort the price mechanism, for a transition period.
Other measures such as nitrate quotas would badly undermine competition.
Quotas would only ever be properly and legally enforced by the United Kingdom and, again, would interfere with our competitiveness on world markets.
Both should be fiercely resisted.
We must give the small, inefficient, part-time continental farmers an option to leave the industry, not a subsidy to produce.
The fundamental point is that, although the cost of buying and storing surplus output is high, the largest item is the unbearable burden of export subsidies or refunds.
Therefore, the nearer that we can get to world prices, the lower will be the cost of those export subsidies, and hence the cost of the total CAP.
It is precisely because British farmers have a competitive advantage in the production of sheepmeat, beef, cereals, dairy and other produce that it is in our interests to have a truly and genuinely single free and open common market in the EEC in agriculture produce.
The strength of our comparative advantage is shown by the fact that 75 per cent.
of British lamb exports go to France.
The abolition of the clawback will enhance our position and 1992 must become a reality of fair competition and free movement of goods without any artificial restrictions.
We must abolish the green currency system and the MCAs altogether.
That is not something that my farmers need fear, but rather a challenge and an opportunity to be welcomed and grasped.
If the EEC is to compete in post-GATT world markets, it is not the number of farmers which matters but rather the quality of their output.
Limitations on the output of the most efficient will prevent them from taking advantage of technology and size, thereby inhibiting further productivity gains.
The only effect of that would be to raise the costs of the CAP and prices.
Therefore, headage limits must be fiercely opposed as they are particularly anti-British.
The MacSharry package would reduce headage limits for ewe premiums in less-favoured areas from 1,000 to 750 ewes.
In the United Kingdom it would mean that in the LFAs 10 per cent.
of holdings would be affected and up to 15 per cent.
of eligible ewes would be excluded from payment.
They discriminate against extensive farms on poor lands.
If farmers are unfairly forced out of business in the less-favoured areas, the social objectives, let alone the economic objectives, of the common agricultural policy cannot be met.
The whole concept of quotas should be abandoned because of the economic damage that they cause by preventing the proper and flexible use of farmers' resources and assets and by preventing technological innovation.
The burden of reform must be borne fairly throughout the Community, both between and within member states, regardless of size and location, bearing in mind the paramount need to ensure the survival of the most efficient producers.
The MacSharry proposals, which discriminate against the larger and more efficient British farmer, are totally unacceptable and must be firmly and unequivocally rejected.
The MacSharry package will hit specifically those farmers most able to compete on the world market.
At an average of 163 acres, British farms are five times bigger than European Community farms, at 33 acres.
Specialist sheep producers in the less-favoured areas would be particularly badly hit by the package.
Reductions in support levels should be carried out at a pace that gives efficient farmers time to adjust and diversify.
I warmly welcome my right hon. Friend's commitment to continue financial support for the less-favoured areas in general and the hill livestock compensatory allowances in particular, where there are fewest opportunities for diversification.
Finally, farmers must be encouraged to get closer to the marketplace and be market oriented.
One of the problems with the MacSharry proposals is that, instead of bringing agriculture closer to the market, they will perpetuate existing excessive levels of support for the majority of farmers.
The cost of the common agricultural policy would go up, not down, so taxpayers, consumers and farmers would all lose out.
We must establish a dynamic industry that is readily able to adapt to changes in the market.
Reform of the common agricultural policy is vital for farmers, consumers and taxpayers, but the proposals as they stand are not acceptable.
While we must get closer to the market, the proposals continue to ignore the reality of market forces in a misguided attempt to solve undesirable social objectives.
In the post-GATT world of liberalised trade we must encourage our efficient producers to compete in a more open world trading system.
We want a developing, dynamic and flexible rural economy, not some stagnant, idealised rustic world — which has never existed — stifled by environmental controls.
We do not want fossilised museum pieces of countryside but communities with jobs and a living, dynamic and healthy social fabric.
Reform must be fair to all, equally applied by all.
Mr. Frank Cook (Stockton, North)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Hexham (Mr. Amos) on the vitriolic quality of his criticism of the common agricultural policy.
I commend his appreciation of the need for a social dimension in any reforms that may take place.
I commend his outlook to the House when we discuss issues relating to the social charter.
Acceptance of a social charter might lead more easily to the achievement of the goals to which the hon. Member referred.
I apologise for the fact that I heard only about 40 minutes of the Minister of Agriculture's speech.
I had to leave the Chamber to attend a Select Committee and did not return here until halfway through the speech of my hon. Friend the Member for Kilmarnock and Loudoun (Mr. McKelvey).
I may therefore not have heard points made to which I wish to refer.
The Minister made a robust speech, in which he outlined his support for and his defence of the British farmer.
I heard no reference to the industries that support the British farmer, in particular the fertiliser industry.
It will surprise no hon. Member to learn of my interest in fertilisers.
ICI plants are to be found in my patch.
Brunner-Mond came to Billingham for the anhydride deposits which it could process into nitrates.
The company has been there ever since — thank God, in view of the employment that it has created in the area.
To that extent, I declare a vested interest.
I have received representations from Mr. Higgs, the director general of the Fertiliser Manufacturers Association.
He makes some valid points that I should like to bring to the House's attention.
The FMA maintains:’ The CAP is too costly and is producing no winners: not farmers, not consumers and tax payers, and not those, such as us, who supply agriculture.
Food surpluses beyond those necessary to maintain strategic reserves are a nonsense and we fully accept that reduced agricultural output will mean reduced fertiliser sales The important part to be played by the market is well recognised by most people as is the need to safeguard small producers and to protect rural communities and our landscape and environment.
What is often not appreciated is the need also to provide a stable and profitable agriculture that can support the infrastructure it needs There is a danger that farmers will not be given adequate incentives to grow produce efficiently and environmentally responsibly.
They may either be discouraged from having to care about the quantity or quality of what they produce, as their income will be guaranteed regardless or, conversely, they may be less concerned about the quality of the inputs they use, or the agricultural practices they employ, because they will be driven to compete on price in the market against imports dumped or produced to lower environmental standards If the EC demands higher environmental and animal husbandry standards than elsewhere, it must not export' its problems.
Question accordingly negatived.
Main Question put and agreed to.
Resolved, That this House takes note of European Community Documents Nos. 8356/90, relating to agricultural production methods, 7570/91, and the Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum submitted by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on 13th November 1991, relating to the development and future of the Common Agricultural Policy, and 8886/91 COR 1,8950/91 and 9136/91, relating to amendments to the legal framework of the Common Agricultural Policy; and supports the Government's intention to seek reform of the Common Agricultural Policy which will make Community agriculture more market-orientated and efficient, will put more emphasis on environmental care, will reduce the cost of that Policy and will apply fairly throughout the Community.
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS, & c .
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101(5) (Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Housing
That the draft Waltham Forest Housing Action Trust (Area and Constitution) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 18th October, in the last Session of Parliament, be approved.
Question agreed to.
Disabled People (Northern Ireland)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Seamus Mallon (Newry and South Armagh)
Most people welcome the opportunity to have an Adjournment debate on matters of great importance.
In this instance, I do not particularly welcome this debate, because I regret having to make these points tonight in this way.
I have made it clear to the Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, the hon. Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham), that in general terms I have every sympathy with the people in the Housing Executive and the Department of Health's occupational therapy department whom, in effect, I shall be criticising.
I must also criticise a system that puts them in a position in which problems occur.
My debate is about the way in which grants are paid from the Northern Ireland Housing Executive to disabled people to improve their environments in their own homes.
They fall into two categories: people who own their own houses, the vast majority of whom have purchased their homes recently from the Housing Executive, and people who are Housing Executive tenants and require special adaptations.
The problem has been exacerbated by recent stringent cuts.
The most recent cut of 16.5 per cent.
in the Housing Executive's budget was announced on 28 November.
That is estimated to cause a shortfall of £50 million over the next three years, which will eventually and inevitably make the problem worse.
I raise this matter also because my constituency has a high percentage of unfit housing.
Although I am sure that these remarks will apply to all constituencies in the north of Ireland, I can judge only what is happening in the one that I know best, which is my own, where 3,344 houses have been deemed’ unfit’, as the Minister confirmed to me in a written answer in 1988.
That is the background to this debate.
I shall raise four main issues, leaving aside the financial strictures and the policy itself, because such matters cannot be dealt with simply in an Adjournment debate.
I refer to the problems in the system which I believe could be avoided.
I repeat that I have sympathy with the staff of the Housing Executive and the Department of Health's occupational therapy department, but there are great problems that we must face.
The first is the average length of time between first receipt of an application and a visit.
Most such applications come from people who, because of physical disabilities that are mostly associated with age, can no longer cope in their homes as currently structured.
Most of the applicants require the provision of downstairs toilets and showers.
A written reply last week confirmed that the average waiting time between the making of an application and the first visit or inspection is about nine weeks.
If that is the average, we can take it that many will take longer than that.
That is bad, but it could be dealt with.
I cannot see any reason why that process cannot be speeded up within the system.
The second main problem relates to the delay in the occupational therapist's visit to assess the application.
The applications cannot be processed by the Housing Executive unless they have been assessed by occupational therapists from the Department of Health and unless recommendations are made by the occupational therapy department.
Again a written reply last week stated that, in the Southern health board region, it took an average of four or five months before the occupational therapist gave an assessment, but in Belfast and in the Western board's region the delays were 11 months, with some being’ very substantially longer’.
We are talking about a system in which, on the admission of that written answer, a year can go by before that essential part of the process is undertaken.
If one adds that delay to the average of about three months before the first visit is made, one is talking about a possible delay of one year and three months before the application starts to receive the attention that is required before it can proceed.
That in itself is bad enough.
However, I tabled a written question some time ago about increasing the number of occupational therapists in Northern Ireland and was assured that that would happen.
I know that it has happened in some regions, but that is certainly not evident in the areas of which I am most aware, where the problem seems great.
Great difficulties arise if an aged person, who has probably just been released from hospital and who is very ill, cannot manage in what is usually a two-storey house where the facilities are upstairs, and has to wait 13 months before the application for downstairs facilities is even sanctioned.
Those difficulties must be addressed.
Of course, there are exceptions and occasions when the process happens much more quickly — and others where it happens much more slowly — but I wish to outline the case of my constituent, Mrs.
Patterson of 126 Dromalane Park, Newry, who received the Housing Executive's reply to her application on 2 October 1989, but was visited by an occupational therapist only last week.
Almost two years elapsed before even the initial visit was made, making the applicant think that her application had been turned down.
There can be no excuse for that.
Something in the system must have gone very wrong.
If that were the only such delay of which I knew, I would accept that there had simply been an oversight, but I am afraid that, in the circumstances, I cannot accept that.
Disabled people should be a priority in the system.
They cannot be a priority if applications are so heavily burdened with bureaucratic requirements.
There are not enough occupational therapists to do the job.
Those who are doing it are grossly overworked.
They have far too big an area to cover and far too many applications to deal with.
The only way in which the position can be improved is to increase the number of occupational therapists.
The third problem is the Housing Executive's requirement under its warranted contractor scheme, which was introduced in 1987, that people who receive grants for this type of improvement employ a warranted contractor.
Yet there is the anomaly that the Housing Executive employs contractors who are not warranted on major jobs.
People naturally assume that a contractor employed by the Housing Executive is the firm to get, but then find that the contractor is not warranted.
That is causing enormous delays.
I know of several cases in which the proposals were sent in, the occupational therapist's assessment was given and everything was in order except that an unwarranted contractor had been chosen.
The people who make applications are not in a position to know who is warranted and who is not.
The Housing Executive has the list in its offices.
I should have thought that as a matter of course, when it sent out its communications to the applicant, it would include the list.
The net result is that the lack of that information results in the application being delayed for many months.
The application of Mr. and Mrs. Collins was delayed for 12 months on this score without the Housing Executive giving any idea of the reason for the delay.
The application of another lady, a Mrs. Nan Lavell, who was very ill indeed, was delayed a matter of months for that same reason, without the Housing Executive giving any reason for the delay.
That procedure should be streamlined as a matter of urgency.
People in such situations are reaching the age when they cannot cope physically or with the bureaucracy.
Is not there a means of creating a one-stop application in such circumstances?
The work does not involve major adaptations or renovation.
By any standards the jobs are small, yet people have to make available three sets of plans for the planning department, three for the building control department, three for the Housing Executive and three for the occupational therapists department.
If things are not just right, they have to go through that process all over again.
I have a case of a constituent in Newry, Mrs. Freda Williams, who has had two strokes and is bedridden.
She very much needs the facilities that she has requested.
After 12 months the relevant authorities are still asking for more copies of the plans that were submitted about nine months ago.
There is something wrong there.
That process could be speeded up substantially.
I strongly request that the Minister consider a way in which a one-stop application could be made in such cases.
The fourth problem is delays in the payments for adaptations carried out.
Perchance I was speaking by telephone this afternoon to a building contractor who specialises in this type of work.
He mentioned to me several cases that were outstanding and told me that he and other contractors are stopping doing work involving a Housing Executive grant because they have to wait anything up to three months to wait for payment after the work has been done.
Either the applicant must take out a bridging loan for that period — most are not in a position to do so — or the contractor goes without payment.
That is the difficulty.
Contractors will reluctantly say,’ No, we simply cannot do your work because we cannot afford to be out of the money for that period.’
In the cases that I have mentioned everything is in order — all the forms have been filled in and returned by the contractor, the work has been completed satisfactorily — but it is a long time before the cheque is processed and the contractor paid.
In the present economic climate, he cannot cope with that situation.
There are a substantial number of cases before the Housing Executive concerning homes where major adaptations are required.
I refer especially to the case of a constituent, a boy who cannot walk, talk, feed himself or do anything for himself, and will never be any different, as a result of meningitis at the age of three.
He has to be carried everywhere by his mother and there are another five children in the house.
That family has applied for a renovation grant on an old building.
They were turned down because it did not fit the criteria.
As a result of advice from me and from others, the family has applied for a new replacement grant on the same building.
However, as the criteria have still not been given by the Department to the Housing Executive, that case, among others, is waiting.
Those criteria should be sent to the Housing Executive immediately so that it can begin to process such cases.
Will the Minister ensure that his Department study the criteria carefully?
I know of no set of criteria that could be drawn up to include such a tragic case.
It is impossible to write such criteria.
Yet if there is no leeway within the system a tragic family like that will suffer most.
I should have preferred not to have to raise this matter in an Adjournment debate.
I recognise that substantial staffing problems exist within the grants department of the Housing Executive, and I recognise the problems that that creates.
I also recognise the fact that there are simply not enough occupational therapists.
However, while I accept all those things and I have sympathy with those staff in the workload that they have to deal with, there are many ways that we could start to speed up the system.
I have taken this opportunity to point them out to the Minister and I hope that something good will come of it.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Richard Needham)
I welcome the opportunity to reply to the debate.
The hon. Member for Newry and Armagh (Mr. Mallon) has raised issues of considerable importance to disabled people in his constituency and to all those affected by disability in Northern Ireland, who look to the grant scheme to work efficiently and speedily for them.
The hon. Gentleman said that he did not wish to criticise the personnel involved in the administration of the schemes.
However, in some of the cases that he mentioned it appears that there must have been some error, or they would have been dealt with more promptly.
In 1989-90 the total amount of grant was £33.8 million, in 1990-91 it was £31.2 million and for 1991-92 it is £29.7 million.
In the region which covers the Newry and Armagh constituency, the grant was £4.85 million in 1989-90, £4.43 million in 1990-91 and £4.3 million this year.
I accept that the figures are slightly down, but not enormously so.
I hope that the hon. Member for Newry and Armagh, and other hon. Members who represent Northern Ireland, will agree that one of the absolute keys is to ensure that the money we spend gets to the people who most deserve and need it as quickly as possible.
We had hoped to announce the new scheme for consultation today, but that has been delayed until tomorrow or perhaps the end of the week.
The present scheme must operate a priority list.
I believe that the Housing Executive ensures that those who most need the grants are put at the top of the list.
The hon. Member for Newry and Armagh will be aware from his constituency that there have been problems with the preliminary investigations.
Those problems were one cause of the delay that the hon. Gentleman described, but I have been told that the wait for that preliminary investigation is now down from six months to three months — the average in Northern Ireland.
That time scale compares well with the rest of the country.
The length of the time that the occupational therapists take to complete their investigations is also down to about three months.
In 1987, there were 28 occupational therapists in the hon. Gentleman's constituency; now, there are 47.
That is a significant increase.
The total number of occupational therapists in Northern Ireland has increased from 206 to 277.
The hon. Gentleman might be interested to know that, in his constituency, 12.5 per cent.
of the grants given to the disabled are dealt with by the Craigavon and Newry offices.
Two years ago, the maximum limit on the grants went from £10,200 to £12,600.
Furthermore, my hon. Friend the Member for Richmond and Barnes (Mr. Hanley) has added £2.6 million to this year's budget for occupational therapy, and about £500,000 has been made available to the Newry and Craigavon area.
Some of the delay is inevitably due to the way in which the applicant, having been through the preliminary investigation and the visit from the occupational therapist, considers the scheme proposed for him before proceeding to the formal application stage.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman appreciates that that takes some time.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman that every conceivable thing that can be done should be done to ensure that the applicant — the hon. Gentleman was right to say that he may be old and slightly confused — is assisted in filling out the forms.
The hon. Gentleman spoke about approved contractors — that application form clearly states the need for such an approved contractor.
Mr. Mallon
It does not say who they are.
Mr. Needham
No, because there are about 900 of them.
Many more are coming on to the list.
The applicant can contact the Housing Executive or the grant officer to discover who is on the list.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will agree that an approved contractor is important, because the grant is paid to the applicant.
Nothing would be more serious than to have unapproved contractors receiving the grant.
However, I shall study the issue that the hon. Gentleman has raised about the length of time it takes for the grant to get to the applicant and then back to the contractor.
The last thing we want is approved contractors having to wait too long for their money.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman agrees that it is crucial that approved contractors are used to ensure that the work is done to the highest possible standard.
The new scheme is important.
We will go out for consultation on the draft order in the next few days.
The new scheme will allow specific grants up to the full cost of the work.
At present, the maximum amount is 90 per cent .
and it can be and often is 75 per cent., depending on someone's resources.
There will be a grant of up to 100 per cent.
of the total of what is required, following a test of resources.
That is an important step forward.
Naturally, I appreciate that it will mean that there will be gainers and losers, but the gainers will be the poorest and the losers will be those most able to afford a contribution toward what is required.
Nevertheless, I fully accept the points that the hon. Gentleman made about the need to be as quick as possible.
The grant officer's job is specialised and needs someone who will look, particularly on major adaptations, at what is required.
In addition, the occupational therapist needs to go into the appropriate scheme for the disabled person to ensure that the work is right for his or her requirements.
I accept that, if there are unnecessary bureaucratic rules or regulations or ways to get forms filled out singly rather than in triplicate, we shall do everything we can to speed up the process.
In the hon. Gentleman's constituency, the time taken is being reduced, although it has not been reduced as fast as we should like.
There are more occupational therapists, and the time that they are taking is also being reduced.
Some delays are inevitable, and it is often difficult to get round them, but that is no one 's fault.
The Government take the matter extremely seriously and want to ensure that grants go to those who most need them.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that my hon. Friend and I give the matter a high priority.
I shall take up the individual cases that the hon. Gentleman has brought to my attention and give as detailed an answer on them as possible.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at sixteen minutes past Eleven o'clock.
Wandsworth Prison (Diplomatic Bags)
Mr. Gerald Kaufman (Manchester, Gorton)(by private notice)
To ask the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary if he will make a statement about the diplomatic bags which have been lost in Wandsworth prison.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Mark Lennox-Boyd)
We learned some days ago that bags containing Canadian diplomatic mail had been discovered by staff at Wandsworth prison.
Diplomatic bags are routinely sent to Wandsworth prison for laundering.
Laughter
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I imagine that it is a Foreign Office brief.
Come on.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
I must get the answer right.
On this occasion, the Canadian bags in question had been inadvertently included in such a consignment sent to Wandsworth.
Steps were immediately taken to recover the diplomatic mail and to investigate the incident.
Mr. Kaufman
I am sorry — I hoped that there would be more.
Will the hon. Gentleman explain why the question is not being answered by the Home Secretary?
On Monday —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I remind the House that we have a busy day ahead of us.
Interruptions will take up time.
Mr. Kaufman
On Monday, dealing with one case, the Home Secretary hid behind his predecessor.
On another case, he hid behind his legal advisers and a junior Home Office Minister.
Today, he is hiding behind the most junior available Minister in another Department.
Will the hon. Gentleman say what action has been taken to explain why the missing material was left in the bags sent to Wandsworth prison?
Will he explain exactly when it was discovered that that material was in the bags sent to Wandsworth prison and when the search for it started?
Is it true that an interval of several days elapsed between the discovery and the search?
How much material is still missing?
Is a search still going on for missing material?
How much of that material, missing or retrieved, is sensitive material?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is taking a long time.
The right hon. Gentleman should be allowed to complete his question.
Mr. Kaufman
Will the hon. Gentleman tell the House whether a watch was in the missing material and what guarantees
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kaufman
What guarantees can the Minister provide that other metal objects cannot find their way into prison in the way in which that did and disappear as it did?
When was the Home Secretary informed about this latest episode?
Why have the Government not made it public?
Would they have made it public if prison officers had not been aware of it?
The hon. Gentleman says that the Government sent the material to be laundered
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kaufman
Are the Government going to send other material that they want to launder to Wandsworth prison or are they now going to come clean about this episode?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd rose
Hon. Members
Answer.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
May I take the right hon. Gentleman's question seriously?
Hon. Members
’ No.’]
Clearly, this is a matter for the Foreign Office
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I am beginning to wonder whether I should have granted this private notice question.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd rose
Mr. Joseph Ashton (Bassetlaw)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
This is your responsibility.
There are3 million people on the dole and this country is in a deep economic crisis, yet all this is being shown on television and it is a disgrace.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us get this over as quickly as we can.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
This is a private notice question tabled by the Opposition.
The Government have a duty and I am here to answer it —— if the House will give me an opportunity.
I think that this is important — I am sure that the House will agree that this is important and that I should explain the background to the answer that I have previously given.
I am sure that the House will bear with me for one or two minutes while I explain what has happened on this occasion.
It is a serious matter.
Interruption
Interruption
The position is that the Canadian Government routinely send their diplomatic bags Should I go on?— to the Foreign Office for onward transmission
Mr. Speaker
Order.
When I decided to grant this private notice question, I took it to be a serious matter and I should like it to be taken seriously.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
On this occasion, some of their bags were contained in the white diplomatic bag belonging to the Foreign Office, which they were using for convenience to contain their consignment —— and, as I have explained to the House, that was the commencement of the error in question which, of course, we very much regret.
Laughter
I have come to the House this afternoon from a meeting with a representative of the Canadian High Commission, with which we have been in constant touch from the outset of the incident.
It is perfectly satisfied with the outcome of the preliminary investigation.
Mr. Robert MacLennan (Caithness and Sutherland)
Is not the difficulty that the Home Secretary is incapable of keeping in prison those people who should be and keeping out of prison those things which should not be?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
That is as absurd a political point as was made by the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton,(Mr. Kaufman).
Clearly, this is not a matter for the Home Secretary.
It occurred in the Foreign Office and the Foreign Office, and I personally take full responsibility for it this afternoon before the House.
Cheap politics is no way to investigate the matter.
Sir Peter Tapsell (East Lindsey)
Bearing in mind the fact that Prince Metternich eventually left Vienna disguised in a laundry basket is not it clear that this incident is in the highest diplomatic tradition?
Can my hon. and diplomatic Friend assure us that these important diplomatic communications were not ultimately put to any ignoble use?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
As we know, Prince Metternich was not the only person to be put into a diplomatic bag.
It happened on other occasions, but not on this one.
Our friends in the Canadian High Commission and the Canadian Government are conducting their own assessment of the case.
It is obviously not proper for me to comment further on what it concludes, but it is satisfied with our preliminary conclusions.
Mr. Tom Cox (Tooting)
As the Minister who represents the area containing Wandsworth prison, may I suggest to the Minister that if the exchanges of the past few minutes were conveyed to BBC television's’ Yes Minister’they might indeed help to revive the Government's fortunes?
But there is a serious point here.
There is a serious point.
Prison officers are repeatedly subject to abuses from the Government about their lack of commitment to the job that they do.
If the diplomatic bags contained metal objects that got through the system, surely the Minister or his right hon. Friend the Home Secretary should take note of the seriousness of the problem.
There have been enough prison escapes under this Government.
Surely this should be an opportunity for giving serious consideration to and providing serious answers on this major issue.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
The allegation about a metal object being contained in one of the bags is new to me.
Consolidated Fund Bill
Mr. Speaker
I have a short statement to make about arrangements for the debate on the motion for the Adjournment, which will follow the passing of the Consolidated Fund Bill on Thursday 12 December.
Hon. Members should submit their subjects to my office not later than 10 pm on Tuesday 10 December.
A list showing the subjects and the times will be published the following day.
Normally, the time allotted will not exceed one and a half hours, but I propose to exercise a discretion to allow one or two debates to continue for rather longer, up to a maximum of three hours.
Where identical or similar subjects have been entered by different Members whose names are drawn in the ballot, only the first name will appear on the list.
As some debates may not last the full time allotted to them, it is the responsibility of hon. Members to keep in touch with developments if they are not to miss their turn.
Points of Order
Mr. George Foulkes (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I hope that it is not because the hon. Gentleman has not been called at business questions.
Mr. Foulkes
You kindly said that you would call hon. Members next week who had been rising.
Somewhat eccentrically, the question that I was going to ask was about next Wednesday's business.
Mr. Speaker
What bad luck.
Mr. Foulkes rose
Mr. Speaker
No — I am sorry, that was a bit provocative.
However, I gave the hon. Member a very good run yesterday, and the day before.
Mr. Tony Marlow (Northampton, North)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker — not related to business questions or to the fact that I am sulking or anything like that; it is a totally different matter.
Whenever there has been a whiff of financial scandal in the past, the Opposition, very much to their credit, have raised it and brought it before the public, and there has been a great hue and cry about it.
Unaccountably, the Opposition have not requested a statement on one of the great scandals involving Robert Maxwell.
Will you, Mr. Speaker, tell the House whether you have been approached on the subject, and, if so, have the Opposition told you why they do not want a statement on it?
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
The trouble with points of order like that is that they are highly contagious.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
In view of what you, Mr. Speaker, have had to say about the Consolidated Fund Bill, can you give some assurance that, if this matter about Maxwell and him laundering money is raised, you will ensure that people such as Arthur Scargill and Peter Heathfield will be given special tickets to sit in the Gallery so that they can hear the debate and so that they can draw the attention of various channels to the fact that perhaps Mr. Lightman should investigate the missing Maxwell millions, and perhaps we can find out whether Roger Windsor, Mr. Maxwell's nark, was paid £50,000 out of the Daily Mirror's missing millions.
Those are the questions that we would like to be asked.
Mr. Speaker
There are opportunities to raise these matters next week.
They would have to be raised in a parliamentary manner, and certainly couched in the proper terms.
Mr. Peter Thurnham (Bolton, North-East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Could you give guidance on the important matter of confidences given us by constituents?
It is important that constituents should be able to consult us about confidential matters, but surely we should not go so far as to give comfort to murderers and bombers, as has been suggested.
The hon. Member for Tottenham (Mr. Grant) said that he had been misquoted.
Will you give a ruling, Mr. Speaker, that we are not like doctors, lawyers and priests, and that we should uphold the police and support them in their duties?
Mr. Speaker
I think I know to what the hon. Member is referring.
The fact is that there is no privilege for confidences given to hon. Members.
It is a matter for the discretion of hon. Members.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of the point of order raised by the hon. Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow), I ought to make it clear that we would very much like to see an investigation of the missing pension funds.
Also, we have been calling for many years for legislation to get rid of the offshore tax havens of the sort that Lord Duncan-Sandys ploughed money into from Lonrho about 1970.
Mr. Speaker
I think that would be quite a good subject.
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
May I ask you about a serious point of order, Mr. Speaker?
I have noticed the growing practice on Prime Minister's questions and on questions to other Ministers of Members on both sides of the House, but primarily Opposition Members, asking personal questions which do not relate to the Minister's responsibility.
For instance, today the Prime Minister was asked about his period of unemployment.
Dr. Lewis Moonie (Kirkcaldy)
The hon. Gentleman might be unemployed soon.
Mr. Devlin
I doubt it very much.
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether you could give us some guidance on the point.
Surely Ministers are appearing at the Dispatch Box solely to answer questions about their governmental responsibilities.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member is absolutely right.
In view of what he has said, I deeply regret having called him, I think on Question 2, to ask a question about the Northumbria police which had nothing to do with his constituency.
I do allow a slight discretion in these matters.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
The hon. Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow) talked about an inquiry into the position of the Mirror Group pension fund.
May it be made clear for the record that my hon. Friend the Member for Redcar (Ms. Mowlam), who is a junior Front-Bench spokesman, wrote to the Secretary of State this week asking for an inquiry?
We are deeply concerned about the matter, about the theft that has taken place and about the laxity of the rules which allowed that to happen.
We want a prompt inquiry.
Mr. Speaker
I think I called the hon. Member on business questions.
Couched in the right terms, that seems to fall within the ambit of a Consolidated Fund Bill debate, or one of the Adjournment debates before we go off for Christmas.
Opposition Day
2nd Allotted Day
Economy and Recession
Mr. Speaker
I must announce to the House that I have selected the amendment in the name of the Prime Minister.
Furthermore, in view of the late start and the number of hon. Members who wish to participate, I am putting a precautionary limit of 10 minutes on speeches between 7 o'clock and 9 o'clock.
If the Front-Bench spokesmen and those who are called before 7 o'clock exercise discretion, it may be possible in the interests of the whole House to relax that limit.
Mr. John Smith (Monklands, East)
I beg to move, That this House deplores the Government's economic policies, which have caused the severe and continuing recession and which are damaging all parts of the economy and all areas of the nation; and calls upon the Government to initiate without delay an investment based recovery including financial incentives for investment in manufacturing, tax credits for the enhancement of technology, assistance for regional economic development and a major programme of education and training to tackle Britain's continuing skills crisis.
I happen for my sins to have been shadow Chancellor since the last election in 1987, during which period there have been three Chancellors of the Exchequer.
The first was the right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson), who is not remembered with exactly ecstatic affection by Conservative Members.
Despite being described by the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), then Prime Minister, as both’ unassailable’and’brilliant, brilliant, brilliant’, he is given a much lower rating by contemporary Conservative opinion.
Whenever they gather in private, he is berated for the economic mess in which their political fortunes are floundering, although in public , as hon. Members know only too well, the fiction is resolutely maintained that Conservative economic policy has been a continuing success.
The right hon. Member for Blaby will be remembered as the Chancellor who dismissed rising inflation as a temporary blip and who, having put up interest rates to 15 per cent., none the less assured us that the economy would have, to use his phrase, a soft landing.
The right hon. Gentleman may personally have achieved a rather soft landing, but sadly that was not true for the economy of which he was in charge.
Mr. Sheldon
I shall come on to that in great detail.
I shall go into greater detail than my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East had a chance to do on the kinds of investment that can be produced, rather than the consumption boom which the Chancellor hopes for.
The debate is intended to bring the Government to account.
They must account for their management of the economy.
Naturally, I do not expect the apologists on the Government Front Bench to criticise the Government's policies, still less to condemn their actions.
However, some of them might have had it in them to refrain from congratulating the Government on delivering the two worst recessions of the post-war years.
How did the implementers of the monetarist nonsense which brought about the first recession manage to produce a second recession?
The Government came to office in 1979, when my constituency, Ashton-under-Lyne, was a manufacturing area with a level of prosperity higher than the national average.
It earned its living then, as it does now, by making things, and it had many small to medium firms.
It used to have less unemployment than the regional or national average.
In the district that embraces both my constituency and Stockport, there were 20,000 skilled engineers, many of whom were made unemployed.
Today, there are no longer 20,000 but 5,000.
At a time when skills are in demand, they have been wantonly discarded.
That is why my right hon. and learned Friend continually puts forward those proposals, and he has the full support of the companies in my area, which understand those problems.
In the two years 1979-81, one third of the firms in my constituency closed.
That was a devastating blow from which the constituency is struggling to recover.
My right hon. Friend is right to talk about the industrial capacity being too low to produce the recovery we need.
It is a long-term, essential and immediate job to bring industrial capacity back to what it should be.
I have never forgiven the Government for what they did to my constituency in those two years.
The good medium and high-tech firms all flourished in Germany, Japan and the United States — indeed, in all countries.
They had a good past and a reasonable future, but they were ruined by the highest interest rates this century and an unrealistic exchange rate, which lost them export markets and provided further competition in their home markets.
We now have the present long-lived recession, which is a further injury to deal with.
It will be some time before I have the figures to show how serious the second recession has been — how many firms have closed, how many jobs have been irrevocably lost, and how the finances of the survivors have suffered.
However, I know of repeated pleas for action and the despair of so many small firms, one of which resulted in yet another suicide of someone whom I knew, resulting from business failure.
Meanwhile, closures of important firms continue.
There is no question of a weeding-out process.
Many are firms that expanded and invested with no expectation of 15 per cent.
interest rates.
Even prudent companies' reasonable expectations have been destroyed by the Government's actions.
The Chancellor gives selective statistics, but I suppose that all our statistics are, to an extent, selective.
I visit many manufacturing companies and ask them about the state of their order books.
I do not ask what hopes or expectations they have, or what they are dreaming of, but what they are experiencing.
There is no question but that firms that expect recovery do not lay off workers.
Firms that are hopeful about the future do not take such measures.
Therefore, the rising levels of unemployment are a direct consequence of what those firms are experiencing, not what they are hoping for.
That should be of concern to the Chancellor.
In such circumstances, it is effrontery that my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East and my hon. Friend the Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) should be attacked for what they might do, instead of the Government being brought to account for what they have done and continue to do.
Opposition Members want to return to common-sense methods of running the economy, encouraging investment and skills.
When I hear the attacks on that modest, even cautious, and certainly prudent programme, I must compare it with the gross waste of public money in which the Government have indulged.
They spent billions of pounds on the nightmare of the poll tax, and millions of pounds were lost to the taxpayer when they sold off publicly owned assets at well below valuation.
In fact, some of them were not even valued, so anxious were the Government to get rid of them.
They waste our public services, and essential repairs are not carried out.
The fabric of our schools, public buildings and roads store up bigger and bigger bills for the future.
Meanwhile, the Government are busy opting out of industrial policy.
I recently asked Lord King of British Airways about his decision to buy Boeing aircraft and United States General Electric aero engines — not only that, but the fact that he was giving them a foothold in Britain at the expense of Rolls-Royce.
I asked him what he had told the Department of Trade and Industry, and he said that he had said nothing.
I was astonished, and thought that he had misunderstood my question.
I asked what the DTI officials had said, and he said that they had told him nothing.
I could not believe that, but he confirmed it openly and readily.
If the Department of Trade and Industry is dealing with one of the most important companies in our country, it should hold a view on what that firm should do or how it might be helped to overcome its problems.
I am not talking only about the position in countries such as Germany or Japan, but about second or third-world countries.
We are dealing with the issue of investment and the necessity for it — which, I regret to say, the Chancellor of the Exchequer did not seem to understand.
The Confederation of British Industry has come round and is now talking about 40 per cent.
capital allowances.
I do not think that that is enough, but I am delighted that my right hon. Friends have again and again spoken of the necessity for plant and machinery.
We must recreate the industrial structure that we once had and wantonly destroyed.
Mr. Tim Smith (Beaconsfield)
Does not the right hon. Gentleman appreciate that, if we were to return to 100 per cent.
capital allowances — which I think he may want — it could have a damaging effect on the quality of investment decisions, which are at present made for good, sound, commercial reasons?
When I worked in industry in the 1970s, people took investment decisions for tax reasons, which are the wrong reasons for taking such decisions.
Mr. Sheldon
There is no doubt that the best way to invest is with the intention of selling more of the goods that come from those investments, and receiving a greater return on them.
However, does the present level of 25 per cent.
provide a level playing field?
I do not believe that it does.
Anyone who buys a piece of plant and machinery and tries to sell it back to the manufacturer at 75 per cent.
at the end of the first year will be laughed at, because the value will then be much less — in some cases it will not even cover the commission of the salesman who organised the sale.
That provides not an incentive to invest but a disincentive — a penalty.
I understand why the Government call for neutrality, but the present position is far from neutral.
I am in favour of some incentive beyond that represented by depreciation, because new methods tend to encourage new ideas of production, which is so important.
Again and again, I hear people say that it is a pity that we who produced the great ideas of the world did not actually manufacture their consequences.
The feeling is that we had the idea, which was the crucial element, and anybody could manufacture the product, but that is not true.
The great skill of Japanese and German manufacturers is that they know how to make things efficiently and well, which is what we are so bad at.
Manufacturing requires the necessary industrial investment to transform the ideas into the articles that can be sold in the keenest markets.
We must be more than neutral, but at present we are not even that.
Meanwhile, the Government are busy opting out of industrial policy.
I asked Lord King of British Airways about the decision to buy Boeing aircraft and United States General Electric aero engines, giving that company a foothold in Britain at the expense of Rolls-Royce.
We must turn our attention to that.
When industry takes such decisions, the DTI must be involved and must know what is going on.
I am not even sure that the Department's officials knew, but if they did, and they took no action, they are culpable in the extreme.
Mr. John Watts (Slough)
Will the right hon. Gentleman explain to the House more clearly what sort of involvement he would expect from the DTI?
Should it twist the arm of British Airways?
Should the company have been subsidised with taxpayers' money in order to buy a British product?
What sort of distortion of the market is he recommending?
Mr. Sheldon
The market is being distorted: if General Electric wants to come into this country, it gives a price concession which damages one of this country's crucial companies.
The DTI should at least have investigated the issue and asked questions.
Its officials may not have come to exactly the same conclusions as I did, but they should have tried to find out.
If they had agreed with British Airways, I could understand that they might have left the issue alone, but they might have come to different conclusions and taken different action.
However, the Government leave it to the financial operations of others, and meanwhile the economy is run on the basis that one might be able to regulate but not to promote.
I totally disagree.
We are now hearing that our outlook is so bad that we had better leave it to an independent central bank to decide the important aspects of our future.
I find it strange that people with whom I have been associated should now accept that independent bankers control so much of our destiny.
I would expect them to be more cautious.
People point to the success of the German Bundesbank as a sign of the strength of the German economy.
It is nothing of the sort.
It is not the cause of German economic strength, but the consequence.
Mercedes-Benz, Siemens and Bayer do not owe their success to the Bundesbank: the Bundesbank owes its strength to German industrial progress.
Germany found itself facing an expansionist Europe and a booming industry.
The strength of Germany derives from the skills of people in industry.
It did not matter that so much plant and machinery, and so many factories, were destroyed in the war, because the skills of the people were not destroyed; they remained, to recreate the industrial strength which we once again admire and respect.
That is the task facing us.
When my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East rightly speaks of the essential nature of skills, training and investment, he has it exactly right.
It is terrible that, for 45 years, we have not done that — that is the scandal of our time.
It is about time that we started to realise that the financial centre of London is not the key to our success.
I do not deny that it plays an important part, but the key to our strength is our industrial might.
I find our love affair with the banking profession curious.
From being the bogey of bankers, we are becoming the bankers' friend.
I have played my part in defending the role of banks and the necessary role that they have, but I find myself a little outflanked by the new enthusiasm.
If British industry were in the same powerful position as German industry, I might be a little more relaxed about economic monetary union, but I am worried about the time at which we are entering into new commitments.
The urge for an independent central bank and a proposed Euro central bank comes at a particularly dangerous time, when recessions, depressions and even a slump cannot be ruled out.
We could be legislating well into the next century.
Nobody can say that depressions were something peculiar to the 1930s.
At times, Government intervention is required.
This could be a time when Franklin Roosevelt's new deal, hated by bankers, could come into its own.
It is a time for the Governments to act together to take charge of economics for the sake of the citizens that they, and only they, can represent.
I used to hold that an international depression was impossible because, faced with an economic catastrophe, the bankers, people and Governments would overcome their differences and co-operate with Keynesian methods to end such a disaster.
There are goals other than conquering inflation.
The Government and our times rightly attach great importance to conquering inflation, but it is not the only aim of a successful economy.
Following the German inflation of the 1920s, there was enormous unemployment and the rise of Hitler.
Nazism was the result not of inflation, but of the counter-inflationary measures that did so much damage.
The trouble was that they voted against the large numbers of unemployed and voted for Fascist and Nazi Governments.
In 1945, the Bank of England was nationalised with some Conservative support because of the way it had handled the depression.
Independence of the central bank would restore its power.
I always thought that, if an international crisis similar to that of the 1930s were to recur, there would be international agreement to control such events.
I cannot be sure now that that would happen.
With a Eurobank, I would be even less sure.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, East (Mr. Healey) once told the Governor of the Bank of England that the latter had the better job.
I do not think that he was joking.
The power of day-to-day decision-making, even in a nationalised bank, is underestimated.
How much greater would be the power of the Eurobank.
Of course we cannot be excluded from progress within the Community.
We must accept our position in the Community, which will lead to a greater alignment between us, but the main solution to our economic problems lies in ourselves.
It lies in our will, determination and good industrial sense, wherein the Government have been found seriously lacking.
Sir William Clark (Croydon, South)
It is always a pleasure to follow the right hon. Member for Ashton-under-Lyne (Mr. Sheldon).
We have all listened to his speech with great interest.
He certainly convinced me, and I am sure the rest of the House, that he is diametrically opposed to a central bank.
In those circumstances, he seems to be at variance with his own Front Bench spokesmen.
I do not know whether that is a serious matter, but given the right hon. Gentleman's experience and standing, I should have thought that the Opposition Front Bench spokesmen would take careful notice of what he says.
The right hon. Gentleman spoke about his constituency.
I agree that many jobs, particularly in manufacturing industry, have been lost since 1979, but one must remember that there was a great deal of overmanning in 1979.
For example, in 1979 the steel industry employed roughly twice the number of people that it does now, producing the same amount of steel.
That in itself meant that we took over an uncompetitive company.
In order for it to remain competitive, jobs had to be shed.
Politicians often succumb to the danger of talking down the economy.
For example, if a Gallup poll goes against the Government, sterling starts to shake.
Equally, when Labour politicians talk down the economy, saying how bad it is, that has an effect on the foreigner.
Therefore, I hope that they can be persuaded to stop.
As my right hon. Friend the Chancellor said, the latest reports of the Institute of Directors and the CBI show that they are not pessimistic about the economy.
In fact, they say that the increase in confidence has been the highest for some years.
The chambers of commerce are not pessimistic.
It does the economy no good for the Opposition continually to talk it down.
Never once does one hear the Opposition say that, since 1981, manufacturing output is up 25 per cent., manufacturing investment is up by 33 per cent. , and manufacturing production is up by more than 50 per cent .
Dr. John Marek (Wrexham)
The Government took office in 1979.
Sir William Clark
If the hon. Gentleman just thinks about what he is saying, he will realise that it takes a Government one or two years to bring the economy round.
The economy cannot change overnight.
It is ridiculous to suggest otherwise.
The Opposition never mention manufacturing exports, which are up 75 per cent.
since 1981.
The export of motor cars in the past nine months is 90 per cent.
higher than last year.
Those are all pointers for the economy.
Why do we not start talking about some of our successes?
Mrs. Dunwoody
Would the right hon. Gentleman therefore care to suggest what I should say to those 420 workers in Rolls-Royce who have been ejected from their jobs with scant courtesy and with no idea why it has happened, who have all the skills required for building motor cars and are not to be given the chance to do so?
Sir William Clark
I fully sympathise with the hon. Lady's constituents, but one must face the facts of life: in a recession, and coming out of a recession, jobs are always being lost.
In the third quarter of this year, our exports rose by 1 per cent.
That is something that we should be talking about.
There is a slowdown in destocking.
Many manufacturing industries have been destocking during the past few years but now that is slowing down.
That in itself is a sign that we are coming out of the recession.
In the third quarter of this year, pay settlements were down from an average of 10 per cent.
to an average of 6.5 per cent.
In manufacturing industry, pay settlements were down from an average of 9 per cent.
to 5.5 per cent.
Those are all steps in the right direction to make us more competitive; and if we are more competitive, we can obviously sell more of our goods.
As my right hon. Friend the Chancellor reminded the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), he did not mention inflation once.
He did not say that our inflation rate had been 10.9 per cent.
and was now down to 3.7 per cent.
It is just a little above that of Germany, but it is well below the EC average.
Consequently, it is forecast that in 1992 our inflation rate will be below even the German average, which at the moment is 3.5 per cent.
In order to give people more confidence rather than surrounding them with gloom and doom, we should point out that, since 1979, GDP has risen 22 per cent.
in real terms.
There are 800,000 more jobs now than there were in 1979.
The net income of an average family, a husband and wife with two children, is up by 37 per cent.
in real terms.
Our corporation tax, which has already been mentioned, is the lowest in the EC.
It is the lowest in the G7 countries.
It has come down from 52 per cent.
under the previous Labour Government to 33 per cent.
now.
Income tax has dropped from 33 per cent.
to 25 per cent., and the top rate, a penal rate of 83 per cent. , is down to 40 per cent .
The investment income surcharge, which we abolished, had a top rate of 98 per cent.
The economy is also assisted by separate tax assessments for husband and wife.
In many cases, that has given the family an added incentive and advantage.
Public expenditure is under control.
In 1979, it was 44 per cent.
It is now down to just over 40 per cent.
Up to last year, we had repaid £26 billion of the national debt.
That is unheard of.
It is true that this year we have a public sector borrowing requirement of about £10 billion or £10.5 billion, but with the strength of sterling and of previous national sector repayments, borrowing, and debt, that is something we can meet.
I want to make a few suggestions to my right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary about small businesses.
Many of the new firms that started were under-capitalised and so went to the wall, but the net number has increased by many hundreds of thousands since 1979.
One of the snags that confronts small businesses in particular is that of cash flow.
They have orders — although perhaps not as many as they had — but also cash flow problems, because the companies they supply do not pay their bills on time.
It is time that the Government considered a system such as that operated by some of our retail stores.
If one has an account at Harrods, for example, and does not pay one's bill by a certain date, a mandatory rate of interest is immediately added to the total.
Mr. Beith
Harrods does that?
Sir William Clark
Yes, it does — if one does not pay within the stipulated time.
When a small company arranges to supply a bigger client, settlement terms of, say, 30 days may be agreed.
Once that period is exceeded, a mandatory rate of interest should automatically be added.
The small supplier would then not be in the hands of his bank.
As it is, his overdraft increases, and so do the interest charges, at two or three points over base.
That penalty should be paid by the firms which owe money to a smaller business.
I also want to point out that the Trades Union Congress, with 6.5 million members, has six representatives on the National Economic Development Council; the National Federation of Self Employed and Small Businesses, with 5 million members, has none.
I believe that organisation ought to be represented.
As to the capital allowance, I was interested in the point made by the hon. Member for Ashton-under-Lyne, and I agree with the comments made by my hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith) in his intervention.
One hundred per cent.
capital allowances could lead to investment decisions being made entirely for tax reasons.
What else could be done?
At present, a 25 per cent .
reduction is given on a reducing basis.
In terms of cash flow, it takes a business man eight or nine years to get his money back on any machinery, for example, that he buys.
Would it not be easier to offer a straight-line reduction, giving 25 per cent.
capital allowance over four years?
That way, a business man making an investment would know that he would get his money back within four years.
I hope that my right hon. and learned Friend will consider that suggestion.
It would not cost the Exchequer anything more the first year, because a 25 per cent.
allowance is already given.
Only in the second year, when the allowance currently is 25 per cent.
of 75 per cent., would any difference arise.
Mr. Sheldon
I am delighted that the right hon. Gentleman has come up with some further suggestions.
There are probably many more.
However, perhaps he could be more generous, given the present need for investment, and allow for a limited period, such as that which operated when the right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) was Chancellor.
An allowance period shorter than the four years mentioned by the right hon. Gentleman might have an immediate and useful effect.
Sir William Clark
That is worth considering, but I am not completely sold on that idea.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) reduced corporation tax to 35 per cent., but at the same time he took away the 100 per cent .
allowance.
In that way, despite the fact that a company lost the capital allowance on the excess on its investment, it gained on the reduction in corporation tax, from — I believe it was — 42 per cent.
to 35 per cent.
During his 30-minute speech, the hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East did not once say where the money for his proposals — other than those on training and investment — would come from.
Neither did he refute the two commitments made by the hon. Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) in respect of pensions and child benefit.
Will Labour fulfil the £35 billion of pledges being given by its spokesmen throughout the country?
I understand that is a conservative estimate.
Mr. Austin Mitchell (Great Grimsby)
It would be.
Sir William Clark
I meant, with a small c, in that some economists attach a higher figure to the cost of implementing those pledges.
There can be no doubt that, if Labour's pledges are implemented, even an increase in taxation from 40 per cent.
to 49 per cent.
would not produce enough revenue to pay for them.
The ordinary person would inevitably be affected.
Every person in this country earning between £10,000 and £30,000 would, if Labour implemented all its pledges, be worse off.
Anyone earning more than £30,000 would be severely worse off.
Mrs. Margaret Beckett (Derby, South)
The hon. Gentleman knows that we have answered that point many times, but I cannot let it pass.
We have made it explicitly clear that none of the changes that we propose, either in tax or in national insurance contributions, will make a penny difference to any individual earning less than £21,000 a year.
No one earning less than £21,000 will pay a penny more under us.
Sir William Clark
Rhetoric and promises are all right, but if Labour's pledges are to be honoured, there is no question but that the ordinary taxpayer will be affected — or that some of those pledges will have to be reneged upon.
It is as simple as that.
I have no doubt that, as my right hon. Friend the Chancellor said, Britain is coming out of the recession.
The recovery is slow and patchy, but the policy is sound — Labour Members who laugh and snigger at such remarks ought to ask themselves why it is that Britain of all the countries in Europe has the most inward investment from overseas investors.
Interruption
Mr. Austin Mitchell
Because Britain offers them cheap labour.
Sir William Clark
That is simply untrue.
I agree with my right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary that the British economy is basically sound.
Our gold and dollar reserves are sound, and we can look forward with confidence to the future — provided that there is no change of Government.
Mr. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed)
I was glad to hear the right hon. Member for Croydon, South (Sir W. Clark) reiterate his support for measures to help small businesses, in particular over the late repayment of debt.
This is something for which my hon. Friends and I have pressed for some time.
I hope that the right hon. Gentleman's call will be heeded by those on his own Front Bench, because it would be an extremely helpful and valuable measure.
The fairest statement that I have seen recently of the prospects of recovery was the one in the Greenwell Montagu Recovery Watch bulletin a few days ago.
It said:’ The balance of evidence over the last month has been towards continued recession.
Shafts of light from company statements and bullish confidence surveys are outweighed by gloomy economic data and depressing anecdotal evidence.’
One can make one's own judgment a little to one side or the other of that.
There is a mixture of indicators, but on the whole the adverse indicators seem heavier and more serious than the favourable ones, many of which are things such as confidence surveys, which do not tell one very much about what will happen.
We must, surely, eventually get to recovery, but we have been waiting for it for a long time.
The Chancellor has been waiting for Father Christmas since the spring, and I do not think that Father Christmas will arrive for him before 25 December.
Worse than that from the Government's point of view, I do not think that he will arrive in time for the general election.
The Government are laying great stress on the possibility of a consumer-led recovery.
That is perhaps the area in which they are least believed by those closest to the reality of retailing and the experience of consumers.
The Government produced in the autumn statement a graph of consumer confidence.
It is the first time, as far as I can see, that what is in effect an opinion poll has found its way into the autumn statement.
It is a bit like taking a poll of general election candidates asking them to state in public whether they think that they will win.
Of course, they all say that they will win.
How many meetings have we all been to, all of us in all parties, at which the candidate has said that he looks forward to winning?
Consumer confidence is not all that far from that, but, from the retailer's point of view, it does not pay the staff wages.
The people in the street outside may tell the market researchers that they are more confident than they were six months ago, but that does not take them into the shop, put their money over the counter or pay the staff wages of the retailer.
The Government do not seem to realise how severely consumers have been affected by the experience of recession.
That is the factor that the Government are not considering.
Consumers who saw their commitments enlarge so dramatically as a result of higher interest rates, who found themselves over-committed, and then found themselves unemployed and even less able to meet those commitments, will not rush out and spend money even if they have more of it.
They are credit-wary, because their experience of credit has been a very adverse one in recent times.
The Government fatally underestimate how very chastened many consumers are by the harsh experience of the last couple of years.
The main driving force of a consumer-led boom would have to be improvement in the housing market.
That is where so much of the consumer boom of the 1980s came from.
There is massive equity withdrawal from housing.
There is no sign of that recovery in the housing market.
That is perhaps the weakest of all the indicators on which the Government seek to rely.
However hopeful we may be, however much we may snatch at the more encouraging indicators, we cannot look forward with any great confidence to a consumer recovery.
Mr. Tim Smith
Chart 2.7 in the autumn statement shows consumer confidence.
It also shows that, since 1974, before every increase in consumer spending there has been an increase in consumer confidence — that the one always follows the other.
What reason is there to suppose that this will not happen this time?
Mr. Beith
The reason that I just gave, which is the experience of recession.
But I am prepared to wait and see.
I advise the Government, however, not to take an indication of confidence as the same thing as money over the counter.
One could never run any business on that basis.
Another danger which the Government face in the coming months is that of post-Maastricht pressures on sterling.
There is considerable evidence that markets are expecting a realignment following the Maastricht negotiations and that there will be downward pressure on sterling, testing the Chancellor's resolve over interest rates.
I believe that there is a strong likelihood that markets will seek to test that resolve.
Nobody in the markets seems to believe that the Chancellor dare put up interest rates this side of the general election.
Indeed, I have defended the Chancellor in some conversations on this very subject with people in these fields.
I have said that I think that he might and they have all said that of course he will not; he dare not, they say, there is no way that he will put up interest rates this side of the general election.
My touching faith in the Chancellor's resolve and commitment to anti-inflation policy was ridiculed by those with whom I had this discussion, who were obviously much more deeply cynical than I am.
I have to warn the Chancellor that there is a widespread belief that he is not at all likely to take the measures that might prove necessary if intervention is insufficient to stem severe downward pressure on sterling in the coming months.
All this adds up to the likelihood that the Government cannot sort out the economy in the very short term and certainly cannot do so this side of the general election; they cannot generate the feeling of happiness and cheerfulness about the economy which parties traditionally rely upon to win general elections.
I think that that is impossible.
I do not think that any incoming party with any set of policies could turn the economy around over the next six months.
It is a much longer-term task than that.
My plea to the Government, therefore, is that they concentrate on what they can do, and that is to improve the long-term prospects for the economy.
If they fiddle around with the short-term situation that will not enable them to win; it will not enable them to get a better general election performance.
They might get at least some credit if they were seen to be laying better long-term foundations for the economy.
They must, at the same time, provide some immediate help to the main sufferers, particularly the unemployed, and take measures designed to reduce unemployment by investment in those areas which can produce some reduction in unemployment.
I am thinking particularly of repairs in schools and housing, which can generate some employment.
The Government must get on with addressing the long-term solutions.
One of these is, of course, the single currency.
Our whole attitude to this is fundamental to the future of our economy.
What an admission to make after 12 years of Conservative government that our economy is uniquely incapable of being signed up for participation in a single currency.
That is one of the principal arguments of those on the Government Benches who say that we should not sign up, that we cannot say at this stage whether we are capable, as an economy, of participating without damage in a single currency.
That is a terrible indictment of 12 years of Conservative government.
The alternative to participating in a single currency is higher interest rates in this country than within that currency.
The opt-out clause which the Government have so anxiously sought, the clause that would enable Britain uniquely to opt out of participation in a single currency, is a health warning on the British economy.
It is a label attached to the British economy which says,’ Warning: This is the United Kingdom economy; we reserve the right to devalue our currency.
If you invest here, your money may lose its value, your products cannot be reliably priced for trade across Europe; you may face high transaction costs; and you may not get the full benefits of a single market.’
That is the label which the opters-out wish to attach to the British economy.
Mr. Alan Williams (Swansea, West)
In that case, how does the hon. Gentleman explain how, under both the Labour Government and the Conservative Government, inward investment has been at its peak when there has been a floating currency, where that has been a possibility?
Mr. Beith
The right hon. Gentleman must address himself to the new situation which is developing and in which there will be a single currency.
I believe that, if we are not participants in it, it will be severely damaging to inward investment.
In the case of a Japanese company wishing to invest in this country, whereas hitherto the attractions of the United Kingdom economy, along with the English language, which is important in Japanese investment, have been significant, for the future we are issuing a warning to the Japanese investor to be careful; he may not be able to price across Europe in the future, he may experience high interest rates in this country and he may find it much harder to trade into the Community, because if we are not participating in the single currency we may not get all the benefits of the single market either.
This is a warning which the Government must heed.
It is not a label which I want to see attached to the British economy.
Sir Ian Stewart (Hertfordshire, North)
What the hon. Gentleman has said is an absolute travesty of the position taken by the Government and, as far as I know, by the official Opposition as well.
The reason why it is considered so important that we should not make a commitment at this stage to join a single currency is that a single currency would involve not only a single central bank but single economic management and a commitment by the Government and people of this country to subsidise, if necessary, the trade deficit of Italy, the budget deficits of other countries and the different standards of living.
That would be a major constitutional and economic decision which we could not possibly take here and now.
That is the reason why that option has to be kept open.
It has nothing to do with the arguments which the hon. Gentleman has put forward.
Mr. Beith
The right hon. Gentleman has not been listening to his hon. Friends.
Unlike the Prime Minister, I am prepared to have a referendum on this fundamental constitutional issue.
I am prepared to let the people of this country decide.
The right hon. Gentleman mentioned the independent central bank, which I believe is part of the long-term anti-inflation policy.
It was significant that the right hon. Member for Ashton-under-Lyne (Mr. Sheldon) expressed two views — that an independent central bank was a bad thing, and that there are worse problems than inflation.
Inflation has been at the root of many of the worst economic problems that we have faced, and was certainly at the root of the problems in pre-war Germany, to which the right hon. Gentleman referred.
The Chancellor has clearly got the message about how an independent central bank would have to work if we had a single currency.
He said:’ But the European central bank in stage 3 would have to be free to set interest rates without interference.’
Significantly, he said:’ That is the view of every member state.
In a Community of 12 countries, it simply would not be practical for 12 Finance Ministers to intervene in the monetary policy decisions of the central bank.’
It is Government policy that if we have a single currency there can be no interference with the setting of monetary policy by the central bank.
That is a significant step forward in Government policy.
I accept that it is conditional on the decision to participate in a single currency, but I hope that Conservative Members have noted that the necessity of an independent central bank to such a system is accepted by the Government and other member states.
For the long-term benefit of the economy, the Government should invest to ensure that we have an adequate public transport system to move people to and from places of work without massive environmental pollution and to move goods.
Our record compared with France, for example on the channel tunnel, is deeply depressing.
The Government should invest in housing to encourage labour mobility, and in training and education, which the Chancellor sought to ridicule as if they were unimportant.
It is fair to point our that training and education were one of the few positive points that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) made.
They are extremely important and, as the right hon. and learned Gentleman said, a frequent cry of industry and business is that those needs are not being met.
The Government should consider the genuine promotion of competition.
The fiddling little Competition and Service (Utilities)
Bill, which is being considered in Committee, does not address the need to promote competition in the economy, particularly among the massive privatised utilities that the Government have created.
We have made proposals on the break-up of British Gas and British Telecom that are designed to promote competition, which the Government have not begun to do.
The Government must consider corporation tax and not simply brush it aside.
I do not share the confidence of the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East in investment incentives.
They run considerable risks of distorting investment decisions.
It might be more productive to guarantee a stable tax environment for business by indexing corporation tax allowances, for example, so that business could predict with reasonable accuracy what its tax liability would be.
In the long term, that might be a more effective way of encouraging investment than some of the short-term proposals that we have heard today.
The Government must establish the constitutional framework for stable and decentralised government.
The Federal Republic of Germany has had both because of its electoral system and the decentralised way in which so much of Germany is governed, where many decisions are taken by the regions.
Such changes would be to the long-term good of the United Kingdom's economy.
My advice to the Government is that they cannot sort out the problem this side of a general election, so why not get on with the job of laying the long-term foundations for a successful economy?
There might be some credit for that.
Mr. Austin Mitchell (Great Grimsby)
I do not intend to follow the hon. Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith), because his economics is the economics of accountancy.
He knows all about the figures but nothing about the reality behind them.
It is his obsession with figures that leads him to make the crucial economic mistakes that he made.
The debate is interesting in the light of those mistakes.
It is almost a throwback debate to 1981, with the Government saying that things are bad but — a Micawberism —’ Wait and see, something better will turn up, it might get a bit better.’
Conservative Members have obviously been briefed by Conservative central office, because they cannot find anything good to say about their Government, so they give central office speeches attacking the Labour party and asking what it would do.
They are attacking not a past Labour Government but the Labour Government who will take office next year.
If that is all they have to say, if they can only attack Labour, it is a sad summation of 13 years in power.
The reality is clear to all of us.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) summed it up brilliantly — it is the state of the depression.
It is horrendous — the mother of all recessions.
It makes the Chancellor the Saddam Hussein of economics for accomplishing it in such a brief period.
I will not go on about the statistics.
They are shocking.
The consequences of those statistics are dismal for the future of this country.
The manufacturing base, which is already nearing the limits of viability — it is only about 20 per cent.
of GDP, compared to about 30 per cent.
in Germany — is shrinking still further.
We are losing all the supporting network of training, research, development and suppliers which keeps the manufacturing base in being.
The balance of payments has become a stranglehold.
In the depths of recession, we are in a balance of payments deficit.
It is horrendous.
What happens when we expand?
We cannot expand without making that balance of payments deficit worse.
Every job we lose now, every factory we close, every production line that stops producing, means more imports later.
It means, in other words, a tighter balance of payments deficit.
We shall be entering the single market in the coming year.
That will be a highly competitive environment and we are entering it by jettisoning investment, research, design, development and all the other attributes that would allow us to compete in that market.
We are not prepared for it, whereas our competitors are.
Firms that should be investing and preparing are throwing overboard, just to survive, research, design and everything, including model changes and investment, to struggle through a depression that the Government have created.
That is the prospect not of success but of disaster later.
It is a national tragedy for Britain.
The hon. Member for Beaconsfield said that, sadly, the depression had hit Beaconsfield.
I remind him that it hit Grimsby bitterly between 1979 and 1981, and now we are having a second dose of it, with the loss of Findus Ltd. and 900 jobs, and the shrinking of labour forces by major employers.
We are suffering the failure of viable businesses.
It is a tragedy.
People who put their lives, their effort, their everything into creating businesses have seen them close simply because of the level of interest rates, the depth of the depression that the Government have created and the hostile, unfavourable and unacceptable behaviour of the banks.
From where will the recovery come?
What will produce it?
I cannot see the answer.
The Government are always making predictions, and in that sense the Chancellor may be described as the Mother Shipton — perhaps I should call him the Brother Shipton — of economics.
I fear that we are in a new norm, a prolonged recession with no real recovery, rather than the real prospect of recovery.
I say that because all the engines of recovery seem incapable of driving us out of the recession.
Housing is one such engine.
From where will recovery in housing come, with interest rates at their present level, with house prices still having some way to fall and with a huge overhang of unsold houses?
One house in five sold in Britain now is repossessed, and that depresses the house price market.
That is why I ask where the recovery will come from in housing.
Where will it come from in terms of consumer demand if unemployment continues to rise?
People are more frightened as unemployment rises and they have less money to spend.
Credit, the debt level, presses on everyone and causes people to save and struggle rather than spend.
It will not come from companies.
They are still struggling under a huge burden of debt.
Nor will it come from exports, which are now falling because the pound is so overvalued that we cannot have export success at its present level of valuation.
There might have been an improvement earlier with an expansion of the German economy, but that is now being deflated.
It will not come from Government spending, because the Government will have to borrow massively to keep going at the present mean levels of public spending.
Hence none of the engines of recovery is available to pull us out of the recession.
There is no escape and the tragedy is that the exchange rate mechanism — which the present aggressive, decisive Prime Minister bullied the hapless, shrinking right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) into entering all those months ago, forcing it on her against her will in such a decisive fashion — precludes recovery, because we cannot reduce interest rates.
It is paramount for us now to retain high interest rates, which are high in the historic sense, in real terms, and are high compared with Japan, and with America, where they stand at 5 per cent.
Interest rates at 5 per cent.
have not yet produced recovery in America.
Yet our higher interest rates cannot be reduced; nor can we reduce the exchange rate, because high interest rates are necessary to support the exchange rate.
The right exchange rate is necessary for a country in deficit, as we are, to shift resources from imports to production and to attract investment into manufacturing industry by again making it profitable.
The exchange rate, which in a market situation would fall, cannot come down because the whole dedication of Government policy is to keep the exchange rate at an unreasonable level.
The result is that the market cannot operate.
We have nailed down the lid on the recession.
There can be recovery only if we reduce interest rates and the pound with them.
It is no good reducing interest rates on their own, because there is no point in just pumping out credit.
It is like trying to push on a piece of string: it cannot be done.
One can pull interest rates up, but one cannot push the string to get them down again.
We must increase demand for British goods by adjusting the exchange rate so that demand is channelled to British goods through the price mechanism, making our goods and exports more attractive and cheaper and imports dearer.
It is no good telling me that the price mechanism does not work any more.
The Government's alternative is to reduce prices in manufacturing from the uncompetitive levels to which they are forced up by the exchange rate, by firing people and depressing the price of labour.
I agree that price is important, but the only way to achieve a reduction in prices and an ability to expand is to adjust the exchange rate.
If inflation is too much money pursuing too few goods, it does not follow that we must — as we have been doing in this country — reduce the supply of money all the time and thus have the disastrous consequences for industry that have occurred.
Question, That the proposed words be there added, put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 30 (Questions on amendments), and agreed to.
Mr. Speaker — forthwith declared the main Question, as amended, to be agreed to.
Resolved, That this House welcomes Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer's Autumn Statement, which reaffirmed the Government's forecast of a modest recovery in the second half of 1991, with growth gathering pace in 1992; notes that the total output of the British economy rose in the third quarter of 1991, providing further confirmation of this forecast; and congratulates the Government on its sound and prudent economic policies, which have reduced inflation from nearly 11 per cent.
to under 4 per cent., have allowed interest rates to be reduced from 15 per cent .
to 10 per cent.
and have laid the foundations for sustained non-inflationary growth.
PETITION
Beer Supply Orders
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
I present a petition on behalf of 332 of my constituents who are residents of Stockton-on-Tees and who protest:
That high rents and business rates have created high bar prices at a time when people can ill afford to pay them.
Licensees are having to leave their pubs in their thousands, and more and more pubs are being closed down.
The Beer Orders have allowed brewers to ride roughshod over the intention of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to lower beer prices, allow greater competition and greater choice for customers.
That we the undersigned, wish to protest at the current activities of the major brewers who are increasing bar prices or forcing tenants out of their businesses and homes.
Wherefore your petitioners pray that your honourable House carry out an immediate review of the Beer supply orders and give proper compensation for licensees forced out of their pubs.
To lie upon the Table.
GPs (Computer Costs)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Sir Peter Emery (Honiton)
Computers and their use are not a normal subject for debate in the House.
The subject of the computerisation of our family doctors' practices has almost never been raised, and has never been raised as an individual subject for debate.
Basically, I come to praise the positive steps taken by Health Ministers over the past five years, although in a minor way I will ask for reconsideration of a wrong done to a medical practice in my constituency.
Taking major steps further to encourage medical practices to use computers and various software packages in dealing with medical records has brought, and I hope will continue to bring, benefits to the patient, and it is the patient who matters.
The accurate presentation to any doctor seeing a patient of that patient's record, the full and easy referral to past treatment and the ease of transfer of records are obvious benefits.
The screening of procedures, the control of prescriptions and the identification of patient groups are further benefits for doctors and for patients.
The Government have set aside £44 million for the period 1989-92 to aid and to stimulate the installation of computers in doctors' practices and that must be welcomed by all of us.
I am worried that, certainly in the beginning, all those funds were not used.
Therefore, the Government's record in general terms has been good.
I urge them to continue to meet the necessary level of funding to maintain and update where necessary what has been achieved.
However, there is one specific item in respect of which I believe — nay, I know — the Government have fallen down.
What are the facts?
A large and excellent doctors' practice in Axminster, which is within my constituency, with Drs.
Church, Sutton, Vann, Evans, Hodges and Taylor as partners, decided to computerise the practice.
The doctors examined carefully the hardware necessary to provide access for each doctor and also for the pharmaceutical dispensery.
They spent time arriving at a decision on the correct software.
They were not opting for a particularly expensive scheme.
It was not a Rolls-Royce, but a practical working and adaptable system.
Following my automobile analogy, it was a Rover system.
They based their decision on a clear statement in a Department of Health approved document, entitled’ Funding General Practice 1990’.
According to that document, non-fundholding practices such as the one to which I am referring were entitled to reimbursement of computer costs from April 1990.
They were entitled to 50 per cent.
of maintenance costs, 50 per cent.
of purchasing, leasing or upgrading costs, and 50 per cent.
of the first year of staff costs.
That document — I now quote from it so that I can make certain that I am not misleading the House — states:’ Special software packages are being developed commercially and will be available before April 1991.
They will:
Enable practices to run budgets on a day-to-day basis Account for expenditure incurred Produce monthly and annual reports and statements for the FPC
Keep track of hospital referrals Further guidance on software will be issued in the Spring of 1990.’
There was no mention of a restriction on the cost or repayment that a practice could obtain.
The Under-Secretary of State for Health acknowledged that fact in a letter to me of 31 January 1991.
In the second paragraph he said:’ During our discussions I accepted that there had possibly been some scope for misunderstanding.
Even though Dr. Vann's practice has not applied to become a fund-holding practice you mentioned the GP fundholder brochure which, while mentioning the 50 per cent.
maximum contribution, did not specifically mention the additional list size criteria on the same page.’
What are the facts?
A large, excellent doctors' practice proceeded — how many doctors did the same?— and made a claim for the reimbursement that they expected.
Having spent £25,775 on computerisation, the doctors might reasonably have expected a 50 per cent.
— £12,800 — reimbursement.
They were amazed and’ aghast’when they received only £4,830 from the family health services authority.
In this instance, the Department of Health is diddling general practitioners.
I have pressed the Minister on this matter both in correspondence and in a visit to the Department when he and his officials told me that they would reconsider it.
Our correspondence culminated in a letter on 14 August, stating:’ From 22 July 1991, family health service authorities (FHSAs) have been given management discretion to target funds in order to maximise value for money and service to patients.
The limits that previously existed within the Statement of Fees and Allowances (SFA) which related reimbursements to list size have been removed.’
Hooray.
I have won.
However, the letter continued by referring to non-fundholding practices, which do not affect this case.
The letter then continued:’ With regard to Dr. Vann's request for retrospective payments’—’retrospective’is the Minister's word not mine because the payments were not retrospective.
They were demanded when the doctors installed the system.
The letter reads:’ With regard to Dr. Vann's request for retrospective payments to be made to GPs who have been reimbursed under the previous arrangements, the object of the scheme, as has been explained in the past, is to ensure the widest possible spread of computing within a cash-limited budget.’
I emphasise the words,’ within a cash-limited budget.’
The letter continued:’ In the light of this, there is no provision to make further payments to those doctors who, like Dr. Vann, feel that the scheme which operated when their claim was made was less generous than the present.
If Dr. Vann wishes to upgrade his system, then the reimbursement for his upgrade costs will be assessed under the revised arrangements.
I am sorry that, despite the delay, I cannot be more helpful.’
The Minister's argument seems to be,’ It is impossible to act because the costs have increased above the Treasury total for computerisation.’
Therefore, on 13 February 1991, I tabled a written question:’ To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many general practitioners in previous years, in complying with his wishes to move to use computers, applied for a grant for the installation of a computer system that was above the figure of payment set out in the published computer cost reimbursement schedule.’
That was accepting that the scheme, to which I did not think that reference had been made, might have been applied.
The Minister's reply to me stated:’ No figures are held centrally either in respect of individual claims made by GPs or individual amounts reimbursed by family health services authorities’.
I found that interesting because it appears that the Minister does not know how many doctors made a claim that was above the amount of the reimbursement schedule or, if he did know, he was unwilling to tell me, so I must presume that he did not know.
One can imagine my indignation when I finally received a copy of a letter that had been signed by Mr. Ian Fleming, one of the Minister's officials, clearly stating in annex A:’ The scheme was introduced in April 1990 (but took into account in its first year any systems obtained by GPs since April 1989).
£24 million was made available in 1990-91 (to cover the two years) but was significantly underspent’.
It was not a case of there not being any money, but simply that the Minister would not darn well apply it.
I believe that that money has been carried forward, which means that funds are available today if the Minister should decide to pay the Axminster practice.
I have been a Minister and I know that there is a difference between Ministers being in charge and Ministers who are run by their civil servants.
If the practice had not done the efficient thing and had installed only part of the structure, to a value of £8,000, it would have received 50 per cent.
of that £8,000.
Last year and this year they could have upgraded it at a cost much greater than the initial expenditure and much less efficiently.
In that case they would have obtained 50 per cent.
of their total extra computerisation costs under the new scheme.
The doctors are being held to account for being efficient.
They are not being fairly treated by the Department.
Therefore, I say to the Minister,’ Gird your loins.
Tell the office that a way must be found to pay the balance of slightly less than £10,000.
Do not allow the civil service to say that there are ways in which it cannot be done.
Any civil servant will find ways of not doing something.’
I am confident that if my hon. Friend the Minister wants to do this, he can.
I expect him so to do.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
I am grateful for the confidence of my hon. Friend the Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery) in my competence.
I do not dispute that if I chose to instruct that the payment be made, it could be made.
On that proposition I have to agree with my hon. Friend.
But before I talk about whether I should use that discretion, I should like to say that, as my hon. Friend said, I have known about his concern about the Axminster practice virtually since I arrived in the Department of Health 18 months ago.
My hon. Friend has been an effective and persuasive advocate in private and now in the House of the interests of his constituents.
The arguments, as he has presented them to me both on earlier occasions and tonight, are, indeed, seductive.
However, I will seek to set them in the wider context of the Government's commitment and programme for the computerisation of general practice.
I shall show why I do not think — it is not what my officials think, but what I think — that I would be right to use the discretion which he correctly said lies with me.
I agree with my hon. Friend about the substantial benefits which computers can bring to a modern general practice.
They can perform simple administrative tasks which were previously both dull and expensive.
Indeed, they can do so more accurately than traditional methods.
Registration and administrative and financial returns are all functions which computers can carry out in a modern general practice.
In addition, and more important, computers can keep clinical records and, therefore, be of direct clinical value to the general practitioner.
They can keep records of the attendances of a patient at the surgery, the clinical condition of the patient and the prescriptions written for the patient.
They can produce repeat prescriptions when the doctor so authorises.
So computers are a valuable tool for a clinician in general practice, as well as being a valuable administrative tool to a partner in a practice.
Therefore, the Government see the extension of computerisation in general practice as an important part of our commitment to the growth, modernisation, expansion and development of primary care in the NHS.
That has been a consistent record of the Government since 1979.
Our commitment is much wider than computers.
We have shifted substantial sums of money into the extension and development of primary and community care in the NHS.
The primary and community health care sectors of the national health service have increased their share of the health service budget from 28 per cent.
in 1979 to 33 per cent.
today.
That represents a growth of expenditure in those sectors of roughly 80 per cent.
in real terms.
That money has been used to increase the number of lay staff, practice nurses and other professionals available in general practice and to improve the physical facilities in which general practice is offered.
It is a substantial record of investment in the expansion of primary and community health care.
Computers have an important part to play in that wider programme.
As recently as five years ago only 10 per cent.
of general practices had access to computers.
On 31 March 1987 there were 942 practices in the national health service which used a computer.
Four years later, on 31 March 1991, that figure had risen to 6,130, which represents 63 per cent.
of all general practices within the health service.
The practice that my hon. Friend mentioned is typical.
Computers tend to be concentrated in larger practices.
On 31 March this year 76 per cent.
of all general practitioners in the NHS had access to a computer.
That is a substantial record of success in support of a much wider strategy of developing primary care as an essential part of modern health care delivery.
How was that expansion of computerisation brought about?
Substantial encouragement for the computerisation process in the primary care sector was developed by the scheme which my hon. Friend the Member for Honiton criticised.
Until I changed it earlier this year, the scheme had four essential elements: it met 50 per cent.
of the system costs and 70 per cent.
of the initial staff costs.
However, both those were subject to a ceiling, determined by the practice list size.
Sir Peter Emery
It was not clear.
Mr. Dorrell
I shall come to that in a moment.
The fourth key point was that for the first two years of the programme, between April 1989 and March 1991, we committed a budget of £24 million to the programme.
My hon. Friend had two criticisms of the way in which the programme was put into effect.
First, he is concerned about the application of the list size criterion.
He is concerned about its merits, but, perhaps more important in the context of his constituents' practice, he is concerned about whether they knew that the limitation on the payments due existed within the scheme that we were operating.
I have told my hon. Friend in private and I am happy to tell him in public that if the doctors concerned say that when they installed the computer they did not know that the list size criterion existed, I am happy to accept that as a statement of fact.
I am happy to accept that they did not know that the payment that they stood entitled to receive was limited by the list size criterion.
However, even if Dr. Church and his partners did not know of the operation of that rule, many others in primary health care knew.
The correspondence files of my hon. Friend the Member for Kettering (Mr. Freeman), my predecessor, stand witness to the fact that the existence of the list size limit was known and was the subject of substantial criticism from representative organisations within the profession.
I answered my hon. Friend's question about how many payments were made to practices — where list size criterion limited payment — saying that I did not know the answer.
That was a statement of fact because the totals were not available to me.
However, I know that substantial numbers of doctors invested in computers, while complaining about the operation of that rule.
I am absolutely confident that Dr. Church and his partners are not unique and that many other doctors are in the same position, in the sense that they made financial investments during 1989-91 and the payments that they received from the fund were limited by the operation of the list size criterion.
Sir Peter Emery
So I am fighting for the profession.
Mr. Dorrell
Indeed, my hon. Friend is fighting a wider battle than purely that of Dr. Church and his partners.
My hon. Friend's second criticism of the way in which the scheme has worked is that the £24 million budget which was set aside for the two financial years — and I emphasise two years — 1989-91 was underspent.
The actual amount disbursed under the scheme in the two years for which it ran was £17 million, not £24 million.
My hon. Friend says that cash is available which could be used at least to make some payment to doctors who had their payments limited by the list size criterion.
I considered that point during the summer, when we were considering the rules of the scheme which should operate for the current financial year.
I decided on a different approach, and I will explain that approach and why I adopted it.
My hon. Friend, and the medical profession more widely, seemed to me to have made a powerful case against the rigid operation of the list size criterion.
That is why, for the current financial year, it has been abolished.
I recognise that that provision has limited payments to my hon. Friend's constituents, but it is no longer limiting payments to doctors because, as of April of this year, it no longer applies.
The next facet of my approach was that I wanted to see more flexibility in the hands of local family health services authorities over the application of funds and the use of the substantial sums of money that are available to them for the development of primary health care.
So for this year I made the computerisation funds part of the wider fund available to FHSAs to support not merely computerisation but the extension of ancillary staff in general practice and the development of new accommodation facilities for primary health care.
Those three elements now all come out of the same fund, with discretion in the hands of the FHSA to use the fund for any one of those three purposes, but with a clear steer that the amount for the current year should be roughly £20 million, which my hon. Friend mentioned.
I believe that the spending levels that we are now seeing, through the new scheme that I announced in the summer, vindicate the judgment I made because the £17 million that was spent in the two years of the initial scheme represents an average spend of £8.5 million.
The initial budget for the current year was £13 million, which was increased to £20 million to take account of the £7 million underspent in the first two years.
So the budget fixed for the current year was £20 million and the £7 million underspent in the first two years of the scheme did not go back to the Treasury — it was not lost to computerisation — but was committed to the further development of GP computerisation.
I inquired of my officials — those officials who are supposed to have such total control over everything I do what the experience would be of the new scheme during the current financial year.
I am pleased to tell my hon. Friend that the latest estimate we can make for the spend on computerisation this year will not be £20 million but £25 million.
So there will be a £25 million spend in a single year, in the current financial year, against an average of £8.5 million in the two previous financial years.
That will be possible because I made the scheme more flexible, so the FHSAs are allowed to use the funds that would previously have been limited to practice premises and ancillary staff to support the continued development and expansion of computerisation of primary health care.
Sir Peter Emery
At the cost of my constituents.
Mr. Dorrell
Not at .It is a constant of any Minister's experience — my hon. Friend referred to his experience as a Minister — that when a new scheme is introduced, there will always be somebody who did the same thing on his own initiative in the previous year and who feels that those who benefit from the newly introduced scheme are receiving an unfair advantage over the individual who took the real risk and did it himself.
Sir Peter Emery
My hon. Friend has been most fair, and I understand the argument that he propounds.
However, will he give one undertaking?
If, at the end of this year, the total funds — I reckon those to be £44 million, but that figure may not be quite accurate — are underspent, will my hon. Friend advertise for people who, from 1989 to 1991, did not receive their full allocation and allow anyone, including my constituents, to apply to help them use up any unused balance?
That would be very fair.
Mr. Dorrell
I said that my hon. Friend's arguments were always powerful, persuasive and seductive and he has just demonstrated that fact once again.
Unfortunately, he double counts in quoting a figure of £44 million —
Sir Peter Emery
Over four years.
Mr. Dorrell
For three financial years.
The budgets that we announced were £24 million and £20 million, which my hon. Friend has added to make £44 million.
But he forgets that the £20 million included a £7 million carry-over from last year's underspend, so the amount is not £44 million but £37 million.
As the spend over the three years will be more than that — last year's spend was £17 million and I expect this year's to be £25 million, making a total of £42 million — I suppose that I could give my hon. Friend the assurance that he seeks, but even if our figures were so way out that I could be caught on that commitment, when I consider the matter next May — assuming that the burden still falls to me to do so — I would have to make the same calculation as I made this year.
I would have to ask whether it is right to use the measure to reward people who did something two years ago, or whether it would be better to use the money to encourage people to continue the process in the future.
This summer, I concluded that the latter was better than the former and I can give my hon. Friend no assurance that I would not reach the same conclusion again.
Sir Peter Emery
I do not accept absolutely my hon. Friend's final factor.
If a balance were left over, it would be reasonable for him to try to use it to repay those who have set the trend.
Those are the people from whom the doctors are seeking advice and asking,’ How has this worked with you?’
Therefore, I believe that the Minister should give me the assurance that I seek.
Mr. Dorrell
As I said, the assurance would cost me nothing, because I am confident that it would not be activated.
Sir Peter Emery
Then give it to me.
Mr. Dorrell
Politics are partly about applying principles, as well as stitching up deals.
The principle must be whether it is right to use public money to reward something that has happened anyway or to encourage something that might not happen if we do not use that public money.
When faced with that choice this summer, I chose to encourage people to continue to develop computerisation in primary health care rather than simply to reward directly those who did something very valuable — there is no doubt about that, or about the fact that they did it at their own risk — some years ago.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at thirteen minutes to Eleven o'clock.
House of Commons
Friday 6 December 1991
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
PETITION
RU486 Drug
Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)
I beg to present a petition against mifegyne, which is known as RU486, to the honourable Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Parliament assembled from Father Michael Hopley of St. Benedicts Parish, Ealing Abbey in his name and in that of Agnes Grist of 142
Argyle road, W13 in my constituency, from many other of my constituents and others who live beyond my constituency but in the parish of Ealing Abbey.
The humble petitioners of Ealing Abbey showeth’ that we the undersigned wish to note with regret that the Abortion Pill mifegyne (known as RU486) has been granted a product licence.
We believe that drugs and medicines should be used only to save life.
We deplore the fact that this drug causes the death of unborn human beings and we express our grave concern that it will damage women physically and psychologically.’
As one who believes that life exists from the moment of conception and is in the image of Christ, I support the petition and am opposed to anything that damages life in the way in which this pill is alleged to do.
The petition states:’ Wherefore, your petitioners pray that your honourable House, which is committed to upholding respect for human life and protection of the weak and vulnerable, will do everything possible to prevent the distribution and use of mifegyne (known as RU486) and any other drugs which, like it, are produced with the deliberate intention of destroying innocent human life.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray & c .’
To lie upon the Table.
Regional Government (England)
Ms. Joyce Quin (Gateshead, East)
I wish to call attention to the need for regional government in England, and I beg to move,’ That this House deplores the excessive centralisation of government in the United Kingdom since 1979 and the failure to decentralise and devolve power to the nations and regions of the United Kingdom; notes that this is in direct contrast to the general trend towards decentralisation evidence elsewhere in Europe; furthermore deplores the severe cuts in the regional assistance budget since 1979 together with the failure to enact dynamic and effective regional economic policies which would have promoted balanced economic growth and prosperity; expresses alarm at the regional divisions which continue to characterise the United Kingdom economy; and considers that the creation of a regional tier of government in the English regions as well as national devolution to Scotland and Wales is now vital to the United Kingdom's future economic and political well-being.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to raise this subject which has interested me for a long time.
The privilege of addressing the House on a Friday morning and of winning the ballot to present a private Member's motion is, however, something of a mixed blessing for hon. Members like myself who represent constituencies a long way from London.
We often look forward to Fridays as a day that we can spend with our constituents.
None the less, I am delighted that many of my hon. Friends who I know have a keen interest in the subject of regional government are in their places this morning.
Indeed, many of my hon. Friends find it frustrating that regional issues are seldom debated in the House.
That is something which we should like to be changed in the future.
Unfortunately, regional policy could hardly be described as one of the current Government's priorities.
I believe that that is one reason why regional policy is so seldom debated here.
Indeed, we often think that it does not figure at all on the Government's agenda.
I am pleased that my hon. Friend the Member for Normanton (Mr. O'Brien) is in his place on the Opposition Front Bench.
He deals with regional government as part of the shadow environment team.
During the debate, I shall obviously be referring to matters that come within my hon. Friend's remit, although I shall also be speaking about some of the important issues relating to regional economic and industrial policy which fall within the remit of the Department of Trade and Industry.
As a member of Labour's trade and industry team, those issues are of particular concern to me in that capacity.
I have been in favour of regional government for as long as I have been in politics.
I stress that point because the fashionable view of some London-based political commentators is that regional government has become popular among Labour party members in England only as a response to the position in Scotland.
That is far from true.
We are not here simply in response to what has been described as the’ West Lothian question’in deference to my hon. Friend the Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell), When we arrive to take up our seats in the House of Commons, we are obviously strongly influenced by the constituency that we represent and the part of the country from which we come.
Indeed, all the experiences that we have had before coming to the House influence us.
That is certainly true in my case.
The experience of coming from the north-east of England is an important influence on my views on the issue with which we are dealing this morning.
When one grows up in the north-east, one is aware that the region is a long way from the English seat of power in London.
Many people in the north-east often feel marginalised and that their views are not taken into account.
Geordie humour sums that up in the phrase,’ The English divvent want we and the Scots winna have we.’
Whether or not that is true, the fact that it is said shows that there is a feeling of isolation in the north-east.
The region has many characteristics in common with Scotland, perhaps as many as it does with England.
It certainly has characteristics of both, which are evident in such things as its folk music tradition.
The north-east of England and the lowlands of Scotland are also ethnically similar, if one can put it that way.
Certainly the same surnames are evident on both sides of the border.
However, I do not pursue the ethnic argument to too great an extent because in the United Kingdom our backgrounds are very mixed up.
Indeed, the irony of someone with the surname Quin introducing a debate on the north-east should be borne in mind.
I have Irish and Scots ancestry as well as many Geordie and northern England forebears.
As many of us have mixed backgrounds I would not like to say that ethnic reasons are the main reasons for tabling this motion.
I and many others of us believe that a regionalised system is sensible and efficient, both economically and politically.
That is one of the main motivations behind my motion.
The history of devolution has been a chequered one in our country, perhaps since the second world war.
Whether we were Members of Parliament in the 1970s or not, many of us will remember the many debates on devolution that took place in Parliament at that time.
The position is different today and there are many more reasons to pursue devolution further.
The debate has moved on and new elements have crept in which make devolution attractive to many people who perhaps did not feel so strongly about it or were even hostile to it in earlier days.
The first difference between now and the 1970s arises from the experience of the past 12 years, during which we have witnessed a growing and marked centralisation of power.
Local government has had its powers and influence greatly curbed.
The metropolitan counties, such as Tyne and Wear, in which I live, have been disbanded, basically because the Government did not like their political complexion and the fact that people in those areas consistently elected Labour authorities.
More and more decisions seem to have been concentrated not merely in Westminster or Whitehall but, increasingly, and particularly during the period of office of the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), in No. 10 Downing street.
The degree of centralisation was particularly marked in England.
The regions of England, unlike the nations of Scotland and Wales, do not have their own Cabinet Minister, separate structures or, indeed, such elements as a separate Question Time in the House.
That has led to an unbalanced position.
We have about 45 million people in England, whereas there are only 5 million in Scotland and slightly fewer than 3 million in Wales.
That is an imbalance in population terms.
It is not healthy for the 45 million people of England to be so dependent both economically and politically on decisions made at the centre.
It makes England one of Europe's most centralised states.
During the past 12 years the Government have shown a lack of interest in regional economic policies.
For example, regional aid and selective assistance have been dramatically cut.
The cuts were considerable in the early years of the Conservative Government when the country was suffering a deep recession.
It was a tragedy that the very regions that needed support and had previously enjoyed a generous level of regional assistance suffered those cuts.
It was at the precise moment at which they needed the assistance that it was cut.
That regional neglect has fuelled a feeling in many regions that perhaps they should be empowered to assist themselves in the face of an unsympathetic central Government.
I can quote some of the figures on the cuts in regional selective assistance in the period in question.
Between 1978-79 and 1990-91, regional selective assistance declined in the north by 78.8 per cent., in Yorkshire and Humberside by 68.8 per cent. , in the east midlands by 36 per cent. , in the north-west by 80 per cent .
and in England as a whole by 75 per cent.
Those severe cuts were inappropriate and harmful, in view of the recession of the early 1980s, to the prospect of economic recovery in those areas.
Throughout the past 12 years the regional gap has widened.
I admit that the present recession is somewhat more complicated and is biting fairly hard in the south-east of England.
None the less, it is clear from the figures for average per capita gross domestic product that the northern regions, Scotland and Wales have a smaller share of the nation's per capita GDP today than in 1979.
Several figures, including the Government's own, document that clearly.
Mr. Peter L. Pike (Burnley)
My hon. Friend rightly highlights the problems caused by what the Government have failed to do in the regions.
Is it not also a fact that, because industries in the north and north-west and other such places have increasingly been taken over by industries based in the south, the north has always been last for investment and first for cuts?
That factor, on top of the Government's failure actively to pursue policies to attract manufacturing industries to the regions, has made the position even worse.
Ms. Quin
I am happy to endorse my hon. Friend's comment.
He is right.
That is one of the reasons why the Opposition are so keen to get measures going which would enable the regions to promote their own economic development and regeneration for the future.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
Will my hon. Friend also take into consideration the disappointing development on the RECHAR money that is available to regions, especially those where mining, steel and textiles and, indeed, shipbuilding and defence in the south, have suffered as a result of the Government's policies?
We are being denied that money by the Government's policies.
Will my hon. Friend address that point?
Ms. Quinn
I assure my hon. Friend that I was going to come to that issue, which is important.
It is significant that the regions that would be eligible to benefit from RECHAR are supporting the European Commission's attitude and not the Government's.
They know that the European Commission is blocking that money for sound reasons.
Unless pressure is put on the Government, they will simply substitute that money for money that they were going to spend in the regions anyway, and the regions will not receive any direct benefit, although that was the whole purpose of the RECHAR regulations.
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
I believe that the figures that the hon. Lady gave earlier were for regional development grant rather than for regional selective assistance, which has been in existence for only about three years, as she will recall.
Under the last Labour Government was not a subsidy of more than £1 million a day given to British Steel and to a number of other companies through regional development grant?
It was disguised as if it were some form of regional assistance, whereas it was bailing out uneconomic, old industries which ought to have been modernised.
Is not the success story of the present Government's policy the fact that they have managed to turn British Steel into a profit-making industry?
Other industries such as shipbuilding, which were previously heavily subsidised, have ceased to take subsidies, with the result that the figures for the northern region appear quite different.
A large number of smaller companies there have been receiving regional selective assistance since the middle 1980s.
Ms. Quin
The figures that I quoted were given in a written answer to a question that I put down about the cutbacks in regional preferential assistance.
Obviously I strongly believe that industry has to be modernised — none of us is against that — but during the Government's term of office the restructuring in many of our industries has been far too savage.
It has cut down our industries in comparison with those of our competitors to too great a degree.
Mr. Hind
What about Liverpool or Manchester?
Mr. Devlin
I should be interested to stand on the sidelines and watch the blood running down the walls as that is sorted out between the two ruling Labour groups.
I am interested to see that the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) would not balk at the prospect of having to sort out those knotty problems.
He said that that is not just an early priority but an immediate one.
How immediate?
Would it be done in the first year of a Labour Government, in the first Labour Parliament, or in two or three terms, or will there be an exchange rate mechanism-type growing process whereby we get used to the idea over 10 or 15 years and the Scots can have it immediately because they are culturally and politically ready for it, but the people of the north, who are not that bothered, will have to wait 15 years until they see the advantages that will supposedly accrue to Scotland and then will mount the barricades and demand the same for themselves?
It is clear that no one in the northern region is demanding that yet.
Labour wants to set up a Parliament in Scotland, where public spending is 23 per cent.
higher per head than in other parts of the kingdom.
If it had to finance that by raising its own taxes, Scotland might become a socialist state along Albanian lines with high taxes, centralised planning and everyone living in council houses and enjoying the beauties of the socialist system in its most untrammelled form.
The people of the north-east might look across the border, full of envy, and say,’ Not for us, thank you very much, please rebuild Hadrian's wall.’
I can foresee that scenario.
What will the Labour party do?
As the hon. Member for Dagenham says, it will have to begin such a system in the first year of a Labour Government.
Unless it starts us down that road fairly quickly, the people of the north-east and the other regions will not want to follow.
I should be interested to hear how that will be paid for, because in addition to giving £200 million a year the Labour party is committed to regional development agencies, to investment in first-class infrastructure for the area, high-speed rail links and other exciting prospects for the region.
It is quite happy to hand the promises out, but not so happy to tell us how they will be financed.
That perhaps gives us some idea of what the regional taxation profile will look like.
I rather suspect that the present regional disparities to which the hon. Member for Gateshead, East referred, not least the voting disparities, will change as one moves further south.
As one goes further north, taxes will get higher as people are more likely to vote Labour.
As one goes further south, people will be paying lower regional taxes and will vote Conservative.
I suspect that rather than looking north, the people of the north-east will look south and say,’ Hang on, why are they only paying such a small amount in the midlands or south when people to the north of us, who are experiencing the full generosity of the Labour party's form of government, are paying much more?’
I do not think that the Labour party has anything to crow about, because Labour-controlled local authorities have the most empty homes available and have the highest community charges.
I am sure that my constituents are mindful of the fact that not everyone in the country pays £440 in community charge.
They were extremely grateful to the Government for stepping in with a £140 rebate because they saw their aunts, uncles, friends, cousins and others elsewhere in the country paying a great deal less.
I suspect that if ever the day came when we had the misfortune of the Labour party inflicting regional government on us from Newcastle, those people would be wondering why their income tax or whatever other form of tax that Labour would seek to impose was so much higher in the northern region than elsewhere.
One reason why people in our area consistently vote Labour is that they are told by the Opposition that the whole country owes them a living and that everything that has happened to them — the economic misfortunes of past years — has been inflicted purposely by a Conservative Government.
That is the impression that is given and Labour likes to think that one should never say anything good about our region.
We can perhaps refer to the superior working-class culture and superior beer, but we are not allowed to refer to the economic or industrial successes.
We must sit back and say how awful everything is, blame the Government and say that they should hand out more money to the regions to assist them.
That does not mesh with the reports from the region at the moment.
It is interesting that the present recession is much deeper in the south than in the north.
Indeed, the CBI northern region economic situation report states:’ The northern region, one of the last to experience the effects of the recession, will also be one of the first to enjoy the benefits of the recovery.
This is based upon the knowledge that Northern business is now genuinely far more broadly based and will be able to respond quickly and positively to future improvements in both national and international economies.’
The idea of a home-grown recession is ludicrous.
I am currently trying to assist a company in my constituency with export credit guarantees.
That company is having difficulties exporting overseas because of the sluggishness of other economies — it does not sell its products in this country.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
As someone interested in trying to promote industrial regeneration and further growth in the north-east does my hon. Friend agree that the additional burdens laid on businesses in regions such as his own by the absurd idea of the imposition of a regional tier of government and the increased taxation necessary to pay for that tier would have an adverse effect on local business, would increase costs, would reduce competitiveness and would help to drive business and jobs away from his region?
Mr. Devlin
One of the great pleasures of the north-east is that we attract the second-largest amount of outside investment after Wales.
We do so because business conditions in the north of England are excellent and the work force is highly trained.
There are many attractions to the area and the Government offer a comprehensive range of incentives and other packages for people who want to invest in it.
That is why there are so many Japanese, American and other foreign investors in our area.
We rarely hear anything about that from the Opposition.
Mr. Jack Thompson
Does the hon. Gentleman accept that in my constituency there has been no major industry since 1979, except for last year when two British companies sold their businesses to the Taiwanese?
Glaxo sold its factory, as did Gresham Lion, and its successor, Dowty, which could not make the business succeed, sold to the Taiwanese.
I am not criticising the Taiwanese, because they were better than the British.
There has not been any real investment in that region since 1979.
Mr. Devlin
When I spoke to the Conservative association in the hon. Gentleman's constituency I heard only a litany of problems caused by the Labour-controlled council, which has done absolutely nothing to promote the area.
Let us consider the region as a whole.
The chairman of the Northern Development Company — Sir Ron Dearing — said in The Northern Echo on 17 September:’ I am not saying the recession hasn't hurt.
It has.
But in terms of the rest of the country, we have survived better than anyone’.
The road to recovery is now clear.
A recent regional survey by the accountants KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock concluded that small and medium-sized firms, which have been encouraged by the Government, would set the pace, blazing a trail for others to follow.
That view is shared by the assistant regional director at CBI Northern, Mr. Neil Etherington, who said recently:’ The North East will pull us out of the recession.
And I do believe, because this region's economy has a broader spread, that it will be the small- to medium-sized companies which will lead to economic recovery’.
Ms. Quin
The hon. Gentleman refers to Sir Ron Dearing, the chairman of the Northern Development Company, but is he aware of his recent speeches in which Sir Ron lamented the lack of a structure in the north-east which, he was worried, would weaken that area in Europe in the coming years?
Mr. Devlin
Sir Ron Dearing heads one of the most successful regional development companies in the country.
He is entitled to his view, but I do not accept the case — and the Labour party has yet to make it — for imposing a very large and costly bureaucracy on people in the north-east of England.
If Labour wants economic regeneration and redevelopment, why cannot it support the development corporations that already exist?
Some hon. Members from Newcastle and Teesside have nothing but ill to say about development corporations.
One of the startling omissions from the maiden speech of the hon. Member for Langbaurgh was any mention of Teesside development corporation.
That was quite extraordinary.
The CBI also found that more of the region's businesses expected new orders to increase rather than to decrease.
It said:’ Firms remain optimistic about demand prospects for their industries Growth is expected in both domestic and export orders.’
Similarly, it said:’ Survey respondents indicate that by UK standards Northern investment levels will hold up quite well over the next 12 months.’
Indeed, it continued:’ Investment intentions are now worst in the West Midlands and South West and best in the North and Humberside.’
When one considers the whole spectrum of economic indicators one finds that the north looks surprisingly healthy.
Unemployment, which is in decline in the north and has declined significantly since 1987, is rising fastest in East Anglia, which is currently supposed to be the most economically successful region.
The survey by international management consultants A. T.
Kearney — produced in association with but not by the CBI — reported that businesses in the north were the most optimistic in the country.
Figures for receivership were less positive, but entirely consistent with the view that the region has suffered a much shorter and less severe recession than any other.
The restructuring that has taken place during the Government's tenure of office has been remarkably good for the region.
The Government's economic role in the north-east — as elsewhere — is to create a climate in which businesses can prosper and, in turn, generate strong and sustainable employment growth.
However, in view of the region's deep-rooted difficulties — such as its overdependence on declining industries — the Government have sought to underpin the policies with substantial central support.
Indeed, the north-east region has benefited to the tune of more than £3.5 billion since 1979.
Much of that public sector support has been designed also to attract investment from private enterprise.
Teesside urban development corporation, for instance, is an example of the Government using pump priming to attract private sector money and skills to help in the process of urban regeneration.
In 1991-92, the TDC had a budget allocation of £51 million, which it is using to great effect.
If the hon. Member for Wansbeck (Mr. Thompson) wants to know about urban regeneration, he should know that the most exciting urban regeneration project probably anywhere in western Europe is that on the river bank in my constituency.
The next time the hon. Gentleman is on the train for Newcastle he should get off at Darlington and I will arrange a guided tour of that project for him.
He would be most welcome.
The hon. Member for Wansbeck believes that no inward investment has come to his constituency and, if that is the case, I am sorry for his constituents.
However, Dr. John Bridge, the NDC chief executive, said recently:’ Since 1985 some 25,000 jobs have been either created or safeguarded in the North of England as a result of inward investment.’
I have great doubts and misgivings about the concept of regional government.
I believe that it offers no benefits to my constituents.
The Labour party is trying to prop up its popularity in Scotland by seeking to impose a similar solution on the rest of England.
We are a happy, contented, compact little country with 48 million people who live together in perfect harmony with their own local, often county, loyalties.
Yorkshiremen who currently live under the authority in Cleveland would have no inclination to join the northern region.
Geordies and tykes have never got on particularly well — they are always friendly to one another, but they are distinct groups.
I do not believe that the case for regional government has been made.
The motion should be rejected.
Mr. Richard Caborn (Sheffield, Central)
First, I thank my hon. Friend the Member for Gateshead, East (Ms. Quin) for initiating this debate, which is extremely timely.
When my hon. Friend was a Member of the European Parliament she did a tremendous amount of work to promote not only her region, but the concept of regional government for England.
She also did a lot to develop that concept within the European Community.
Unfortunately this debate has revealed the narrow and naive view held by the Conservative party — illustrated graphically by the hon. Member for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin).
Although the single currency and the new powers for the European Parliament continue to grab the headlines, they are not the only issues to be hammered out at Maastricht next week.
A new role for the European regions is also on the agenda.
During the summit, Heads of Government will decide whether the European regions should be given a greater role in decision making in the Community.
No doubt the rest of Europe will say yes to that, but the British Government will, as usual, drag their heels on such a development.
The new article 198(a) to chapter 4 of the draft treaty on the union, on a committee of regional and local authorities, has not been opposed by the British Government.
Consultations were held with regional and local authorities on the new article and the Commission submitted evidence to it.
On article 198(a) it stated:’ The members of the Committee shall be elected representatives at regional or local level.
They shall be appointed in their personal capacity and shall not be bound by any mandate.’
When the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment replies to the debate, I hope that he will tell us how the British Government will apportion the 24 delegates from the United Kingdom who will represent us on that new body, the committee of regional and local authorities.
Many people on the other side of the English channel believe that that may become an important institution for the future development of Europe.
Initially, the committee will be a consultative body, but many of our European colleagues hope that its role will be enhanced.
Given that we have no true regional representatives, I hope that the Minister can tell us how the Government believe that the committee will operate.
Just because the regional dimension has not received the attention afforded to monetary union, that does not mean that it is less important to our future economic well-being.
We believe that regional government has proved to be a key economic regenerator of many of the European regions.
Our lack of a regional strategy has acted as a brake on our economic development and, in the future, it will be a barrier to competing in the single market.
The lack of fuss about regional policy in the United Kingdom is not in tune with the rest of Europe.
The lack of attention devoted to it by the British Government and, in particular, by the British press, in terms of the discussions at Maastricht, is symptomatic of our isolationist approach not only to Europe, but to the development of regional policy.
In every other European country, regional policy has become a hot political issue, particularly in the past decade.
In the current debate about Maastricht that policy is worthy of public and Government interest.
If there is a move towards monetary union, convergence across the Community must take place.
The first part of the mechanism for developing and delivering that convergence will be regional policy.
It is unfortunate that the Government have adopted such a negative approach to regional policy.
That was amply demonstrated by the speech of the hon. Member for Stockton, South, as it was by the chairman of the Conservative party who produced a document in July entitled’ Regional Red Tape’.
That document was in response to that produced by my hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) on devolution and democracy.
At least Labour's document tried to lift the debate about Europe and the regions and their inter-relationship.
It also sought to initiate a debate on how we can start regenerating the north of England and develop a more balanced nation.
That would assist all our regions.
The chairman of the Conservative party, the right hon. Member for Bath (Mr. Patten), and the hon. Member for Stockton, South have tried to knock down the political and economic case for regional policy that has been advanced by the Labour party.
Unfortunately, all the Government have done is to ask why we did not support the purchase of council houses or the provisions for grant-maintained schools.
The level of debate has been poor.
The Conservatives have not put forward one constructive alternative to the Labour party document.
Those outside the political arena believe that the Government have made a poor attempt to answer some searching questions.
Those in industry and those who are concerned about our future in Europe have been disappointed at the level of debate.
Mr. Devlin
The Conservative party's vision on this issue is clear.
We want a single tier of local authority in each area.
Therefore, we shall establish a local government commission to consider the needs of each area.
We shall allow single-tier local authorities to be established within the boundaries considered necessary by that commission.
That is a clear policy statement.
Mr. Caborn
I accept that.
It is important to consider the role of the Government in terms of economic regeneration, the role of local government and, by implication, the need for strategic levels of government.
Those issues were raised by the Secretary of State for the Environment, especially when he was running for the leadership of the Conservative party.
Mr. David Ashby (Leicestershire, North-West)
There is one thing I cannot understand about the Labour party policy.
In my area the local district council is Labour controlled.
That district authority and I agree entirely on the future of local government.
It wants a unitary authority and it wants it to be based upon its present framework.
It believes that it should be free to unite with other district councils, as it sees fit, to provide wider services, rather than have them imposed by Whitehall and central Government.
In my part of the world, therefore, the Labour party is agreeing not with the hon. Gentleman, but with the Conservative party.
Mr. Caborn
I do not know to which local authority the hon. Gentleman is referring, but may I try to explain the context of the debate to him, because it seems to be going straight over the heads of Conservative Members, as was evident in that intervention which I shall now try to answer.
What the hon. Gentleman's local authority is saying is absolutely right.
There will be all-purpose authorities for the delivery of services.
I do not think that there is any disagreement between us on that.
Indeed, the Secretary of State for the Environment has said that we should remove the county council layer of government and move down to all-purpose districts, the size and boundaries of which have yet to be decided.
It is clear that such districts should be the point of contact with the local population.
That is the point at which the services will be delivered.
That idea is wholly compatible with the argument about subsidiarity.
We are saying that there is a structural weakness in the United Kingdom and that we need a strategic authority, not for providing services, but for developing and co-ordinating —
Mr. Ashby rose
Mr. Caborn
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will allow me to develop my argument and I shall then come back to him.
Such a strategic authority would have an economy of scale of about 5 million people.
If the hon. Gentleman looks at what has happened in Europe in the past decade — in France, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Italy — he will see that all those countries have devolved their powers down to regional authorities.
On average, their economy of scale is about 5.7 million people.
Those countries are co-ordinating their industrial and economic strategies at the regional level.
We are not talking about removing powers from the layer of government below local government and sucking them up; we are talking about taking power from the centre.
I stress that a council of the regions will be agreed next week which will probably become operative in January 1993 and on which the regions of Europe will be represented.
The regions will then have some control and not only over such things as regional grants.
They will start to have an impact on the regulations and directives that come before the House and our Parliament and become part of our statute book.
We must understand what regional government is all about.
It is not local government; it is part of the government of the nation.
Mr. Ashby
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving way, because I had misunderstood him a bit.
Does he agree, however, that what my local authority wants is a wider authority for strategic services, for the delivery of those services, and that local authorities can group themselves as they see fit in providing what may be different services, but that what the hon. Gentleman wants is another tier of central Government, which will impose on the regions what central Government do?
Is he not seeking to impose another burden on our people?
Is not that what we are really talking about?
Mr. Caborn
Yes —
Mr. Ashby
I thought so.
Mr. Caborn
If that is the description of regional government, yes, but the hon. Gentleman has highlighted the negative part and, unfortunately, that thinking is prevalent among Conservative Members.
The Opposition take a totally different attitude.
Obviously, the hon. Gentleman will argue his case and people will come to a judgment — that is what debate is about — but our judgment is that there is a need to bring decision-making nearer to the people.
The hon. Gentleman may choose to ignore developments in Europe, but what has happened there means that a different form and structure of government, a newly developed decision-making arena, will result from the Maastricht discussions.
I am asking the hon. Gentleman whether he wants to go down that road.
This country has so far gone in the opposite direction.
I shall seek to show clearly where the hon. Gentleman went wrong on public expenditure and how other nations, which are much more balanced, have been able to develop their real economies, their manufacturing bases and their wealth-creating processes so much more effectively than we have been able to do in the United Kingdom.
Regional government has provided the framework for other European countries to develop the entrepreneurial atmosphere and spirit that are necessary for the development of small and medium-sized businesses.
I hope that I have answered the hon. Gentleman's question.
We are not talking about local government; we are talking about a strategic layer of government.
That layer would not be an imposition; it would be democratically accountable.
It would encompass the many quangos that the Government have set up in many areas, the operations of which have been highly criticised by the Public Accounts Committee and the Audit Commission.
We would bring all that together in a strategic authority, which would not be dictated to by Whitehall and the mandarins down here.
A few weeks ago we had a classic example of that in a debate on the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill.
How do I, as somebody from Yorkshire, know what Cardiff wants?
It would have been far better if a decision on that matter had been taken in Wales.
Such decisions should not be made here.
We criticise the European Commission for its interventions about our roads and about the development of the channel tunnel, but the people of Wales and of many of our regions should also say,’ We should be making our own decisions, not people down there in London with little or no interest in us.’
What is even more frightening is that the decision-making down here — I am not talking only about the Government, but about the media and the City of London — is conditioned by the thinking of the south-east and of London in particular.
In many cases, such thinking has no bearing on what is happening in the regions.
Many industrialists and people from local authorities on both sides of the political spectrum are saying,’ We should have more power over the decisions that affect our lives’, instead of being subject to arbitrary decision making from institutions down here.
I repeat that in the past 10 years there has been a devolution of power down into the regions right across Europe, not only inside the EC.
I was interested to read an article on local government financing in the Financial Times of Monday 28 October by the Controller of the Audit Commission, Howard Davies.
Referring to the Government's Green Paper, he stated:’ The word Europe' does not appear in the green paper on introducing unitary authorities.
Yet the European Commission is open about its desires to create a Europe des re gions.
There's a European Assembly of the Regions and regional social policy is oriented towards regional needs.
It's certainly arguable that without some sort of regional structure, the UK will be increasingly disadvantaged with no way of influencing Community regional policy.
My feeling is that we probably need to create a set of interlocutors on a regional basis who can have the right kind of influence on EC regional and social policies.’
That interview was part of an in-depth report on a person who is well-respected in the House.
Mr. Ashby
I was interested to hear the hon. Gentleman say who wrote that article.
The hon. Gentleman has completely failed to understand that he has not yet asked himself the question,’ What is a region?’
Throughout Europe, regions have evolved into states only recently.
Europe has a completely different concept from this country of the question,’ What is a nation?’
It is completely different in Germany and France and throughout Europe where there are new nations, most of which are not more than 100 years old.
Those nations are made up of regions.
We are talking about a return of local nationalism, which is something that we do not have over here.
That is the difference.
The hon. Gentleman is trying to impose regions here, whereas Europe has regions.
Mr. Caborn
I am not trying to impose anything.
I am trying, within the context of the debate, to identify how we can move forward from the 1990s to the 21st century, the problems that we as a nation will have to face, our relationship with Europe and how we can learn from the nations that we have said are the best, such as Germany, and develop a sound strategic regional policy.
We need a delivery mechanism to deal with many of the issues that have been raised, such as convergence.
I shall come to what the Audit Commission has said.
It answers some of the questions posed by the hon. Member for Stockton, South.
Mr. Devlin
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Caborn
I wish to go through the argument and then I shall willingly give way to the hon. Gentleman.
In 1989 the Audit Commission published a series of documents on the local government dimension of urban regeneration and economic development.
The critical part of one of the reports said that the Government had some 30 or 40 different schemes in operation.
It said:’ The Commission reported that individual programmes such as Urban Programme assistance from central government were unnecessarily bureaucratic.’
The commission also said that the Government's many schemes, including the urban development corporations, were’ a patchwork quilt' of complexity and idiosyncrasy.’
That was further underlined by the Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte report which referred to’ confusion and uncertainty’and’absence of co-ordination.’
The Public Accounts Committee also examined the wide band of assistance for regeneration, especially of the north.
It spoke of’ insufficient liaison between departments at national level.’
It described the multiplicity of bodies and initiatives as’ potentially a recipe for confusion and overlap.’
I ask hon. Members to compare that with what is happening in Scotland and Wales.
The simple co-ordination through development agencies in both Scotland and Wales does not receive the criticism that the Audit Commission has levelled against the system in England.
We must consider the way in which some Departments operate.
We have the most departmentalised approach to many of the complex issues that we seek to resolve.
There is in-fighting in Westminster and in the regions.
That was most graphically illustrated when Sheffield was arguing about an urban development corporation.
I do not want to go into that argument; I simply wish to illustrate my point.
The chamber of commerce, the local authority, the trade unions and the Members of Parliament came down to London to see the Secretary of State.
We all sat on one side of the table and the Secretary of State sat on the other.
The person who sat at the side of the Secretary of State was the regional officer from Leeds.
As he saw it, his role was not necessarily to support the region but to be the earpiece and branch line for the Secretary of State.
That is where the influence is and remains.
That branch line of decision-making is there.
Opposition Members argue, with a great deal of support from industry and commerce, that such decision-making should be at a lower level.
Mr. Key
I shall deal in my speech with the importance of the regional offices.
The hon. Gentleman has got the wrong end of the stick about how they work.
The article in the Financial Times to which the hon. Gentleman referred was a good article.
He also quoted from Audit Commission reports, but he has not quoted from the Audit Commission response to our consultation paper on the structure of local government.
As he said, it makes some criticism of the European dimension, but in paragraph 8 headed’ Europe’it also says:’While local government structure in the UK cannot be determined by the nature of European structural funds and the case for regional authorities with power over service delivery has not been made out, the European dimension must nonetheless be considered in the longer term.’
That is a slightly different gloss.
Mr. Caborn
I am sure that the Minister will recall that I said a few moments ago that in our view the role of regional government is not delivery of services.
We believe that that should go to the lowest level.
Regional authorities should be strategic bodies to co-ordinate and enable.
That is what happens in many other European countries.
I do not necessarily disagree with the Minister.
Where it is possible to deliver services at the lowest point, one does just that.
That is why we examine the expanded role of all-purpose authorities.
Even the Government accept that all-purpose authorities will have a wider role; but the local authority delivers services.
There is a major difference of opinion about the centralisation of government and the state.
The Government want to continue to centralise.
That was illustrated during the Conservative party leadership contest in an article in The Sunday Times of 18 November 1990.
The right hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Hesletine), the present Secretary of State for the Environment, laid out how he saw the development of local government.
He said:’ I know enough of our local government to know that if there is a cash pool out there, they go for it.
Within no time at all, the directly elected mayor of some industrial town or city in the north would spot that if he came along with imaginative ideas for raising standards and delivering services, he would get support, he would be the one that would claim the credit and the central government would be proud to let him have it.
This would give value for money, a competitive sense between community and community and a new surge of local independence and pride.’
That illustrates the thinking of the Conservative party.
It must always be community against community.
There is a big pot of gold down in Westminster for which we all scrabble.
We all get into the trough and try to grab a bit for ourselves.
What a way to run a country — an advanced industrial nation!
The Conservative party's attitude is epitomised by that statement and followed through by the Audit Commission.
Is not it more sensible to say that we have responsible people out there with whom we have developed partnerships?
We should create a synergy of activity in which local small and medium-sized companies can develop, technology transfer can be operated and academic institutions can be brought in.
One of the great incentives for development in Germany has been the ability to bring academic institutions into the real world of production to allow technology transfer, aided, abetted and assisted by the Landers and the local authorities.
In Britain, public sector-led investment has taken place down the M4 corridor and in the south-east.
It is not surprising that there has been such growth in the south-east.
It has been aided and abetted.
That has been illustrated.
The points that have been made about public expenditure are as far from the truth as one can imagine.
Let us look at the figures for central Government expenditure per head of population in the north and the south.
In 1989-90 expenditure in the north of England was £1,707 per head.
In the south-east of England it was £1,876 per head.
The figures for expenditure by the Ministry of Defence and the Departments of Trade and Industry and Transport in 1989 were £248 per head of population in the north of England and £546 — almost double — per head in the south-east.
That is the amount of public money per head of population spent on overheating the south-east of England.
That imbalance has become progressively worse in the past decade.
In the past eight years, the amount has increased by 15 per cent.
in the north of England but by 24 per cent.
in the south.
Mr. Key
The hon. Gentleman puts his finger on an extremely important issue which has absorbed an enormous amount of my time in the past year.
I should be happy to have a five-hour debate on this part of his speech alone, let alone the rest of regional policy and government.
The real problem that Governments always face anywhere in the world is how to distribute central funds to regions and localities as far down as possible.
The hon. Gentleman appears to argue that it would be better to use a method based on population, irrespective of need or possibly even a sensitive formula-driven system which would take account of different needs of different regions.
That is exactly what the standard spending assessment system has been designed to do.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Robert Key)
I begin by congratulating the hon. Member for Gateshea East (Ms. Quin) on being successful in the ballot, on introducing such an important subject for debate and on doing it so well.
This has been one of the best Friday debates that I have attended for a long time.
Our Friday debates tend to be of rather higher quality than some of our midweek debates and all hon. Members who have spoken so far — and, I am sure, those who will follow me — have spoken to a high standard and have contributed to a serious debate on this important issue.
My response is not a traditional wind-up speech, because this is the hon. Lady's debate and I am sure that she will receive the leave of the House to reply to it at the appropriate time.
However, I shall try to answer some of the specific points that have been put to me.
I start from a position of very much respecting the fact that the hon. Member for Gateshead, East was a Member of the European Parliament for 10 years before becoming a Member of this House and I recognise the expertise that she has acquired in this subject.
However, I disagree strongly with some of her comments and I begin by disagreeing with her that the north-east is as isolated as she thinks it is.
I see it with a rather different gloss.
I am a southerner whose first job was in Leeds, whose second job was in Edinburgh and whose third job was in London.
I suppose that where I live now depends on the day of the week.
As a result of improved communications in every sense — be they electronic communications, our airports or any other form of communication — the regions of this country have never been closer to London than they are today.
I shall develop that point later.
Of course, I recognise, respect and enjoy Britain's regional diversity, of which we can be particularly proud.
The hon. Member for Gateshead, East referred to folk music.
I am immediately drawn to comment on the technological superiority of the Northumbrian bagpipes over the Scottish bagpipes.
As there is no Scottish Member of Parliament present, I feel that I can say that without being lynched on my way out of the Chamber.
The regional policies that have been developed, refined and improved in Britain in the past quarter of a century owe a great deal to the foresight of then Prime Minister Harold Macmillan in deciding to send Lord Hailsham, as he is now, to the north-east to make some progress.
That was but a seed, but it was a seed well sown and matters have moved on a great deal since then.
The hon. Member for Gateshead, East said that we should not be dependent on central decision-making.
I agree entirely with that sentiment, but I find it hard to understand how she can then be so keen to hand over so much power to Brussels on decisions that affect people at a local level, whether on farming, training or whatever.
Her enthusiasm for the social programme is astonishing.
Decisions will be made in Brussels on social matters whatever happens and I am not convinced that those decisions would be affected by any new form of regional government.
The hon. Lady must address that point.
I am intrigued that the hon. Lady thinks that 11 regional parliaments would not be costly or bureaucratic.
If only that were true.
She asked for some answers to specific points.
She said that large cuts were made in regional selective assistance in the early 1980s.
The RSA scheme expenditure increased during the 1980s from £86 million in 1980-81 to £177 million in 1989-90.
The hon. Lady was probably referring to cuts in regional development grants, which reflected a move away from automatic grants which went into loss-making nationalised industries.
The hon. Lady also said that the Government had not supported the Northern Development Company.
That is not what my evidence suggests.
The Department of Trade and Industry gave three years of core programme funding to it and makes annual grants to the NDC and other regional development agencies to undertake our important and beneficial inward investment promotional work.
For 1991-92 the DTI's grant to the regional development agencies increased by £0.5 million to a total of £4.5 million.
Ms. Quin
The Minister referred to the figures that I gave on regional assistance.
The figures were for regional preferential assistance and were provided by the Department of Trade and Industry in response to a written question, as I explained to the hon. Member for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin).
The Government were not enthusiastic about the creation of the Northern Development Company.
It was created from within the region.
Only later did the Government decide to support it.
I am glad that they did, but it was rather late in the day.
Mr. Key
We are nothing if not pragmatic and we like to see success.
We are delighted to support that success when it occurs.
The hon. Lady also said that the assisted areas map had not changed since 1984.
I accept that there are some anomalies on the 1984 map, but it is still focused on the areas of greatest need.
I assure her that if the Government had thought that changes were called for, we would have made them.
But they are not called for.
Our policy remains the same.
We shall not make changes to the assisted areas, at least in the lifetime of this Parliament.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin) made an excellent speech, as ever.
He began by drawing attention to the different histories of other countries.
He was right.
My hon. Friend the Member for Taunton (Mr. Nicholson) intervened to make an extremely important point that we should all bear in mind.
He drew attention to the size of England in terms of population and geography.
It is quite different when dealing with a country as big as France in terms of population and area.
Mr. Caborn
On the basis of that argument, can we take it that the boundary review that will be undertaken will now be on geographical location rather than population distribution?
Mr. Key
I am sorry, I did not catch the hon. Gentleman's meaning.
Mr. Caborn
In the light of the arguments which have been put forward about the size of the constituency can we take it that there has been a change in Government principle on the boundary reorganisation?
Are they going to take area rather than population as the criterion now?
Mr. Key
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will spend the weekend reading the document and will see exactly what we said about that.
He is teasing me, as the hon. Member for Normanton (Mr. O'Brien) and I were teased occasionally in the Standing Committee on the Local Government Finance Bill during the past three weeks.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South talked about the representative role of a Member of Parliament and how it had changed, which is also important.
I dare say that my hon. Friend's constituents complain about their district council, county council and central Government.
Who will they go to if there are regional governments as well?
I can tell the House exactly whom they will go to — they will still come to their Member of Parliament at Westminster.
It will be good business for Mercury, British Telecom and the Post Office, because we shall keep them busy when we are trying to sort out which tier of government we should be addressing our thoughts to on behalf of our constituents.
The only beneficiaries will be the bureaucrats employed to answer the letters.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South also made an important point about choosing regional capitals.
My hon. Friend the Member for Taunton talked about the difficulties in the south-west and whether Taunton should become the capital or whether it should be Bristol, Plymouth or Exeter.
Manchester and Liverpool have been mentioned.
Those are serious problems which will have to be tackled if that were to happen.
The hon. Member for Sheffield, Central (Mr. Caborn) made a thoughtful speech, which I shall look forward to reading.
I am sure that it will merit reading.
He asked about the regional conference.
The Commissioner, who is anxious that the regions are represented in discussions on regional policy, has announced a committee of the regions, in the context of the intergovernmental conference.
It is the Commission's view that the members of that body would all be elected representatives and would advise the Commission on a wide range of policy issues relevant to the regions.
It will be a huge body, approaching 200 people.
I am not sure that it will be frightfully effective if it is that big.
Nevertheless, we support the creation of the body, provided that it is guaranteed that member states can nominate members.
No decision has yet been taken on how United Kingdom delegates will be apportioned and I would welcome the hon. Gentleman's ideas.
Mr. Caborn
Can we take it that elected members will be representing the United Kingdom on that body, but the formal distribution of that representation has not yet been worked out?
Mr. Key
That is how I understand it.
We support the creation, provided that it is guaranteed that member states can nominate members of the body.
The hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed (Mr. Beith) made some generous remarks in his speech about my visit to his constituency, for which I was grateful.
One of the advantages of my job as a Minister representing local government is that I travel throughout the country.
I do not merely spend time in Manchester — where I spend more time than anywhere else outside London and my constituency, which is my home town.
I ensure that I hear the views of parish councils in rural areas outside my constituency.
The hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed said that as far as he was concerned, regional government would not take away the powers of local government.
That is an article of faith for him.
Therefore, he has a problem with the Labour party, which is pledged to take some of the powers of local authorities into regional government, as well as co-ordination.
The hon. Member for Gateshead, East looks doubtful, but in a debate in the other place yesterday, Baroness Hollis of Higham said:’ Thirdly I suggest that a few functions would appropriately come up from the county councils.’
[Official Report, House of Lords, 5 December 1991, c. 401.]
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
Is the Minister quoting a speech in the other place?
It is only in order to quote a Minister.
If it is not a Minister, please will he paraphrase.
Mr. Key
The damage is done.
It was an Opposition spokesman and I am sure that, however delightful she may be, she will not be a Minister for long.
I am grateful for your guidance, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
The second point made by the hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed was about RECHAR and I am anxious to respond positively to him.
The current objective No. 2 of’ Community Support Frameworks’will end on 31 December 1991.
Discussions are currently proceeding with the Commission on the successors.
The structural fund regulations allow for a fundamental review of the fund's operation to take effect from 1 January 1994.
Consequently, member states and the Commission wish to see the minimum change in the operation of the current CSFs and programmes for the years 1992 and 1993.
There has been discussion with the Commission on the issue and it seems to adopt a similar approach.
The financial allocations for 1992-93 have already been given to member states and plans and programmes are being prepared on a minimum change basis.
Departments are evaluating ways in which, after 1993, the use of the structural fund could develop.
That will enable officials to discuss with the Commission the way in which the fund could operate in the future.
Discussions are also proceeding on a document called’ Europe 2000.’
It is not a master plan for member states or for the development of Europe, but it will provide a useful reference for member states and others to enable them to take decisions with due regard to the European dimension.
In other words, we are continuing to discuss the matter and its development with the Commission on a no-change basis across the Community.
My hon. Friend the Member for Taunton made a thoroughly thoughtful speech and provided an honest analysis of his views.
In particular, he spoke of the importance of counties.
I assure him that we are not talking about sweeping away counties.
Our policy is to make changes to the structure of local government in the shire counties.
In some cases that may involve the abolition of councils.
There is no intention to abolish either county or district councils as a whole and there is no discrimination between them.
Changes to the boundaries of shire counties or districts are also possible, as at present.
We intend to ask the local government commission, which we hope to set up, to consider whether people want unitary authorities to be treated as part of historical counties for certain traditional or non-administrative purposes such as sport, a theme to which I shall return.
We shall certainly not sweep away the counties.
That is not our intention.
I assure the hon. Member for Normanton — with whom it is a pleasure to be debating again; it has been our daily dose for the past three weeks, and he is a worthy opponent — that my party and I are not living in the past.
When I visit Labour leaders in the north-east, north-west and elsewhere I do not think that they are living in the past, either.
I sometimes wonder, though, whether they speak much to the occupants of the Labour Front Bench because I see the 1990s as the decade of the north-east and the north-west.
I see thrilling regeneration every time I visit Tyneside and Teesside, Manchester and Merseyside.
A great deal is going on in those regions, and people in the south who have not been north of Watford Gap for a few years should go and see what is happening there.
I was delighted to hear of the conversion of the hon. Member for Normanton to full-blooded capitalism.
I suspect that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) is quaking in his shoes as the Labour Front Bench is clearly in line for a takeover from Barclays Bank, I fear, however, that it would be a hostile takeover.
Mr. O'Brien
I feel that I must put the Minister right yet again.
The Official Report will show that I said that the Government should take advice from an official of Barclays Bank because, I said, if Barclays Bank was successful with regional reorganisation, the Government should not resist regional reorganisation for the English regions.
Mr. Key
We take advice from a number of bankers, but we are not monopolists.
I should be just as happy to take the advice that I read in National Westminster Bank's quarterly review, for instance.
If the hon. Gentleman does not read it, perhaps he should.
Wide-ranging advice is preferable to the advice of just one particular bank.
Nevertheless, I have checked with my hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, North-East (Mr. Kirkhope), who would have leapt to his feet to speak if he were not precluded from doing so by virtue of his office, and I have read the document to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
The chamber of commerce in Leeds is very positive about the future, as well it might be, and it was hard to infer from the report that the chamber of commerce felt that there was a need for a regional government, as the hon. Gentleman suggested.
If members of the chamber of commerce disagree about that, I am sure that they will be in touch with me.
In proclaiming the supposed need for regional government in England, the hon. Member for Gateshead, East works from the assumption that such a system would bring government closer to the people.
In fact, regional government would have the opposite effect.
It would impose another tier of bureaucracy on top of local government, taking it further away from the people.
We are committed to simplifying local government, not to creating extra layers.
We are committed to giving people the councils that they want — that means creating councils based on the communities with which local people and organisations identify.
Such councils should be able to provide services to their communities that are more cost effective and efficient than they are now.
Our proposals for establishing a new, independent local government commission for England are currently under consideration in the Local Government Bill in another place.
The commission's task will be to review the country area by area and make recommendations for improving the structure of local government, taking account of local views, the costs and benefits of change, and the economy and effectiveness of service arrangements.
They may recommend a structure based on unitary authorities or the present two-tier arrangements.
We make no presumption about the right size of authority that will emerge in an area, but we expect that in most areas a system based on unitary authorities would be the most popular and effective.
We do not desire to impose a blueprint on England.
Rather, we desire that the commission should recommend the most appropriate form of local government for a particular area.
Mr. Devlin
Will my hon. Friend repeat the commitment given by the Secretary of State for the Environment when he said that the new councils of Avon, Cleveland and Humberside would be among the first to receive the benefit of that new commission?
I hope that that will happen as soon as possible in the case of Cleveland.
Mr. Key
If my memory serves me correctly, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment said that Humberside would be the first because it has already been the subject of a local government boundary commission report.
It will be up to the Secretary of State to decide on the exact order of priority and we shall publish guidelines to help the new commission.
There would be precious little point in appointing a local government commission if we then took all the decisions.
The hon. Member for Gateshead, East is right to suggest that government should be accountable and responsive — but to achieve that we need government that truly reflects local communities.
The vast majority of district and county councils that responded to our recent consultation paper on the structure of local government in England expressed their desire to become unitary authorities.
In contrast, only 26 out of nearly 1,900 respondents expressed a desire for regional government.
In documents outlining their plans for regional government, the Opposition state that the new tier would take its powers from Westminster and Whitehall, and be empowered to carry out only those functions of a strategic or regulatory nature, currently exercised by the counties.
This is patently unnecessary.
Our proposals will empower the new local authorities to exercise all the functions, including strategic planning, local planning and development control.
Before any new authorities are established, it will have to be shown that those issues can be dealt with satisfactorily.
Moreover, the regional context for structure and local plans prepared by local authorities is safeguarded under regional planning guidance from the Secretary of State.
The Planning and Compensation Act 1991 requires local planning authorities to have regard to any regional or strategic planning guidance given by the Secretary of State when preparing their development plans.
Regional planning guidance already exists in the south-east and East Anglia.
Strategic planning guidance exists in all the metropolitan districts, including Tyne and Wear.
Progress is being made towards establishing regional planning guidance in all the regions.
We hope that regional planning guidance for all the north, which is currently in hand, will be finalised by June 1992.
The hon. Lady has also raised the issue of the European dimension, both here and on other occasions.
On 15 November she wrote to the Financial Times.
The headline over her letter stated:’ An England of regions is the way forward in a Europe of regions’.
I believe that the structures of local and regional government vary substantially between the different member states.
I do not believe that our participation in the European Community implies that a level of regional government should be established here.
Regional government is un-English, unworkable and unwanted.
There is no cultural identity in a region.
People feel no loyalty to it.
They regard themselves as English, and after — or sometimes before — they identify with their county or city, not some falsely created region.
Our entire culture is built around those loyalties.
Our literature and language are full of examples illustrating our pride in country and county.
Let us imagine how uninspiring Shakespeare's Henry V would have been, had he proclaimed that’ gentlemen of the east Midlands, now-abed shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here’.
That is foreign to our culture.
Ms. Quin
The Minister completely exaggerates his case.
If he were to ask many people in the north-east where they come from, they would say’ the north-east’.
The expression’ the north-east’trips easily off the tongue.
People do have regional identities, but the Minister completely overlooks that.
It is true that people had loyalties to the old counties, many of which were abolished by the Conservatives in 1974, but people do have regional identities.
Mr. Key
I would find the hon. Lady's argument more credible if I had not experienced the difficulties of trying to remember, when on Tyneside to talk about Tyneside.
However, if I talk about Tyneside when I am a few miles away in Teesside or Wearside, I am in real trouble.
I can identify with the north-west, the south or Wessex.
But, first, people feel that there is a more local and historic dimension.
People also feel proud of England, being English, and of all that has stood for over 1,000 years.
Our nation's culture is bound up in that philosophy, which cannot be written off as looking backwards or day-dreaming — it is deeply ingrained in all of us.
Hon. Members will be familiar with the lines from Henry V, but imagine if they were as follows:’ I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the start.
The game's afoot:
Follow your spirit; and upon this charge Cry God for Harry! the south-east regional government and St.
George.’
That is not very credible.
It is not silly to suggest that we should consider those aspects.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
The Minister must recognise that the concept of England as a unitary nation may make much sense in the south of England, but there is a much greater feeling of distance among people in the north.
Having grown up a northerner, I make no apologies for saying that I do not regard myself as a southerner who happens to live a few miles up the road.
We are different.
On the issue of regional government, I do not want to distance myself from English history, but I recognise that Whitehall government is a long way from Manchester.
Mr. Key
I am also from the provinces — I am glad to say that I am not a Londoner, but come from Wessex.
Therefore, I have no difficulty with what the hon. Gentleman says.
Thank God that we do have regional diversity and differences, but if we are not careful, if we pursue regionalist policies it will lead to a break-up of England.
If he were to reflect on that, I do not think the hon. Gentleman would want it to happen.
We can be facetious about the examples that I am using.
We do not want to talk about south-west regional cream instead of Devonshire produce, roast beef and north-east regional pudding or Greater Manchester hot-pot.
Mr. David Nicholson
Given the recent record of local government in Manchester and Liverpool, constituents in Lancashire and Cheshire would be appalled at the prospect of being governed from either of those places.
Mr. Key
I spent much time in that area and I know that brighter things are on the horizon for Manchester and Liverpool.
I give credit to the people of those regions who, as we have seen, are realising some of the follies of the past.
Even some of their political masters in London have recognised the follies of some of the goings-on in those areas.
Mr. Devlin
Of course it is right for people in the north-east to think of themselves as north-easterners.
The Minister is right to say that people think of themselves as Yorkshiremen or Durhamers or Teessiders rather than Tynesiders.
I have had to pull up the Minister when he has visited Teesside and talked about companies in Tyneside which are of no interest to people on Teesside.
It is not the identity that people feel.
Labour has carried out a trawl of Departments in order to find something for their Labour colleagues in Newcastle to do and to justify giving them a huge bureaucracy and their own budget.
It is another case of Labour trying to give jobs to the boys in the north-east.
Mr. Key
My hon. Friend is right.
I wonder where the Labour party was while all these lessons were being learned.
It has clearly been in hibernation as well as in opposition for the past 12 years.
It is worrying that after all this time Labour appears to think that being in opposition means solely that one must oppose everything.
There have been few examples of sensible, alternative ways to do things.
The Opposition argue that other European countries have regional government and we must have it as well.
Why must we be the same as our neighbours?
Italy may be what some people have called a geographical expression, but England certainly is not, and we have 1,000 years of history to prove it.
We should not assume that because some European countries have regional government the people there want it.
I have canvassed the views of my hon. Friend the Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities who is very European, and he assures me that people who live in the southern part of Spain were totally bemused to wake up one day and find themselves in an invented region called Andalusia with a different Government from than in Madrid.
They did not particularly want that, but it was foisted upon them.
Notional regions without definitive boundaries are used for the purposes of economic development, and our regions get aid from Europe without the need for a formal structure.
We should ask how such a structure would work.
Who would decide where regional boundaries begin and end.
That topic was only touched upon by the hon. Member for Gateshead, East.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Brigg and Cleethorpes (Mr. Brown) said, British Gas decides its regions according to the location of its gasworks and the lie of the pipes.
Electricity was privatised in regions dictated by the positioning of cables.
British Telecom directories and area codes are also based on service delivery and not on the existence of defined regions.
Regionalism is not about service delivery.
Labour has completely misunderstood the concept.
It talks about only another layer of government and more red tape and state control, not less.
That is ironic given Labour's supposed support for the concept of unitary authorities which the Government are pursuing.
Our legislation is about bringing local government closer to the people, giving them the councils that they want.
Our recognition of the importance of tradition and loyalties will permit the re-creation of historic counties as non-administrative entities.
One does not need a council in order to prove the existence of well-established areas such as Lancashire or Somerset.
I have not forgotten Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, but I shall deal with them separately, because devolution is a different issue.
As usual, Labour is muddled.
Regionalism and devolution are not the same.
Scotland and Wales are nation states, not regions, and neither country wants nationhood.
Both have voted against it.
However, Scottishness exists without a separate government.
Cultural identity forms over hundreds of years and cannot be imposed.
There is no point in the Labour party in Scotland pretending that Grampian or Strathclyde regions have captured the affections of the people.
What would regional assemblies do?
Labour says that powers would be devolved from Whitehall.
Which powers?
It would be very divisive to break up England in this way.
There is no constitutional precedent for regional government such as that proposed by the Opposition.
That would merely be another way of manufacturing extra government — no doubt to employ Labour's trade union supporters, at great expense to the taxpayers.
We are told that the initial creation of the assemblies would include a strategic body for London — Greater London council mark 2.
They would cost more than £200 million — imagine 11
GLCs all over the country.
Labour says that the assemblies would be financed initially by block grant, but that eventually they would be give tax-raising powers of their own.
That would have a disastrous effect on economic development.
No doubt the hon. Member for Normanton would confirm that business men and professionals in Leeds and elsewhere would leave high-tax Labour regions in their droves for efficiently run, Conservative regions.
Inward investment from abroad would follow.
That would leave some regions without investment and jobs.
How can Labour argue that their plans would be benefitial to regional development?
Mr. O'Brien
The references that I made were not to Labour party documents but to papers published by the chambers of commerce.
How can the Minister say that those people are not living in reasonably-rated areas — or did not do so, long before the introduction of the unified business rate?
Mr. Key
I did not say that.
I said that I feared going down the road of different regional governments having different tax rates.
That is an interesting parallel with the Liberal Democrats' proposals for local income tax, whereby local councils would be given authority to raise taxes locally — which would have a profound effect on industrial location.
I must tell my right hon. and hon. Friends that we have an ally.
The hon. Member for Gateshead, East and other Labour Members who spoke should be in no doubt that by no means all Opposition Members agree with their point of view.
The hon. Member for Norwich, South (Mr. Garrett), who is charged with improving Labour's performance in the south of England, denounced his party's proposals in forceful terms.
He called them’ unwise’,’incoherent’, and’folly’.
He predicted that devolution would be divisive and questioned the very motives behind the policy.
I quote from Tribune of10 March 1989:’ Those who advocated regional government also have little idea of the amount of managerial talent required to organise and control it.
It would take at least a generation to find and train effective top management cadres for the English regions Reorganisation of the management of English government on this scale would cause a decade of chaos in local services.’
Someone even more influential than the hon. Member for Norwich, South disagrees with the hon. Member for Gateshead, East.
I refer to the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock), who proclaimed in Blackpool that regional government would result in’ guaranteed disharmony, disunity, conflict and competition throughout the whole of Britain The dominant issue of politics will be the jealousies of region against region, nation against nation, argument against argument.
That will be very bad news for Britain.’
Or has the right hon. Gentleman changed his mind again because he wants the key to No. 10?
Labour does not have its act together.
This Government's many imaginative and effective initiatives are far more helpful to the regions than any hare-brained scheme from Labour.
We firmly expect that the single market will benefit all English regions.
There is no evidence that they will be adversely affected by its completion.
I will briefly outline the ways in which our policies are working together to improve the quality of life in areas that face particular problems.
I repeat that it would be wrong to impose another layer of bureaucracy, when a more streamlined local government structure is needed.
We have done much to develop regional policies over the past decade.
It is within the overall context of national development that regional development can most effectively be addressed and actioned.
This Government are committed to an effective policy of regional development, and I remind the hon. Member for Gateshead, East that much has been achieved over the past 10 years.
Our city challenge and other inner-city initiatives were enthusiastically received by local authorities and the private sector — particularly in the north-east.
Middlesbrough and Newcastle are among the 11 local authorities chosen to be the pacemaker front-runners in the new city challenge initiative.
So enthusiastic were other local authorities, including the constituents of my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South, that his council, together with Sunderland, put in a late bid.
It did not want to be left out.
I should like another five hours of debate with the hon. Member for Gateshead, East, because we could learn much from it.
She referred to the problems of democracy.
There are severe problems of democracy that we as a nation need to face, particularly in local government.
I am in no doubt about that, particularly as I have toured regularly the difficult areas in all parts of the country.
The people who live in those areas have lost power.
They perceive that they have no influence over their own lives, or over the quality of their own lives.
They are in need of empowerment.
That is the problem which faces us all.
Whether I am talking to the residents of Moss Side in Manchester, or Scotswood in Newcastle, I am left in no doubt that they dislike their local councillors and councils as much as they dislike the Government.
Members of Parliament who represent those areas know that that is the problem which we face.
We must address it.
We must ensure that those people can play their part with local government, national government, the private sector and the voluntary organisations in creating their own future.
That is what city challenge is all about.
City challenge will deliver £7.5 million of Government assistance to each authority each year for a five-year programme of concentrated regeneration — for example, in the west end of Newcastle and in east Middlesbrough.
This year we are spending £42.2 million on our northern region urban programme.
That is a special allocation, in addition to the normal resources made available to local authorities to support their inner-area programmes of social and economic regeneration.
It is allocated to the north-east — to Newcastle, Gateshead, North Tyneside, Cleveland, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Langbaurgh and Stockton.
In addition, since we introduced the city grant in May 1988, 39 schemes in the northern region have received grant aid of £18.1 million to enable developers to undertake otherwise uneconomic housing, industrial and commercial developments.
Ms. Quin
I do not know whether the Minister has seen today's announcement about the loss of 370 jobs at the Volvo plant in Copeland in west Cumbria.
Is he able to make an announcement about a review of the assisted area status for west Cumbria which was taken away from that area in the early 1980s?
Do the Government intend to introduce initiatives to help that area which is, of course, part of the northern region?
Mr. Key
I do not doubt that representations will be made about that private sector decision, which I very much regret.
I am very sorry about loss of jobs.
The hon. Lady had the advantage of slipping out for an hour, when no doubt she managed to get hold of that news.
I have been stuck here and have not received it, but I shall, of course, give it proper consideration.
There are urban development corporations in the northern region and throughout the country.
The housing investment programme has allocated £99 million to the northern region this year, with an additional £20.5 million coming through estate action resources.
A very good example of development is the Calgate estate in Newcastle where the Department of the Environment, the local authority and the housing corporation worked together to refurbish housing in the area, to build new homes and to raise the profile of the area.
I have been there and seen the remarkable progress that is being made.
Mr. Hugo Summerson (Walthamstow)
My hon. Friend knows that there is a housing action trust in my constituency of Walthamstow.
Would it be possible for other areas to be given housing action trusts, in addition to all the resources and programmes that my hon. Friend has mentioned?
Mr. Key
The development of housing action trusts is one of the most exciting ways in which central Government are helping the regions.
One of the most enthusiastic authorities taking up housing action trusts has been Liverpool city council.
It has seen that this is an obvious way to make real progress in the regions, using central Government — taxpayers' — money.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman (Lancaster)
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. O'Brien
The hon. Lady has only just come in.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
I came because I regard the debate as important.
I used to work in Liverpool.
I know that it has one of the worst housing problems in the country.
I am delighted that it has now decided to co-operate with the Government and solve a problem that I brought the regional affairs committee of the European Parliament over to look at 14 years ago.
Mr. Key
My hon. Friend is wise and experienced, both at a European level and in her constituency.
Her constituents are lucky that she has decided to stay down here today.
I am glad that she has joined us for the debate.
The motion refers to cuts in the regional assistance budget.
I have tried to explain why the hon. Member for Gateshead, East and I were talking at cross purposes.
In 1979, the assisted areas covered almost half the country by working population.
They now cover 35 per cent.
of the working population and are carefully targeted on the areas most in need.
Our regional policy measures are not the heavy-handed, high-spending models of the past.
I remember well being an economics teacher in the awful years of the Labour Government of the 1970s.
I had to change the A-level economics syllabus to take account of yet more dotty ideas that poured out of the Department of Economic Affairs, of national plans that were revised because they did not work and of huge methods of distributing money through regional policy, where more than half the country was part of a development area.
I remember the ridiculous plans such as the selective employment tax.
It is typical of the Labour party that it has not learnt a thing since.
It still thinks that by interfering and pouring on more layers of bureaucracy and government it will achieve something that has eluded it for so long and will continue to elude it if it takes that path.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
I hear what the Minister says about regional policy in the past.
I have great misgivings about what was done by the previous Labour Government.
Yes; it is not difficult to say.
Government spending has a strong regional dimension.
The latest available figures — they are not Government figures because they will not publish theirs — show that in the south-east Government spending per head was £1,876 but it was only £1, 707 in the north — 10 per cent.
less.
That is a strange regional policy.
Unfortunately, the money is spent on the strongest and least-vulnerable economic regions at the expense of the weakest and most vulnerable.
Mr. Key
As I said to the hon. Member for Sheffield, Central, when he was here, I would welcome a five-hour debate on the distribution of grant, which is one of the hardest tasks facing any Government.
I take the hon. Gentleman's point.
I assert that our regional policies will more than balance the points that he makes.
It would not be appropriate to pursue that now.
Regional selective assistance remains the main regional programme for industry.
It is available to British and foreign-owned businesses for projects providing or safeguarding jobs and for the development of intermediate areas.
There is the regional enterprise grant scheme for very small businesses and consultancy support for firms under the enterprise initiative.
When the private sector is unwilling to invest in the assisted areas, factory and commercial premises are provided by English Estates.
Since March 1986, it has created more than 5 million sq ft of floor space in such areas.
However, instruments and expenditure are not always enough.
That is why the Invest in Britain Bureau is active in promoting foreign inward investment.
The regions benefit considerably.
Regional programme grants are used to encourage investment in assisted areas.
In the northern region alone, there are more than 220 foreign-owned businesses employing more than 42,000 people.
For example, Fujitsu is setting up a £600 million semi-conductor plant at Aycliffe, county Durham, creating 1,500 jobs.
There are many more examples.
There is abundant evidence that our regional measures have had a significant impact on unemployment in assisted areas.
Tens of thousands of jobs are created each year by regional selective assistance.
Unemployment in the northern region has fallen by more than 52,000 from 201,000, or 14.1 per cent.
at the beginning of 1988, to 149,000, or 10.6 per cent.
in October this year.
Far too many people are unemployed, but we are making progress.
We are committed to an effective regional industrial policy.
The economic development of the regions is further assisted by structural funds, which are made available through the European Community.
Since the Commission confirmed its objective 2 list in 1989, most of the assisted areas and some others have benefited under the RESIDER, RECHAR and RENAVAL schemes.
These conversion schemes aim to foster industrial diversification in areas that formerly relied on iron and steel production, coal mining and shipbuilding.
I responded to the hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed on that point.
Another example of regional development has been in the relocation of Government Departments away from the south-east.
Since we announced the launch of our relocation policy in March 1988, about 30,000 posts — two thirds of the total reviewed — have been recommended for creation in or relocation to the regions.
A large proportion of the posts already announced for relocation are destined for locations targeted by our regional development or urban programme policies and we expect that about 60 per cent.
of the posts will be filled by local recruitment.
For example, in the past three years 8,610 posts have been relocated to the assisted areas and 18,700 posts to the urban programme areas.
Of the 24,170 posts in England, the northern region has so far received about 2,500, including 855 with the Inland Revenue in Sunderland, Middlesbrough and Washington and 1,205 posts in a number of departments in Newcastle.
The others are being distributed among the east and west midlands, the north-west, Yorkshire and Humberside, East Anglia and the south-west.
The full breakdown of the figures was given in a parliamentary written answer on 3 December.
Our policies promise a bright and vigorous future for regional development and local government in England.
Our plans for local government will bring decision-making closer to the people rather than alienating them by imposing an extra layer of bureaucracy on top of local government.
We shall create councils which reflect local communities and which are able to predict and respond to people's needs.
Building on the achievements of the past few years, we shall continue to target aid and assistance where it can be most constructive, for the regions and for the nation as a whole.
Effective regional policies — not regional government — are the way forward for England.
Mr. David Trimble (Upper Bann)
I shall begin — as did other hon. Members — by congratulating the hon. Member for Gateshead, East (Ms.
Quin) on choosing the subject for the debate.
It was potentially a valuable and interesting debate, but, as happened during the debate on constitutional reform on 17 May, which was also held in private Members' time, time has become rather squeezed, mainly because the Conservatives seem keen to spin out the debate through their speeches and interventions instead of allowing a proper debate.
Consequently, I shall try to keep my remarks as brief as possible so that other hon. Members may contribute.
Hon. Members have referred to the increasing centralisation of government that has taken place, especially in the past decade.
I shall not add to what they have said, but it underlines the need for a rethink.
Another reason for a rethink is what has been called the European dimension.
Not all of us are happy with the developments in Europe, but we cannot ignore them.
References have been made to the impact that the regional policies and structure in Europe will have and to the desire of the regions to have some direct representation in Europe.
Whether or not the Government facilitate that, it will tend to happen.
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr. Malcolm Rifkind)
At about 10.35 on Saturday morning 7 December, the 07.00 hrs sprinter diesel train from Portsmouth to Cardiff collided with the rear of the08.30 hrs InterCity 125 train from London, Paddington to Cardiff inside the Severn tunnel, about one and a quarter miles from the Newport end.
I understand from British Rail that the impact was less severe than it might have been, since both trains were on the move at the time, but some 90 passengers and the driver of the Portsmouth train were injured.
Eight people, including the driver, were still in hospital this morning.
The House will wish to join me in expressing our sympathy with those who were injured and our hopes for their speedy recovery.
I also pay tribute to the professionalism of the emergency services, who naturally faced difficulties in getting to the injured and in getting them out of the tunnel for treatment.
The response by all involved was magnificent.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr. Malcolm Rifkind)
British Rail has accepted responsibility for the accident and will be starting its own internal inquiry tomorrow.
I understand that the signalling and axle counter system, which is used to detect the location of trains in the tunnel, was not working normally at the time.
An emergency procedure was in operation which should have ensured that only one train was in the tunnel.
There are a number of questions to investigate, which may take some time.
British Rail will make its results available to the Health and Safety Executive.
A principal inspecting officer from the Health and Safety Executive's railway inspectorate visited the scene of the accident.
After consultation with the Health and Safety Commission, I shall be appointing an inspector to carry out an inquiry into the accident under the Regulation of Railways Act 1871.
The inquiry will be wholly independent.
The report will be published, and I have asked the inspector to report to me as quickly as possible.
Meanwhile, British Rail will, of course, take immediate corrective action should the need for it emerge during any of these investigations.
At this stage, the cause of the accident is not yet clear, and we cannot reach any conclusions until all the evidence is available.
Sir John Cope
I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for that statement and, on behalf of my constituents, join him in sending sympathy to those who were injured in the accident.
In addition, I should like to thank my right hon. and learned Friend for his well deserved tributes to the emergency services.
It is peculiarly frightening to have an accident in a tunnel, but that should not obscure the fact the Severn tunnel in particular, and the railways in general , have a very good accident record and that travelling by rail is safer than travelling by road.
Will my right hon. and learned Friend say a bit more about communications?
These days, we should expect the drivers of all trains to have two-way communication at all times with the signal box and those who are in control of the track.
Does my right hon. and learned Friend think that such communication would have contributed to avoiding the accident?
Mr. Rifkind
I thank my hon. Friend.
He is right to emphasise the general safety level of the railways, which compares favourably with all other modes of transport.
Tragically, some 5,000 people die on our roads every year, whereas only about 84 died on the railways during 1990.
As for communication, there is no way of knowing whether a cab radio would have made any difference in this accident, but I agree with my hon. Friend that it is desirable that cab radios should be fitted into locomotives and multiple unit fleets.
Already, some 60 per cent.
of British Rail locomotive and multiple unit fleets have some such radio installed.
All regional railways will have such radios installed by June next year.
Mr. Roy Hughes (Newport, East)
Does the Secretary of State appreciate that the Welsh entrance to the tunnel is in Caldicot in the Newport, East constituency?
Local people there have been worried for some time about safety factors which affect the tunnel.
For them, last Saturday was an accident that had been waiting to happen.
I wrote to Sir Bob Reid, the chairman of British Rail, over 12 months ago expressing my constituents' concern.
I also tabled early-day motion 186 in the last Session of Parliament, which was supported by no fewer than 39 hon. Members, calling for lighting throughout the tunnel and for closed circuit television.
Certainly those facilities would have helped in the evacuation of the injured last Saturday.
The Severn tunnel is a wonderful structure, which has served the travelling public well for over 100 years, but it is now badly in need of modernisation.
Mr. Rifkind
The hon. Gentleman is right to emphasise that the Severn tunnel has served the travelling public extremely well for many years.
Indeed, as far as I am aware, there have not been any previous accidents of this nature within the tunnel.
I was interested in the points that the hon. Gentleman raised.
Clearly the inquiry which is to take place will take into account any comments made by the hon. Gentleman which may be relevant to the cause of the accident or to reducing the prospects of any future incidents.
Mr. James Hill (Southampton, Test)
My right hon. and learned Friend will be aware that on the train were constituents from not only the Portsmouth area but Southampton.
We are gravely worried that a series of accidents seem to have taken place in which trains simply run into each other.
Surely it must be tantamount to neglect of the safety of our railways if we do not spend more and more money on a system which can give early warning.
Aircraft have transponder systems which locate the aircraft exactly so that everyone for several miles around knows where the aircraft is.
Surely research and development can provide similar high technology for railway cabs.
It is all very well to have two-way communication, but we need some high technology which will prevent trains from slamming into the back of each other.
Mr. Rifkind
My hon. Friend is right to say that British Rail needs to use available modern technology to reduce further the incidence of accidents involving loss of life and injury on the railways.
He will be pleased to know that the latest report of the railway inspectorate on railway safety showed a modest reduction in the number of collisions between passenger trains in 1990 compared with the previous year.
I know that that will be welcome to my hon. Friend.
Mr. Alex Carlile (Montgomery)
May I join in the Secretary of State's praise for the emergency services, which acted magnificently, and also in his best wishes to those who were injured?
This accident, and the collapse of a railway bridge within the recent past in Wales, together with declining standards and quality of service, raise serious questions about the competence of British Rail's management of the rail network in Wales.
Will the Secretary of State please ask the chairman of British Rail to report to him as a matter of urgency on the state of British Rail in Wales an on its financing?
Will he also ask the chairman to prepare — at long last— a strategic plan for co-ordinated rail services in Wales, as those services are in a poor state?
Mr. Rifkind
We naturally expect British Rail to attach the greatest importance to safety considerations.
That is also the view of the chairman of British Rail, and is matched by the resources that the Government make available.
The resources available for safety have increased from £140 million to about £200 million for the current year, and are likely to continue at at least that level.
It would be unwise for the hon. and learned Gentleman or for anyone else to draw conclusions about what might have been the cause of this accident.
We do not have the information today which would entitle us to draw any conclusions of that kind.
Mr. David Martin (Portsmouth, South)
May I associate myself with my right hon. and learned Friend's comments about the injuries of people on the train?
May I also welcome the inquiry that he has announced?
As the cause of the accident is not clear, will he deplore the remarks of the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, East (Mr. Prescott) and others who are already speculating on the causes of the accident and criticising the Government for not investing enough in the railways?
That is always the knee-jerk reaction of Opposition Members, who say that we are not spending enough money, without saying precisely how they would improve situations such as this.
Mr. Rifkind
Yes, my hon. Friend is correct.
I am afraid that the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, East (Mr. Prescott) has a regrettable tendency not to bother with the facts, but to jump to conclusions in the immediate aftermath of any accident, before any of the facts are known to him or to anyone else.
Mr. Donald Anderson (Swansea, East)
Without going into matters which might be the subject of the inquiry, can the Secretary of State confirm, first, that there have been recurrent problems with the signalling at either end of the line, as a result of the damp; and, secondly, the system in case of an emergency and a red light was for the relevant engine drivers physically to get out of the cab and use a telephone near the tunnel?
Although that will be remedied by next June, is it not somewhat antiquated that such a system has persisted for so long?
Mr. Rifkind
I said in my orginal response that there was a failure in the signalling system at the time, and that is why the emergency procedure was in operation.
I agreed with the other hon. Member who mentioned radios in cabs — they are being introduced into all new cabs and into existing cabs.
All regional railways will have such equipment by June next year.
Mr. Ian Grist (Cardiff, Central)
Can my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that it took the emergency services an hour to reach the injured, and that another hour went past before the 125 was able to move off?
Many people were therefore trapped for a long time.
Does he not think that that could be improved on in any future, but hopefully never to be repeated accident?
Mr. Rifkind
I think that it must have been a frightening experience for people trapped within the train for that time.
I understand that one of the reasons why it took longer than one would have wished was that the emergency services went to the inappropriate end of the tunnel, further away from the train, and had to be redirected to the other end, which gave easier access to the two trains.
Mr. Dafydd Wigley (Caernarfon)
Does the Secretary of State recall that, earlier this year, when he was talking about the increase in BR's external financing, he said that there would be £70 million more for safety matters?
Does he accept that a fail-safe system — an automatic train protection system — would cost nearer £390 million and is a matter of urgency?
If we are to overcome this sort of problem in future we must put even greater resources into British Rail to safeguard trains, crews and passengers.
Mr. Rifkind
British Rail is at the moment testing automatic train protection, and the Chiltern line has a pilot scheme which, if successful, will enable ATP to be implemented elsewhere on the network.
Mr. Robert Hayward (Kingswood)
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that he will ask the chairman of British Rail urgently to look at the position of the tunnels further along the line to ensure that precautions similar to those that are being instituted in the Severn tunnel will also be made in those tunnels if signalling changes have taken place recently associated with the general modernisation work?
Mr. Rifkind
Yes, it will be appropriate for both British Rail's internal inquiry and the inquiry that I have announced under the railway inspectorate to look at all the implications that may be relevant to the work being undertaken.
Mrs. Gwyneth Dunwoody (Crewe and Nantwich)
Will the Secretary of State, without waiting for the report, send for the chairman of British Rail and, exceptionally, offer him enough money to allow him to put into operation an immediate emergency programme for the renewal of signalling systems?
It is clear that signalling is one of the vital factors that, unfortunately, has contributed in the immediate past to several major accidents.
Mr. Rifkind
The hon. Lady should not jump to conclusions.
My understanding is that the signalling in the Severn tunnel area is relatively new, and was installed in the relatively recent past.
The suggestion inherent in her question — that the signalling is antiquated — does not appear to be justified.
Mr. Robert Adley (Christchurch)
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree with my right hon. Friend the Member for Northavon (Mr. Cope) that the crash in the tunnel was frightening, but that the problem was not caused by junctions, so we should not associate what happened at Purley, for example, with what happened in the Severn tunnel?
Is my right hon. and learned Friend familiar with the automatic warning system of the Great Western railway, which has kept this tunnel and hundreds of miles of railway line safe for years?
We now seem to have a serious problem with some of the new technology.
My right hon. and learned Friend has announced an internal inquiry.
In view of the importance of signalling and telecommunications to the railways, would it not be sensible quietly to contemplate the proposition of an independent inquiry into all the technological changes that are taking place on British Rail signalling?
While the subject —
Mr. Speaker
Briefly please.
Mr. Adley
As the subject of funds for British Rail has been mentioned, will my right hon. and learned Friend have a look at two points quickly —
Mr. Speaker
One point.
Mr. Adley
One point.
On locomotive-hauled trains, a flashing red light is used by British Rail, while on multiple units a static light is used.
Is not that one matter that could be rearranged?
Surely a flashing red light would be far more visible in a tunnel than a static light?
Mr. Rifkind
I am grateful to my hon. Friend, who has considerable knowledge of these matters.
I will direct his point to the chairman of British Rail, so that the matters are taken into account.
My hon. Friend suggested that there would be only an internal inquiry.
British Rail is conducting an internal inquiry, but the inquiry that I have announced today, which is to be held by the Health and Safety Executive, will be a public inquiry under the Regulation of Railways Act 1871.
Mr. John Prescott (Kingston upon Hull, East)
May I on behalf of the House offer our deepest sympathy to those who were injured and hope that they have a speedy recovery?
Indeed, may I express once again our great admiration for the skill and courage of those involved in our emergency services?
Is the Secretary of State aware that it is almost three years to the day that we heard of the Clapham rail tragedy, which was caused by faulty signalling and negligence?
Is he further aware that last week we heard of a thousand signalling faults on British Rail followed by this further terrible accident in the Severn tunnel, involving signal faults and negligence yet again?
Hon. Members
How do you know?
Mr. John Prescott (Kingston upon Hull, East)
British Rail has already accepted responsibility for the matter, as the Secretary of State has pointed out.
That undoubtedly goes a long way to explaining the inspectors' report.
I hope that the Secretary of State will look again at the figures, instead of looking at them superficially as he has done, to see that, in the past five years, the incidence of passenger train collisions has increased by 40 per cent.
over the average for the past 10 years.
That is the point that is causing the travelling public great concern.
Can the Secretary of State tell us, three years after Clapham, what the total cost is of implementing the Hidden recommendations to make our system safer?
Has the Department completed the review of the investment for safety, as required by Hidden?
Finally, does he accept that the general public want to see him and his Department using all their energies to ensure the implementation of a safe, reliable railway, instead of producing a White Paper on the privatisation of British Rail?
Mr. Rifkind
The hon. Gentleman is really behaving disgracefully —— when he accuses British Rail of negligence before an inquiry has even begun, and when he has not the slightest idea of what caused that accident.
The hon. Gentleman is in danger of becoming like a vulture scavenging around every incident, irrespective of the facts and of the accusations that he makes against other people.
Interruption
The hon. Gentleman referred in his question, and in a conversation on radio during the weekend, to what he describes as’ an increasing number’of passenger train collisions.
As the hon. Gentleman must know perfectly well from the railway safety report, published only last week, the total number of significant collisions in 1989 was 85, and in 1990 it was 59.
If that is what the hon. Gentleman describes as an increasing rate of passenger train collisions, it shows that he does not deserve the attention or respect of the House.
Bus Plant Closure (Workington)
Mr. D. N. Campbell-Savours (Workington)
I beg to ask leave to move the Adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 for the purpose of discussing a specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration, namely,’ The need for a debate on the closure of the Volvo bus plant, formerly known as Leyland National, in my constituency’.
This matter is urgent, as west Cumbria is now on the eve of a renewed spate of large-scale redundancies.
Last week, job losses were announced at Allbright and Wilson, and last weekend Volvo announced the closure of its bus plant in Workington with a loss of 370 jobs.
That closure will, from July next year, leave empty a modern factory of 650,000 sq ft in my constituency.
The area will face a herculean task if it is to find a new occupier for that factory.
The House will also be aware of the impending rundown of the THORP — thermal oxide reprocessing plant — construction project at Sellafield with the loss of several thousand jobs.
The matter is important, as Volvo clearly blamed the Government's economic policies for its decision.
In the press release announcing the closure, Volvo states:’ The actions are the direct result of deregulation of bus services and the recession, which have combined to severely depress demand.’
The matter is specific, because the Leyland/Volvo plant in Workington is Britain's principal bus producing plant.
Surely it cannot be right for a foreign company, faced with recession and a lack of profitability at home, in Sweden, to cut its overseas operations and, in doing so, close down the United Kingdom's strategic bus manufacturing plant.
Such a decision is surely a matter for Government.
The plant was built under a Labour Government, with a large amount of taxpayers' money, as part of efforts to consolidate bus manufacturing within the United Kingdom.
Its loss can lead only to an invasion of imports when the recession ends and the market picks up.
In the absence of adequate bus production capacity in the United Kingdom, we can face only danger in terms of the future bus market.
I appeal to you, Mr. Speaker, to allow us to have a debate on this matter today.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member for Workington (Mr. Campbell-Savours) seeks leave to move the Adjournment of the House, under Standing Order No. 20, for the purpose of discussing a specific and important matter that he believes should have urgent consideration, namely,’ The closure of the Leyland Volvo bus manufacturing plant in Workington, with the loss of 370 jobs, announced this weekend.’
I have listened with concern to what the hon. Gentleman said about this matter.
As he knows, I must decide whether to give this matter precedent over the business set down for today or for tomorrow.
I regret that his application does not meet the requirements of the Standing Order.
I therefore cannot submit the hon. Gentleman's application to the House.
I hope that there may be other opportunities for the hon. Gentleman to raise this matter this week.
Points of Order
Mr. Simon Burns (Chelmsford)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
As you are probably aware, when astronomers discover a new star, there are special procedures for registering it.
I wonder whether you follow any special procedure when you spot a new political party in the House.
For example, will you instigate an investigation and action to change the Short money as a result of the hon. Members for Liverpool, Broadgreen (Mr. Fields) and for Coventry, South-East (Mr. Nellist) ceasing to be members of the Labour party?
Will you expect the size of that new political party to increase, as other non-community-charge-paying Labour Members join it?
Mr. Speaker
I regularly look for stars in the Chamber, and I believe that the stars are on the Floor of the House.
However, I am not certain that such a point of order falls within my area of responsibility.
Mr. Michael Meacher (Oldham, West)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Have you received a request from the Secretary of State for Social Security to be allowed to make a statement on the withdrawal of moneys from Mirror Group Newspapers' pension fund?
The revelations from MGN show that there is a gaping hole in the law covering pension funds.
There is no legal provision for an independent chairman, 50 per cent.
independently elected employee representation on the board, or full and up-to-date disclosure of information covering a fund's financial state or the allocation of its surpluses.
As there is no provision either for fully protecting the interests of fund members, the Government's proposed regulation on self-investment is irrelevant to what has been revealed in respect of the MGN pension fund.
Millions of employees and pensioners are deeply worried about the future of their pension funds as a result of the MGN revelations, so will you, Mr. Speaker, use your good offices to seek an early statement to the House by the Secretary of State, so that the public's doubts and apprehensions can be allayed?
Several Hon. Members
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Perhaps I can save time.
That matter was raised at business questions and in points of order to me last Thursday.
I said then that it seemed to me that the Consolidated Fund Bill would provide an opportunity to debate it — possibly at some length.
Mr. David Sumberg (Bury, South)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Perhaps I may support the request of the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher).
Such a debate would give right hon. and hon. Members — particularly those whose constituents, like mine in the north-west, are suffering from the loss of their MGN pensions — an opportunity to ask the Opposition to account for the way in which some of their members who were trustees of the MGN fund behaved in a wholly negligent way.
Mr. Speaker
That point could also be raised in the Consolidated Fund Bill debate.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Leaving aside cheap party political propaganda, I put it to you, in all seriousness, that literally millions of people in this country will rely when they retire on occupational pensions.
They know that, if anything went wrong, they would lead a life of poverty or near-poverty.
Concern about that is likely to spread beyond those immediately affected by the revelations about Robert Maxwell's actions at Mirror Group Newspapers.
Would it not be right for the Secretary of State to come to the House to say what steps are being taken to try to ensure that the sort of dishonesty and crookery that went on at MGN is not being repeated elsewhere?
The people of this country are entitled to know that.
Mr. Speaker
I cannot say anything more.
If that topic is submitted as a subject for debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, I will certainly give it careful consideration.
Such a debate would give the hon. Members who have raised those points of order an opportunity to participate, and for a Minister to respond.
Mr. Roger King (Birmingham, Northfield)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
What more can I say?
Mr. King
You kindly reminded the House, Mr. Speaker, that the Consolidated Fund Bill may provide an opportunity to debate the MGN pension fund, but I wonder how far such a debate could go — particularly in respect of references to Mirror Group Newspapers, the Daily Mirror, payments to the Labour party, advertising in Labour party journals, and so on.
Would we not be touching on areas that are sub judice, or which are the subject of possible legal action, which may or may not be taken?
Would an application for a full debate on Robert Maxwell, Mirror Group Newspapers and the Labour party be permissible?
Mr. Speaker
We shall have to consider the sub judice rule in relation to what is said, but at present I can see nothing sub judice in this matter.
Mr. Anthony Beaumont-Dark (Birmingham, Selly Oak)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In a spirit of Christmas unity, may I agree with the shadow Secretary of State for Social Security, the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher)?
A full debate on the issue would indeed be very helpful to us all.
It is to the hon. Gentleman's credit that he wishes to raise a matter that may be embarrassing to his hon. Friends.
Would it not be a good idea, given the suggestion that all these shady capitalist things happen on only one side of the House, to discuss pension funds and how they are to be controlled?
Regardless of what company is involved in such matters and of whether it has a socialist supporter, a Conservative supporter or no political supporter at all, it is our duty as a House to enable everyone in the country to feel that his or her pension is well protected.
Mr. Speaker
If the hon. Gentleman is called to speak in the debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill or the Adjournment motion, he could well raise those points then.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
I appeal to your Christmas spirit, Mr. Speaker.
Will you allow such a debate?
Mr. Speaker
Those are not matters for me.
Dr. John Cunningham (Copeland)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I share the view expressed by the hon. Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak (Mr. Beaumont-Dark): it does not matter whether those involved in fraud, the rip-off of investors of the misuse of pension funds belong to any political party, or to no political party.
There have been plenty of City frauds and scandals involving Conservative supporters.
This is just the latest in long line of such scandals, which besmirch the country's financial institutions as a whole.
My hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) is right to point out that revelations such as these terrify people whose lifelong pension contributions are at the mercy of those responsible for the action taken at Mirror Group Newspapers.
It will seem strange to them that the House has not been given the opportunity to hear a statement on the matter, or to debate it.
I strongly support my hon. Friend's request for a statement.
Mr. Speaker
Any statement is for the Government — what has been said will have been heard by the Home Secretary and other Ministers.
As I have said, there will be opportunities for hon. Members to debate this matter during the debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, if the subject is submitted.
Mr. David Shaw (Dover)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Is it a different point of order?
Mr. Shaw
Yes, Sir.
Mr. Speaker
Absolutely different?
Mr. Shaw
Yes, Sir.
Can you say, Mr. Speaker, whether it would be in order, during any debate on the Maxwell group pension fund fiddles, to raise the subject of the fiddles carried out by the Labour Government in 1976 —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That point of order seems to be related to the matter that we have just been discussing.
Mr. Michael Irvine (Ipswich) rose
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover) rose
Mr. Speaker
No, I do not think that we need to hear any more points of order.
Let me tell the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) that I heard what he said about this matter on Thursday, and I agree with him.
BILLS PRESENTED
Commonwealth of Europe
Mr. Tony Benn presented a Bill to provide for the establishment of a Commonwealth of Europe; and for purposes connected therewith: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Friday 17 January and to be printed.
[Bill 37.]
Cheques
Mr. Conal Gregory, supported by Mr. Anthony Coombs, Mr. Simon Coombs, Mr. Douglas French, Mr. Archy Kirkwood, Sir Richard Luce, Mrs Marion Roe, Sir Gerard Vaughan, Mr. Alan Williams and Mr. Robert Wareing, presented a Bill to amend the law relating to cheques: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Friday 17 January and to be printed.
Statutory Instruments, & c .
Mr. Speaker
With permission, I will put together the two motions on the Order Paper.
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101 (3)(Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Rating and Valuation
That the draft Non-Domestic Rating (Appropriate Fraction and Rateable Values) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Representation of the People
That the draft European Parliamentary Constituencies (Scotland)(Miscellaneous Changes) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Aggravated Vehicle-Taking Bill Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Alex Carlile (Montgomery)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
During my 20 years of practice in the law, there has been a great deal of vehicle taking, in precisely the kind of circumstances that led to the promulgation of the Bill by the Government.
The courts have had powers over the years to deal with those offences.
I wonder whether you could define the circumstances in which it is appropriate for the Government to introduce a law reform Bill and seek to push it through all its procedures in a day without it going to a Standing Committee to be considered carefully as to its detail, when it happens that there is no particular circumstance of urgency and when the reform concerned could lead to considerable difficulties for the courts if the measure is not fully considered?
Mr. Speaker
It is within the knowledge of the House that Bills have gone through all their stages in one day.
The House itself will take a decision on the matter later this evening when the Question will be put whether the Bill should or should not be considered in Committee of the whole House.
Mr. Donald Anderson (Swansea, East)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Following the point made by the hon. and learned Member for Montgomery (Mr. Carlile), presumably the Government's contention is that, either because of prevalence or because of some emergency, it is necessary today, without the normal consultation, to go through every stage of the Bill.
If there is such an emergency, why is it that there is no analogous Bill for Scotland?
Is it the Government's contention that such an emergency, if there be an emergency, is relevant only in England and Wales?
What are the intentions, therefore, in respect of Scotland?
Mr. Speaker
Of course, this Bill will go through all its stages in the normal way.
The unusual feature is that that may happen in one day.
I draw the hon. Gentleman's attention to the fact that the Question will be put from the Chair at the appropriate moment, That the Bill be committed to a Committee of the whole House.
The House will then decide to agree — or to disagree.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You said earlier that other Bills have gone through all their stages in one day.
That is true of some uncontroversial matters, but recently there have been several Bills of this kind, such as the one after the Hungerford massacre — that was rushed through the House and not dealt with properly — the council tax Bill — that was rushed through the House and is a mess — and the Dangerous Dogs Bill that was also rushed through all its stages.
Yes, you are right, there are precedents, but most of them have ended in tears.
Mr. Speaker
I think that perhaps we had better hear the Home Secretary explain it.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.
The Bill has two simple aims.
The first is to make sure that everyone who gets involved in the taking of someone else's vehicle is made criminally liable for the consequences.
The second is to give the courts power to sentence the serious cases in the way that they deserve.
Car crime, I think it is generally agreed, is a curse on our society.
Let me give just a few facts and figures.
In the 12 months to June 1991, over 550,000 cars were stolen.
There were over 800,000 thefts from vehicles.
About 30 per cent.
of all recorded crime is car crime, and car crime is rising rapidly.
It accounted for more than a third of the overall increase in recorded crime this year.
It is a curse that affects us all.
Many hundreds of thousands of members of the public have had their cars stolen, or their cars broken into and their possessions taken.
We have seen recently how car crime can destroy the peace of mind of whole communities in Oxford and in Newcastle.
We are taking action on a number of fronts to tackle this problem.
Over the last year, I have held a series of meetings with the major motor manufacturers to see what action they can take in the battle against car crime.
Many manufacturers have made great improvements in the security of their vehicles.
I welcome that, but there is much more that can be done.
When I last met them in September, I asked them to consider urgently three specific point: first, the introduction of visible vehicle identification numbers; secondly, the fitting of deadlocking across all their vehicle ranges; and, most important, the development of an effective vehicle immobilising device that would make it impossible to move a car even if it had been broken into.
I am meeting the manufacturers again this Wednesday, and I shall ask what progress they have made.
I think that all hon. Members have been sent a circular about the Bill by the Consumers Association.
It says that it has been urging motor manufacturers to make cars more secure since 1961.
I applaud what it and Which? have done.
The Government have an important role in improving vehicle security.
We want to see the British standard on vehicle security adopted as a compulsory European Community directive.
My right hon. Friend the Minister of State and I have raised this with our European colleagues.
The standard covers locking systems, glass marking, security of in-car entertainment and deadlocking.
We are working hard in the EC to get all member states to accept those requirements.
The insurance industry is also very concerned about rising car crime.
When I met the Association of British Insurers about six months ago, it was reluctant to take a collective view, but when I met it about two months ago, its views had changed considerably, because the claims paid by insurers rose by 46 per cent.
to £225 million in the first half of the year — a substantial sum.
That is equal to the value of the claims in the whole of 1989.
Since that meeting, I am glad that the industry has announced its plan to double the number of insurance ratings, for the first time taking account of factory-fitted security measures in assessing insurance grouping.
I have asked the ABI to consider whether there is scope for offering discounts to car owners who fit effective security devices after initial sale.
There is much that the Government, the car industry, the insurance industry and others are doing to prevent car crime, but tackling the roots of car crime means, in part, tackling the roots of criminality.
We must consider what leads young men — it is predominantly young men — to see crime as a better outlet for their abilities and energies than lawful activity.
What causes young people to fall into crime?
This year, I have been having a series of informal discussions with Church leaders, the voluntary sector, leading members of the police, probation and prison services, magistrates and others to consider what we can do to get at the roots of criminality.
I intend to set out our proposals in the new year.
Mr. Gary Waller (Keighley)
Has my right hon. Friend seen the view of the chief constable of west Yorkshire, Mr. Peter Nobes, that the upsurge in the taking of motor vehicles has probably occurred since the change in the Criminal Justice Act 1988, which reduced the unauthorised taking of a motor vehicle to a summary offence triable only at a magistrates court?
He believes that the deterrent effect, which no longer seems to exist for young people, should be reinstated.
Is my right hon. Friend willing to consider that further?
Mr. Baker
My hon. Friend should bear in mind the fact that, before 1988, only 3 per cent.
of sentences were longer than six months.
That effectively answers my hon. Friend.
That is why I believe that the Bill is necessary.
The Bill is one of a wide range of urgent measures that we are taking to stop the plague of car crime getting out of hand.
Mr. Doug Henderson (Newcastle upon Tyne, North)
I am glad that the Home Secretary recognises that we must tackle the whole question of crime to get a grip of the dreadful problem of stealing vehicles, which has affected my area of Newcastle.
Is the right hon. Gentleman frustrated by the edicts of the Secretary of State for the Environment, whose rate-capping proposals have reduced Newcastle city council's ability to tackle the core of the problem?
Many youth clubs in Elswick, Benwell and Lemington have had to close because of that lack of funding.
Mr. Baker
Deprived urban areas have had one of the largest increases in expenditure since we took office.
From memory, I believe that the figure was about £100 million when we took office but about £900 million or £1 billion this year.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that this year I secured not only a good standard spending assessment for the police but an urban crime fund for the Northumbrian police of £3.66 million.
That shows our commitment to dealing with those very problems.
The Bill is not the whole answer to car crime, nor does it pretend to be, but it is an important, new and urgently needed part of the legislative answer.
It is difficult enough to identify anyone who was in a vehicle.
It is much more difficult to establish precisely when damage occurred, who was responsible and what they intended at the time.
What is new about the Bill is that, where a vehicle is taken and damage or injury are caused, all those involved in the taking, including the passengers, will be equally liable to the more severe punishment for the aggravating events.
All the criminals involved in taking the vehicle will be held responsible for what followed the original taking.
Of course, not all cases of vehicle taking are so serious: our whole approach to sentencing — brought to fruition in last Session's Criminal Justice Act — is to have a range of custodial and exacting community penalties graduated to fit the seriousness of the offence.
The right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) has raised that matter with me on other occasions.
For example, my Department funds various motor projects which have played an increasing role, and there are some excellent examples which focus on demanding programmes to get motor offenders to change to adopt responsible attitudes and behaviour.
I believe that, organised properly, those can be effective.
My Department is providing £200,000 this financial year to motor projects dealing with young offenders, thereby keeping them out of custody.
That includes more than £150,000 to projects supervising offenders through the young adult offenders grant scheme.
That fund is set to increase by a further £1 million next year, and I certainly expect motor projects to figure significantly within that increased expenditure.
What we are talking about today is the need to ensure that bad cases do not elude tough penalties, because the present law puts burdens on the police and prosecution which they can have difficulty in discharging.
Mr. Alex Carlile
I suspect that the right hon. Gentleman said something a little earlier that was factually inaccurate.
He has implied that all those who are involved in taking a vehicle are not already committing an offence, but they are.
Everyone who is involved in taking a vehicle is implicitly committing an offence.
The right hon. Gentleman has implied that those who travel in such a vehicle are not already committing an offence, but they are.
There is the offence of being carried.
If the right hon. Gentleman took the measure which has been suggested of restoring indictability to the offence of taking and driving away, would not the courts be left with a wide range of penalties?
Would not the courts therefore be able to take into account the facts of offences without going through the restrictive provisions in this ill-considered new Bill?
Every item in clause 1(2) imposes a restriction on the courts.
Does not the right hon. Gentleman realise that he is setting an obstacle course for the courts which will make it more difficult for them to pass tough sentences in serious cases?
Mr. Anderson rose
Mr. Baker
Let me reply to one point at a time.
I knew perfectly well what I was saying with regard to the Theft Act 1968.
The hon. and learned Member for Montgomery (Mr. Carlile) is right — when a person is charged with taking and driving away, there is a collective responsibility on all those in the car.
We are extending that provision to the aggravated events that follow the taking away.
The hon. and learned Gentleman can rightly say,’ Leave the present offence and just increase the penalties,’but it would be difficult, in respect of the offence of taking and driving away, to prove culpability for the aggravated offence and the damage that followed.
That is the point of the Bill, and I shall justify it in a moment.
Mr. Anderson
I wish to follow the point made by the hon. and learned Member for Montgomery (Mr. Carlile).
If the Government were serious about this matter, would they not remove some of the obstacles that now stand in the way of successful prosecutions under section 12 of the Theft Act?
Under that section, the prosecution has to prove mens rea in respect of’ knowing’, whereas, under section 22, the handling provision, it has to prove a case in respect of ’knowing or believing’.
By importing into section 12’ knowing or believing’for the purposes of means rea, could not the Government give an extra tool to the prosecution to deal with this prevalent offence?
Mr. Baker
With great respect, to begin with, that involves a fundamental re-examination of this and other offences under the Theft Act.
Mr. Anderson
Why not?
Mr. Baker
We believe that the right way to deal with that offence is to build on the offence under the Theft Act 1968 — the taking and driving away — and add to it the aggravated offence covered in clause 1.
Clearly, the hon. and learned Member for Montgomery and the hon. Member for Swansea, East (Mr. Anderson) take an entirely different view which I do not believe would be an effective way in which to deal with the problem.
My view is shared by all the chief constables to whom I have spoken.
Mr. Peter Thurnham (Bolton, North-East)
Will the Bill deal with the problem of people reoffending while on bail?
Chief Superintendent Riding of Bolton said that one youth has been arrested 30 times so far this year for taking vehicles.
Mr. Baker
That is a separate matter.
I shall publish — shortly after Christmas, I suspect — the results of our survey of research on reoffending while on bail, and I shall introduce proposals.
However, the Bill does not deal with that point.
I resume my explanation of the Bill, and this goes to the very heart of the issues raised by the two hon. Gentlemen.
Let us consider the problems that there may be in proving the more serious offence of criminal damage.
Let us suppose that the vehicle is found abandoned in a wood, seriously damaged or completely burnt out.
Perhaps one of those involved in the taking — perhaps the original taker — is caught.
His fingerprints are all over the car.
He admits that he took the vehicle, but says that it was already damaged when he got in or that it was not damaged when he left the scene and that it must have been damaged by someone who took it later.
Mr. Shersby
The House will recall that a computer scientist, Mr. Melvyn Davies, was clubbed and slashed in Oxford while going to the help of his girl friend, who had herself been stabbed in the body and in the face.
He gave a succinct judgment about what happened when he said:’ We have got to stamp out this sort of thing or it will spread like wildfire and become a new craze for the yobs.
We cannot let them ruin our lives.’
That is one powerful reason why the House is considering the Bill.
I believe that we owe it to Mr. Davies and to many others to pass it quickly.
We owe it not only to the people of Oxford but to those of Birmingham, Cardiff, Elswick, and even of rural Shropshire who have suffered.
We owe it to the people of my own borough of Hillingdon, where only a week or so ago a teenager who had just stolen a car killed himself when he drove it into a tree at nearly 100 mph.
There is no joy in those dangerous rides to death.
It is only as a result of sensitive and skilful policing in towns and cities that the problem will be kept under control.
That kind of policing requires good police intelligence and first-class training.
Fortunately for us all, those skills are possessed to a considerable degree by police officers of every rank.
The police have also demonstrated considerable success in building good relationships with the community, but they need the backing of the law and a powerful deterrent to prevent the craze of’ hotting’from becoming a permanent feature of life in British towns and on estates.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn
My hon. Friend spoke of’ our nation’, which includes a place called Scotland.
Those new crimes are not occurring in Scotland — but if they were, there would be no difficulty in charging a person with reckless driving under the Road Traffic Act 1988, or, under common law, with assault to the danger of life, which should, if necessary, carry a penalty of life imprisonment.
Am I being told that the law of England is so deficient that, if one assaults a person by driving a car at them to the danger of that person's life or property — whether or not one damages either — that is not a crime known to the common law of England, and would it not attract the most condign penalties?
Mr. Shersby
My hon. and learned Friend makes an extremely valuable point.
I am glad that he has drawn the attention of the House to the situation in Scotland and to the law of Scotland, which in so many ways is superior to that of England.
Although the Police Federation welcomes the Bill, it would prefer the basic offence of taking away without consent possibly to incur the same penalty as was available until 1988, of up to three years' custodial sentence.
The Bill does not propose that: it proposes only that those who cause injury or damage shall be liable to imprisonment for up to two years — or, if it is proved that an accident caused death, of up to five years.
Over the past few days, police officers have asked me why a community has to wait until someone is injured or killed before an offender is sent to prison for a lengthy period.
For most juveniles who steal cars and engage in’ hotting’, the maximum penalty will remain a six-month custodial sentence — although, as my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary said this afternoon, the fine will increase next year to £5,000.
I doubt whether many young people will be deterred by a fine of £1,000 or £5,000, because they do not have that kind of money available.
However, it will be interesting to see whether, under the Criminal Justice Act 1991, their parents will have some liability, and perhaps exercise more supervision over their youngsters than they have in the past.
Mr. John Patten
Is my hon. Friend aware that, under the Criminal Justice Act 1991, the parents of convicted children will leave themselves liable to meeting an unlimited fine, as levied by a Crown court, if their children cannot themselves pay?
That will act as a considerable encouragment to greater parental responsibility.
Mr. Shersby
I am aware of that provision, to which I was referring before I gave way to my right hon. Friend — and I hope that it will be widely understood by parents throughout the country.
For the first time, to anything like that extent, parents are liable for the criminal activities of juveniles.
The Bill also imposes an automatic one-year driving ban, but I cannot help wondering how many young people will be deterred by that — particularly as many of them drive without a licence anyway.
The police know that’ hotting’, ram-raiding, and related offences are committed by a comparatively small number of people, many of whom are persistent young criminals.
Surely the threat of a custodial sentence would be a stronger deterrent — as it was before 1988 — in addition to the longer sentences for which the Bill provides.
The Government give as reason for not reverting to the 1988 arrangements the small number of convictions previously secured.
I believe that the real problem was that, before 1988, magistrates were under pressure from the Home Office not to award custodial sentences.
If the will had been there and secure accommodation and prison accommodation had been available, I suggest that magistrates would have applied the law in the way that was intended when that legislation was passed.
I am told that, even today, most juveniles are cautioned or sentenced to community service, or receive a discharge because magistrates remain reluctant to award custodial sentences.
However, in so many cases, the police and the courts are dealing with persistent reoffenders rather than with first-time offenders, for whom a caution or community service would be an appropriate penalty.
I turn to the taking away of children.
Does my right hon. Friend consider that the Bill's provisions will deter the kind of thief who stole Mr. Peter Brown's BMW from a garage forecourt while Mr. Brown's infant daughter was in the back seat?
According to Martin Newland's article in The Daily Telegraph today, Mr. Brown turned his back on his car for less than one minute.
Mercifully, his car was abandoned three miles away, and two-year-old Natasha Brown was able to tell a passing couple that’ a naughty man’had taken the car.
The prospect of community punishment or even six months' imprisonment did not deter the thief in that case.
According to The Daily Telegraph, that was the latest in a series of incidents in which children were inadvertently taken by car thieves.
In another recent case, two-year-old James Austin, who had been left strapped into his baby seat by his mother, was driven away while she took some refuse to a rubbish dump some 50 yards from her parked car.
Luckily, he was reunited with his mother unharmed.
Were both offences aggravated taking away?
Perhaps my right hon. Friend the Minister will tell the House when he winds up.
Neither child was injured, and nor were the cars damaged.
I suppose that the thieves concerned could be charged with kidnapping or some other offence under common law.
Perhaps my right hon. Friend could clarify that point, because that danger is a cause of great concern to many parents.
It is proper for the Government to act promptly, early in this Session, to deal with the problem.
I understand the reservations expressed by hon. Members on both sides of the House about the speed with which the Bill is being enacted.
However, the offence is so serious, and parents and car owners are so concerned, that the House should not delay but ought to place the Bill on the statute book as soon as possible.
Mr. Andrew Smith (Oxford, East)
This matter is of the greatest concern to my constituents, many of whom are at their wits' end as to what can be done to halt the murderous menace of the theft and racing of cars in residential city streets.
I support the Bill, because anything that can add to the action that can be taken against car thieves is welcome.
Much more needs to be done.
The Bill is much too little and comes much too late.
It is, by itself, little more than window dressing on the part of the Government.
Anyone who believes that the Bill will really be effective in catching, punishing and deterring the criminals in question is living in cloud cuckoo land.
The extensive national media coverage in August and September of confrontations with the police left many of the wider public with a distorted picture of the problem.
Some of the media were interested only in portraying a violent image of Blackbird Leys.
I know the estate well, because I live there.
I place it on record that Blackbird Leys, Barton and the other parts of Oxford that are plagued by this menace are good places, with a terrific community spirit.
Decent people who are sick and tired of the criminal activities of the few deserve a much better portrayal by the national media and more support from Government.
On Saturday night, volunteers from Blackbird Leys community centre provided — as they do every year — a free dinner and social evening, drinks and gifts for 250 local pensioners.
They held a similar event back in the summer, when Blackbird Leys was in the headlines.
On neither occasion were the media at all interested in covering the good news; they were interested only in hyping up the bad news.
When I add that youngsters have reportedly been paid by film crews to put on displays in stolen cars and that a recent Channel 4 programme tried — ludicrously and dangerously — to suggest that the real problem was police brutality, hon. Members will have some idea of the anger felt by my constituents about the gross irresponsibility shown by some of the media.
They have let down the public and also let down colleagues who, in the local media and in some national programmes such as’ Newsnight’, have succeeded in giving a more accurate and balanced picture of events.
Now that the events of the summer are out of the headlines, some hon. Members, and members of the public who are not immediately affected, may imagine that the problem of theft and racing of cars has gone away.
Sadly, that is not so.
Reported car crimes in Oxford are running at 600 per month; car crime has doubled in the past four years, constituting one third of all crime reported in the city, and this year's figures are one third up on last year's.
Residents and police are in the front line of a war against hooliganism and car crime, including the displaying of stolen vehicles, which is now running at some 10 to 12 reported incidents per week.
They were at it last night, as they are nearly every night.
Just a week ago on Saturday, the secretary of our Headington Labour club, remonstrating with a thug outside her home, was knocked to the ground and beaten.
She, and all the other residents with the courage to stand up and defend decent values on behalf of their families and communities, deserve more support than they are receiving from the Government.
The police have taken action to combat the wave of car crime.
In the past three months, there have been some 150 arrests in Oxford for car theft.
I have the highest praise for the professionalism and dedication of the Oxford police and for the bravery that they have shown when confronted by ugly and sickening attacks.
Let there be no mistake: the Oxford public strongly support the police and they have our confidence.
It is evident, however, that the police are overstretched and are having to fight the rising tide of car crime with insufficient officers and with one hand tied behind their backs.
The Bill will barely scratch the surface of either problem.
If the law is to be effective, the criminals must know that the chance of their being caught is high, as is the chance of their being convicted; and that they are certain to receive a sentence that matches the severity of their crime.
Sadly, none of those factors applies today.
Even when their offences are of the ultimate gravity, some people are getting off far too lightly.
An example is the appalling tragedy of lorry driver Leslie Parsons, who was killed last February when he was just doing his job.
Let me quote from last Saturday's Oxford Mail:’ A teenager whose night of joyriding ended in the death of a lorry driver, was sent to a young offenders' institution for two years.
Alan Dawtrey was driving a Metro at about 80 mph on the wrong side of the road before it smashed into a lorry coming in the opposite direction, Oxford Crown Court heard.
Lorry driver Mr. Leslie Parsons, 51, lost control of the 28-ton lorry after colliding with the H-reg. car.
The lorry careered across the A423 Oxford to Henley road, hitting a second Metro before ploughing into the Harcourt Arms pub.
Mr. Parsons, of Fenny Compton, Warwickshire, a driver with Fine Lady Bakeries in Banbury, died from multiple injuries in the crash early on February 18.
The court was told that Dawtrey had been racing against the other Metro shortly before the crash in the village of Nuneham Courtenay, where there is a 40mph restriction.
Dawtrey, 18, of Boundary Brook Road, Oxford, who admitted causing death by reckless driving and five offences of taking vehicles without consent, was also banned from driving for four years.
The driver of the second Metro, Jamie Hughes of King's Lane, Harwell, was also convicted of causing death by reckless driving.
His sentence was adjourned for social inquiry reports.
Judge Leo Clark told Dawtrey it was a bad case, with a number of aggravating features which included running away from the scene in complete disregard for the lorry and its driver'.’
Surely it is clear to anyone who might imagine that we are discussing an activity that could legitimately be called’ joyriding’— from the incident that I have cited and from the horrors of the case in Liverpool, where a car ploughed into some children — just what a murderous evil that activity is.
I am fully aware of the importance of the independence of the courts and of the constraints that they face when sentencing juveniles.
I imagine that, in the case that I cited, the offender was given the maximum sentence that could be conferred for causing death by reckless driving; but, given normal remission and remission for good behaviour, there is every possibility that that young man will be freed after nine months in custody.
I cannot believe that many members of the public believe that that is justice, or that it conveys the right message to those who, tonight, will steal a car and race it in the path of some other innocent victim.
We should remember that causing death by reckless driving carries the same five-year maximum penalty as is included in the Bill.
The public will want to know how many people who are convicted will serve five years and how many will serve nine months.
As the hon. Member for Uxbridge (Mr. Shersby) pointed out, the courts and the public receive very confused and contradictory messages from the Home Office and from Ministers, whose words suggest that the police and the magistrates must be backed up, but whose actions have on occasion deprived them of the support that they need.
An example is the injunction on magistrates to do everything possible to keep people under 21 out of custody.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) said, some supervised car projects may be an effective alternative to custody; but do the Government give the probation service the resources that it needs to run such projects?
Why, in Oxford, has it been left so far to the police, the voluntary sector and private sponsorship to try to cobble together a scheme?
As my right hon. Friend asked earlier, when will the Home Office commit resources to that scheme?
Mr. John Patten
As the hon. Gentleman and I both have constituencies in the city of Oxford, I was interested to learn of the comparatively recent endeavours to introduce motor projects there.
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that the Home Office received the first application from Oxfordshire only last week, on 5 December?
It is under active consideration, however.
That application relates to the Oxfordshire motor project — which is aimed at those on probation, following conviction, unlike the diversionary projects to which the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) referred.
Mr. Smith
I hope that that means that support will be forthcoming.
My point is that, in general, the courts are under an injunction not to give custodial sentences to offenders under 21.
If the alternatives are to work, we must take care that they are not seen as a reward for those who become involved in such activities.
What about the kids who do not steal cars?
Where are the projects that might stop them from doing so in the first place?
Where the alternatives are to be provided, however, I believe that the Government are obliged, through the Home Office and the probation service, to fund them adequately.
Another example that illustrates the need for change is the diminished opportunity to pass deterrent sentences, not just in terms of the threat to society of a particular offender, but the threat to society that is posed by the crime at large in which these people are involved.
That important point is well argued in an article in’ Justice of the Peace’by Mr. T. G. Moore, who is deputy clerk to the justices in Nottingham.
He points out:’ A court faced with a young offender who has been involved in the taking of vehicles, even though it may be his third or possibly fourth appearance, cannot simply pass a deterrent sentence on the basis of the prevalence of such offending in the locality Section 1(4A) (b) of the 1982 Act deals with protecting the public from serious harm from the offender.
The importance of the amendment by the 1988 Criminal Justice Act was that it added the words from serious harm from him' to the end of the sentence only a custodial sentence would be adequate to protect the public'.
The case of R. v.
Jacobs and Kinsella makes it clear that the consideration which courts must now take into account is not whether a custodial sentence was necessary to protect the public from offenders generally of the same type, but whether it was necessary to protect the public from a particular offender.
This indicates that if the court's desire is to protect the public from persons who take vehicles without the owner's consent, that is by a sense of general deterrence, then this particular criterion of the Criminal Justice Act will not be applicable The question posed for the courts must be whether taking a vehicle without consent can ever, as an individual offence, be so serious that a non-custodial sentence cannot be considered.
It is on this point, that the ordinary member of the public and, it is suspected, the average police officer finds it difficult to equate his own perception of the offence of taking without consent with the strictures placed upon the courts by legislation.’
We are responsible for legislation.
We have to take account of that article and ask what difference the Bill will make in this respect.
The answer is that it will make no difference at all.
Even with such opportunities as the Bill presents to get cases into the Crown court, where the offence involves only damage to vehicles or property — the vast bulk of cases — it is the value of the damage to property, as set out in clause 2, that is the criterion, not the extent of the nuisance and danger, although that is the real problem with which we need to get to grips.
To get such cases to the Crown court will therefore involve further cost to victims and trouble to the police in obtaining estimates from garages, builders and so on.
An element of bureaucratic waste is built into the Bill.
I support the measure, but for those reasons I have no confidence that the Bill will make more than a very small difference.
It is much too little much too late.
Why has it taken the Government so long to take even this inadequate action?
Local residents, the Thames Valley police and I were urging, long before the events of the summer, that something should be done.
The Government cannot say, as an excuse, that they did not know what was going on and how it could escalate.
I shall give some examples.
I raised what was happening — the racing and the attacks on police — at a meeting with the chief constable on 2 November 1990 at which the Foreign Secretary, the right hon. Member for Witney (Mr. Hurd), and the present Secretary of State for the Environment, the hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine), were present.
The Home Secretary was fully briefed about the position when he visited Cowley in May this year.
Again I stressed the seriousness of the matter and the need for more police officers at a meeting of Thames valley Members of Parliament which the Home Secretary was supposed to take, but which Lord Ferrers took instead, on 23 July this year.
The Home Office took more than six weeks even to respond to the points made, by which time the situation in my constituency had already exploded out of control.
Home Office Ministers fiddled while tyres and a few petrol bombs burned.
If the Government had listened to the police and taken prompt action on any of those warnings — action for which they could have secured all-party support — I have no doubt that some of this summer's tragedies would have been avoided.
Much more vigorous action than is provided for in the Bill is needed.
We need more police officers, urgent changes to sentencing policy and an end to the nonesense whereby attempting to steal a car and attempting to drive while disqualified are no longer arrestable offences.
Where the Government propose alternatives to custody, they must provide the resources to make them work.
As for the motor manufacturers, we need more progress and Home Office action to build on the excellent collaboration that the Rover Group has with Thames Valley police.
We also need Government investment to back up the youth services, teachers and parents so that the next generation of youngsters does not include a minority whose self-discipline, self-esteem and respect for their own future are so lacking that they get kicks from racing stolen cars or lobbing bottles at the police.
The first duty of the Government is to work with the people to ensure security and freedom from fear for the people.
This Home Secretary and this Government have failed that test.
The Bill should be supported, but unless a much more determined attack on the problem, and its roots, is launched, we shall, I fear, have to address at some point in the future an even more hideous nightmare than that which confronts us now.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
We on this side of the House agree with much of what the hon. Member for Oxford, East (Mr. Smith) said.
It is a rare example of ecumenism — on a day other than a Friday — across party lines.
However, before I so much as opened my mouth, the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) had attacked me.
He had the impertinence to berate me for knee-jerk reactions on behalf of the Government when he opposes absolutely everything that the Government do, however sensible it obviously is.
That is as genuine an example of a knee-jerk reaction as it is possible to get in this place.
The right hon. Gentleman does it every time and under any circumstances.
The right hon. Member for Sparkbrook — and, I suspect, many other Opposition Members — are against all deterrent sentences.
In addition, the right hon. Gentleman does not seem to be aware that, although potential joyriders may not read Hansard, the word about tough sentences having been imposed has a habit of getting around.
Anyway, if the right hon. Gentleman had remained in the Chamber, he would have realised that much of what he said was total nonsense, for reasons to which I shall turn in a moment.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary on taking action against death riders — I agree with those who have already said that that is a much better way to describe these offenders who are not joyriders — and others who think that it is good fun to take somebody's car and drive it dangerously, thereby damaging property and sometimes killing people, thus causing appalling misery to those whose lives may be wrecked in the process.
The public will be thankful to my right hon. Friend for his timely action, following the recent bout of appalling abuse in Oxford and the north of England and the immense misery that this atrocious behaviour has caused.
It is also important that we should all realise that surveys show that a quarter of all stolen cars are used for death riding, just as a quarter of all car thefts happen to unlocked vehicles — which is our fault.
There is no reason why we should not lock our vehicles when we leave them and thus prevent that crime.
My right hon. Friend's action at large— to spur manufacturers to action to improve security — is also very welcome, as is his acknowledgement of the Government's role.
If we can give tax concessions for unleaded petrol to improve the environment, surely we should not be aghast at the prospect of tax concessions to secure that alarms are fitted in our cars and that some protection is provided to stop a lot of this senseless crime.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on identifying the fact that, apart from the commission of the taking and driving away offence, there is an additional factor that arises when injury and damage are caused, but that there is no adequate deterrent penalty for that aspect of the offence.
However, deterrence will exist only when young people can be locked up in secure accommodation: if they cannot be locked up, all this will be a waste of time.
Having said all that, I am afraid that I cannot be as enthusiastic about the Bill as I should like.
We support and accept the good sense of increasing sentences for offences that are worse than taking and driving away and of extending the deterrent of disqualification where personal injury and damage occurs, but it is quite another thing for someone to be guilty of additional offences that he does not commit, to which he is not a party and which he might not have foreseen as the likely consequences of his taking and driving away.
How would that occur?
It would arise where a defendant could not prove, on the balance of probabilities, that his story was correct, that someone else was responsible for causing personal injury or damage to the vehicle taken or to other vehicles and articles, and that he was not a party to the offence.
It would arise where, for example, the original taker and driver away was arrested, but after he had left the car and was going to have no more to do with it.
He may not be able to call upon the driver who took over the car to support his defence and to help him discharge the balance of probabilities in his favour, because that driver would not want to expose himself to the criminal charges of aggravated car theft.
In the environment in which these cases occur, witnesses are young and can easily be intimidated.
The accused also might not be able to call witnesses who saw the damage-causing driver, because that driver may have terrified the witnesses to prevent them from giving evidence.
That seems to be the stuff of which miscarriages of justice are made.
I appreciate that the number of cases in which the taker and driver away is not the driver who goes on to cause personal injury or damage will be comparatively few, but I ask my right hon. Friend whether it is necessary to make such a draconian change in the traditional principles of British law, or to do it by reversing the normal burden of proof.
Clause 1(3) says:’ A person is not guilty of an offence under this section if he proves’.
Will my right hon. Friend reconsider whether this part of the Bill is necessary?
I support the intention of the Bill and its important deterrent aspects, and I shall support it for the same reason as the hon. Member for Oxford, East, but I must confess that I do so with some reluctance at this stage.
Mr. Donald Anderson (Swansea, East)
If the hon. and learned Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) had been here for the speech of my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley)
Hon. Members
He was here.
Mr. Donald Anderson (Swansea, East)
If he had been listening, then, he would have heard my right hon. Friend's point about the lay-by.
Having said that, the hon. and learned Member for Burton makes a good point: it would offend against the views of ordinary persons and would be a crying sense of injustice if people who were not party to the aggravated crime and who had sought to distance themselves from it were found guilty because the balance of probabilities had fallen on them to prove their innocence.
Anyone who has practised at the Bar knows well that, in the sort of case that arises on an estate, where a number of people are involved, intimidation is such that it may prove impossible for a young man to find witnesses to say that he had left the scene of the crime and that another person was guilty of aggravated theft.
Any amendment to the law that provides an aggravated penalty for someone who could not have foreseen that for which he is sentenced must be wrong.
The Government must find an answer to that key point, which was made by the hon. and learned Member for Burton, who has long experience at the Bar, and by my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook.
The Bill is an attempt to respond to widespread public concern.
No one doubts that concern or that the offence is prevalent.
Almost daily, my local newspaper, the South Wales Evening Post, publishes examples of what used to be called taking and driving away — joyriding.
There is a graveyard for cars at Kilvey hill, where young men drive cars that they have taken without authority and then burn them.
There is an immense feeling of anger among ordinary members of the public at the extent to which they are inconvenienced, and they are crying out for something to be done.
Magistrates are under a constraint not to send young people to prison.
There is the problem of general deterrence, which my hon. Friend the Member for Oxford, East (Mr. Smith) set out in his excellent speech on behalf of his constituents.
Surely the Lord Chancellor should have issued guidance to justices on the tariff for sentencing in such cases.
The House may be interested to learn that hon. Members who represent south Wales constituencies hold fairly regular meetings with the south Wales constabulary.
The main item on the agenda of our last meeting was joyriding.
We saw several videos that the police had taken from helicopters showing the nature of the driving of some young drivers and the constraints on police in pursuing them, particularly in built-up areas.
Guidelines have been issued to them on the point at which they must desist from the chase because of danger to the public.
They expressed various other concerns, few of which are addressed in the Bill.
Although we must respond to the offence, we must avoid the’ Something must be done’syndrome and ensure that we do not lash out wildly in some public relations exercise.
Why must the Bill be completed today?
Why do the Government reject the argument that even a Home Office Bill is capable of improvement?
A Special Standing Committee could hear the views of practitioners, police officers and others on how the Bill could be improved.
Is the Home Office alleging or claiming that an emergency has arisen since the Conservative party conference, that the Bill must be completed in one day and that it is inconceivable that it could be improved in Committee?
That is an arrogant view to take of the Bill.
If there is such an emergency, why is there not a similar Bill for Scotland?
Do the Government contend that the emergency is confined to England and Wales and somehow stops at the border?
The legal situation in Scotland differs from that in England and Wales.
Section 178 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 applies in Scotland, rather than section 12(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
Will the Government give an assurance that there will be a similar attempt to alter the law in Scotland if there is an emergency there?
Penalties in Scotland also differ from those in England and Wales.
In Scotland, the penalty for a summary offence is three months' imprisonment or a fine, but not both.
On indictment, the maximum sentence under section 178 of the 1988 Act is 12 months.
Why is there a difference?
If the emergency is so important, why are not the penalties for these aggravated offences equally applicable in Scotland?
As a Conservative Member asked in an intervention, if there is an adequate remedy under existing law, why is there a void in the current law in England and Wales?
Surely the Government must either say that the position in Scotland is essentially different from that in England and Wales or provide a timetable within which they will aim to introduce equivalent legislation in Scotland.
There are other differences in penalties between England and Wales and Scotland with which we should deal.
We must ask ourselves: who are the perpetrators of these offences, and what are their motives?
As several hon. Members have asked, are these individuals, who typically are young men in their teens, likely to be deterred by the changes brought about by the Bill?
The south Wales constabulary interviewed young men who had committed these offences and the factors involved were set out.
The plus factors included the kicks that those people got from driving in that way.
One of the minus factors was clearly the risk of being caught and the associated penalty.
How do we ensure that there is a much greater chance of catching those young men and adequately dealing with them?
Is that matter addressed by the Bill?
The key question was put forcefully and eloquently by my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook: is the lack of an adequate penalty the root of the problem, or can we tackle the matter in other ways — for example, by extending motor schemes in the way he described?
My hon. Friend the Member for Oxford, East said that such schemes should be available not only for those who have already committed offences but for young people who might be tempted to do so, perhaps for kicks.
Extending schemes, as suggested by my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook, would be a cost-effective way of dealing with the problem.
I am afraid that we are assuming too much from this proposed change and that it is a little too simplistic — a sort of professional defamation from those who believe that applying law and order is the only way of solving what are, in part, deep-seated social problems.
The issue is much more multi-layered than that.
There are other key considerations, one of which is the near-certainty of detection.
In this respect, police manpower levels are important.
There was great astonishment and anger in south Wales when we heard by letter of 28 November 1991 the news that the Home Secretary was unwilling to agree any additional manpower for the South Wales police authority in 1992-93.
The letter boasted:’ the South Wales Police has received approval for 99 extra police posts since the Government took office, with actual strength increasing by 198 — or 7 per cent.
— over that period.’
That 7 per cent.
must be put in the context of the more than 100 per cent.
increase in this type of crime.
I certainly would not boast about that 7 per cent.
Like everyone in the area covered by the South Wales police authority, I must ask why built-up urban areas such as Cardiff and Swansea will pass this Christmas — with all the great temptations offered to young people at that time — and go through 1992-93 with no increase in police manpower.
A wide range of powers are already available under statute law to combat this crime.
Maximum sentences could be increased.
As several hon. Members have said, the changes brought about by the 1988
Act — making this crime only a summary offence — should be reconsidered.
If the Government are concerned about public expenditure and court time, will they make offences under section 12(1) of the 1968 Act indictable, rather than purely summary, offences for people who are making a second or subsequent court appearances?
The Bill does not deal with other key matters.
If the Government wanted to reduce the number of obstacles that prevent prosecution of offenders, thereby making convictions more certain, they would alter the mens rea principle under section 12(1) of the 1988 Act and import the term’ knowing or believing’from section 22 of that Act.
That would put a lighter burden on the prosecution, and improve the chances of convicting an offender.
Had the Government not thought that they could get the Bill passed without the House having a serious attempt to debate or qualify it, those matters could have been discussed with experts.
Our police forces have another major complaint about the Bill.
They say that it does not deal with the problem of people who persistently reoffend while on bail.
My local police force has given me remarkable examples of young people in the south Wales constabulary area who have persistently reoffended.
In South Glamorgan, over a period of a year, a 15-year-old male took 15 cars and was involved in six house burglaries, one handling offence and six thefts.
The most that that young man received was a supervision order for one year.
I shall not bore the House with the details of another case, but I shall summarise it.
In West Glamorgan, a juvenile male was found guilty between the ages of 13 and 15 of offences involving 45 takings of cars, but it was only towards the end that he received a custodial sentence.
One can well understand the anger and frustration of the police force.
In another case in Mid Glamorgan, a young man between the age of 11 and 16 — I pass over six or seven pages of antecedents — was involved in 32 burglaries, 34 thefts, 15 offences of criminal damage and 41 offences involving motor vehicles, but the most severe penalty that he received was a supervision order for 12 months.
He gaily continued to offend and reoffend, to the point where the police wondered whether it was worth bothering to pick him up.
Those are the problems that face our police force.
In 1990, 20 per cent.
of detected crime in Mid Glamorgan was committed by juveniles.
In South Glamorgan, that figure was 17 per cent.
of the total, and in my area of West Glamorgan, the figure was more than 22 per cent.
However, the police ask how the Government are helping them to deal with those who persistently offend.
What happens when the police do detain such individuals?
Should not more secure units be available for those juveniles while they are on remand?
Some investment is at last being made in south Wales in that respect.
Other issues with which I shall not detain the House but which have been mentioned by other hon. Members include the design of motor vehicles, the admirable Which? survey, the question of insurance and rewarding those who take adequate precautions to secure their vehicles by having the means to immobilise them in case of theft, safety improvements and cases such as those in Swansea, where, for example, the local authority has now put attendants in several of the key car parks.
The authority charges people to park there but the editor of my local papar — The South Wales Evening Post — said on 3 December:’ Many people will be pleased, and reassured, that Swansea City Council appears to be moving towards a policy of providing attendants for selected car parks.’
The paper went on the say that such a move would at least give the people who came into the city centre greater reassurance, even if they had to pay for the privilege.
The Government must deal with the issue of making crime more difficult for the young people who are tempted to perpetrate it, and local authorities can also help.
Clearly, the Bill is a step forward, by and large.
It is an attempt to deal with a prevalent problem, but I fear a distortion — the Government are considering only one aspect of the issue.
They are not attempting to modify the existing law in ways which would help the prosecution.
I have mentioned some ways in which section 12(1) of the Theft Act 1968 might be amended.
I have also mentioned the question of indictment after the first court appearance, and other hon. Members have suggested other means to tackle the problem.
However, it would be wrong for the Government to hype the Bill too much, and to raise expectations which they certainly cannot meet.
Mr. Michael Irvine (Ipswich)
The right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) delivered what I thought was a curiously muddled speech.
Mr. John Patten
Characteristically muddled.
Mr. Irvine
I shall confine myself to’ muddled’.
In the fist half of his speech, the right hon. Gentleman complained that the Bill was irrelevant, that it did nothing, that it was wholly superfluous and was simply aimed at the headlines.
In the second half, he suddenly changed tack.
Far from arguing that the Bill did nothing, he argued that it was too draconian.
He criticised the changing of the evidential requirements and complained that the burden of proof has been reversed in certain important respects.
He also attacked the provisions for automatic disqualification.
Such a muddled approach is symptomatic of a tendency, among all too many people who should know better, to treat the taking and driving away of vehicles as a less serious offence than it is.
It is such loose, flaccid and irresponsible thinking which has led to the widespread use of the offensive term’ joyriding’.
Such thinking was behind the absurd argument that the police should be restrained from giving hot pursuit to stolen cars, and it also lay behind much of the nit-picking objection to the Bill that we heard from the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook.
For many people — if not most — their car is, after their home, their most valuable piece of property.
When their car is taken, they suffer, at the very least, considerable inconvenience and very often substantial financial loss.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary stated that as many as 40 per cent.
of all vehicles taken and driven away unlawfully are damaged when returned to their owner.
If a car is unlawfully taken and then returned in a damaged state, it seems absolutely right that the person or persons responsible for taking it should be assumed to be responsible for causing the damage unless they can prove the contrary.
After all, they removed it from the custody of its owner and, prima facie, they should bear the responsibility for any damage which occurs between that time and the owner getting it back.
Some hon. Members may think that that is unfair, but I believe that car owners whose vehicles have been taken would think differently.
The unlawful taking and driving away of vehicles goes well beyond damage to property.
Car thieves are usually young and unused to driving the particular car that they have taken, and they are usually attracted to high performance cars.
That is a lethal combination.
’ Lethal’is the right word.
A few years ago, a Government publication entitled’ Practical Ways to Crack Crime’stated:’A stolen car is about 200 times more likely to be involved in an accident than the same car driven by its owner.’
The unlawful theft of cars all too often leads to injury and death.
We know that legislation alone cannot provide a remedy, but it can make convictions easier to obtain.
It can increase deterrents.
It can single out for special treatment the special aggravating features of a crime.
The Bill does exactly that, and I believe that it deserves the support of the House.
Mr. David Clelland (Tyne Bridge)
I begin with an apology to my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), the Home Secretary and other hon. Members who spoke before I entered the Chamber.
My late arrival was entirely due to an unenjoyable ride on British Rail.
I must apologise if I repeat some of the points already made — I do not expect that I shall, except perhaps in my introduction.
In 1990, nearly 500,000 vehicles were stolen in the United Kingdom — one every minute of the night and day.
Some 30,000 vehicles were stolen in Northumbria alone, and more than 770,000 thefts were reported from vehicles.
Insurers paid out nearly £500 million for car theft claims.
Nearly one third of all recorded crimes were due to thefts from or of motor vehicles.
About one quarter of missing vehicles were never recovered.
A stolen car is 200 times more likely to be involved in an accident than one driven by its owner.
At least three car owners out of every 20 have experienced theft from their vehicles, and it takes as little as four seconds for a car thief to break into a car without a key.
Mr. Clelland
The wheel clamp is extremely useful, because it is visible.
Potential thieves are put off because they can see that it would be difficult to steal the car.
I am not sure whether a wheel clamp would be particularly attractive to owners in inclement weather, but does my hon. Friend agree that, if a device is visible, inside or outside a car, it acts as a valuable deterrent?
Mr. Thompson
Yes.
I hope that the Home Secretary will consider all the suggestions that have been made in this sensible debate.
The debate has been marred only by the snide remarks of the hon. Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham) about my hon. Friend the Member for Tottenham (Mr. Grant).
This issue has generated cross-party support and those remarks were a bit off, given what we are trying to achieve.
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
I support the aims of the Bill, and I shall vote for it tonight.
I want to concentrate on whether it will provide a sufficiently good means of dealing with young people.
As we heard from my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary, the maximum penalty for someone aged 16 or 17 is subject to a ceiling of one year.
However, if one takes off time for remission and good behaviour, one is left with a sentence of four months.
We are often talking about young people who have been through the entire menu of alternatives to imprisonment before they are sent to a young offenders institution, formerly known as a detention centre.
The penalty offers little deterrent to those youngsters.
In the summer, I visited my local crime prevention panel and the police to discuss this matter.
I was told of one particular youngster in Stockton-on-Tees who has been arrested and charged no fewer than 17 times this year.
He has been convicted of car crimes 16 times and had one charge pending at the time of our discussions three months ago.
The last time that that young person went into secure accommodation in Middlesbrough, he went in through the front door at 3.30 pm, and at 5.30 pm he disappeared out the back door and stole a car to make his escape.
He was rounded up about a week later, having stolen four more vehicles.
That one 14-year-old has been responsible for the loss of cars to the value of £2.5 million in the last year alone.
The superintendent of police in my area has told me that, were we to round up about 150 people in the county of Cleveland, it would eradicate about 80 per cent.
of all car crime, which itself constitutes about 60 per cent.
of total crime in the county.
Two types of car crime offenders concern us.
First, there are those juveniles who steal and wreck fast cars.
They are the death riders or joyriders — just stupid and irresponsible people.
Above that is a thin veneer of hard cases, who continue offending into their twenties.
They are the people to whom the Bill will have some relevance.
There are many other hon. Members present from the north-east, who have struggled down on British Rail to participate in this debate because we have seen in recent months horrifying scenes on our televisions.
They include high-speed chases through densely packed suburban areas, filmed from the air by helicopters.
At the crime prevention panel, I watched a video of a police chase through the centre of Middlesbrough, in which a 14-year-old drove a Vauxhall Astra at 90 miles per hour on the wrong side of the road, weaving in and out of oncoming traffic.
That offender damaged no fewer than eight vehicles, and the police gave up the chase on four separate occasions because it was too dangerous to continue pursuing the stolen vehicle at various stages.
The situation is getting completely out of hand.
In the north-east, we also saw on our televisions a gentleman — if one can call him that — being interviewed after the death of his son in a 90-mph crash involving a stolen car on the outskirts of Newcastle.
That father said,’ No, my son wasn't a joy rider.
He was a professional car thief.
He was one of the best in the business.’
Many hon. Members are nodding, because they remember that interview.
Our constituents were horrified that the media should have given such a person a platform, and that the father's attitude was so wholly irresponsible.
What are we to do?
The Bill makes a good start, but it is only a start.
It does not deal with hard-core, habitual car thieves — most of whom are in their teens, and who will grow out of it by their mid-twenties.
I am told by the probation service, social workers, educationists, and those involved in the youth offenders institute in my constituency that the turning point comes in the late teens, when such offenders get a regular girl friend and decide that it is about time that they acted a little more responsibly.
However, in that window between the ages of 13 and 17, there are some dangerous young men who will not be taught any lessons until they are contained.
I would like the Bill to contain a first offence penalty of a six-month custodial sentence — with no remission and no time off for good behaviour — in a properly funded and managed institution.
A second offence would merit two six-month sentences; a third, three six-month sentences, and so on.
If the individual kept on offending, he would simply be given six months' custodial sentence for each offence — not to run concurrently, but consecutively.
Then, a youngster who stole three cars would go to a young offenders institution for one and a half years.
I am told by those who have responsibility for the care and custody of young people that they can actually do something with them over that period — but little can be achieved with a young man in one or two months.
He returns to the same circumstances as before, to associate with the same peer group, and starts behaving the same way as before.
I have written at great length to my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary.
I emphasise that juvenile crime is not the same as adult crime.
I once defended a juvenile on a charge of reckless driving, and he was banned from driving for two years after being found guilty of the most horrific driving at night without lights.
As I pulled out of the court car park into the road afterwards, I was almost rammed by some genius in a gold Capri.
It was none other than the juvenile that I had just been defending.
The way such people behave is quite unbelievable.
We must recognise the essential difference between juvenile crime and adult crime, and start to treat it seriously.
The opposition to the Bill that we have heard tonight, to the effect that it will make such offences more difficult to prove, will not go down well in the country.
The public want the House to do something serious about the problem.
I doubt that the public will think that the Bill goes far enough — but it makes a good start.
Sir Giles Shaw (Pudsey)
I apologise to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Home Department for being unable to attend at the start of the debate, due to the aggravated taking of British Rail, which took three hours to take me from York to the metropolis.
I am none the less glad to make a short contribution to the cross-party connection in support of the Bill.
Right hon. and hon. Members in all parts of the House agree that something must be done, and quickly.
I agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin) that the Bill is a rapid reaction to the tip of what is obviously a substantial iceberg — and rightly, because the extent of public anger had to be addressed.
The iceberg is the result of a rapid rise in vehicle theft by young persons which goes back some time.
It is at its most active in urban areas such as my constituency, the metropolitan city of Leeds, and other big cities such as Newcastle, Bradford and Manchester, whose Members of Parliament have contributed to the debate.
Figures from the police forces of North and West Yorkshire show the astonishing rate at which vehicle theft has risen.
In 1990-91, the six-monthly average for vehicle thefts in West Yorkshire was 20,900.
Between 1989-90, there was a 53 per cent.
increase in recorded vehicle theft offences in the county and the number recorded in the Leeds metropolitan district rose by 85 per cent.
There is a disturbing trend for younger children to involve themselves in that kind of crime.
In 1989, 19 per cent.
of all those convicted of vehicle theft were aged under 17.
So far this year, the figure has risen to 27 per cent.
West Yorkshire police statistics suggest that the peak age for the offence of taking a vehicle without consent is 15.
That is the outrageous undercurrent against which the real bravados — the macho bunch — have participated in so-called joyriding or death riding.
That is a dangerous cult and it must be dealt with harshly.
Between July and October this year in Leeds, two children aged under 10 came to the attention of the police for vehicle theft offences.
The Bill does not attempt to address that aspect — and understandably so, because the problem must be dealt with in a short and concise way.
Many devices and initiatives are available, but the view of West Yorkshire's chief constable is this:’ It is interesting to note that the upsurge in vehicle crime began in earnest in 1989.
It may be no coincidence that just prior to this the Criminal Justice Act 1988 reduced the unauthorised taking of motor vehicles to a summary offence, triable only at magistrates courts.
Following this reduction to a less serious' offence, sentencing policy seems to be that the offence of taking vehicles without consent is not in isolation deemed to be serious enough to attract a custodial sentence.
In consequence, young offenders may take many cars and never face the prospect of a deterrent sentence.’
That point was well made by my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South.
The chief constable adds:’ The proposed legislation to deal with aggravated taking of vehicles is most welcomed as recognition that there is a real problem to be addressed.
I am left wondering, however, whether it will address the basic problem of the volume of car crime committed, particularly by significant numbers of young offenders who are not dealt with in a way that effectively deters their criminal activities.’
There are only three reasons for the Bill.
First, we have seen a rapid growth of horrendous proportions in the incidence of this crime.
Secondly, the Home Secretary and his colleagues have found a way in which to deal with the problem swiftly and, I believe, to remove the uppermost element.
Thirdly, the Bill has received all-party support, which has enabled us to deal with it in the current Session.
I am bound to say, however, that the Bill does nothing to deter younger vehicle takers — and it will stand or fall according to its deterrent qualities.
We do not want to see a massive amount of custodial sentencing, although we are glad that provision is made for it; what we do want is a reduction in the number of people who participate in such a horrendous cult and in the equally horrendous statistics relating to youngsters who take cars, go to court and then take more cars.
Mr. Tony Marlow (Northampton, North)
I support the Bill because it seeks to address a serious problem, but I believe that that problem is greater than it appears to be.
My right hon. Friend will not be surprised to learn that I speak from gut reaction rather than a detailed knowledge of the law or the statistics, but I believe that my gut reaction is shared by the vast majority of people in this country.
Over the past few years, there has been a massive increase in hooligan crime — crime perpetrated by maladjusted, ill-disciplined adolescents: vehicle theft, theft from vehicles, vandalism, mugging and, at a lower level, intimidatory cycling on modern pedestrian estates, which is very disturbing for residents.
In short, young hooligans are terrorising and destroying the neighbourhoods in which they live.
At the weekend, a constituent came to see me.
A neighbour's child had been breaking my constituent's windows, hurling abusive language and stealing property at will.
The youth in question had been before the courts, but was still at large.
The police had been round to have a supportive chat; there was nothing else that they could do in the circumstances.
While a police constable was in the living room, the car parked outside was being daubed by the youth.
How much worse the problem must be in our larger inner-city areas, whose suffering has recently been laid bare by the national press.
The fact that it is concentrated in the poorer areas is no justification for such behaviour, for which there can be no justification; it increases the urgency of the need to find a solution.
Until the blight is eradicated, no one will wish to employ people from the areas where this menace exists, and the poor will become poorer.
Of course there are people who come from disadvantaged backgrounds; of course we must do what we can about it.
Sadly, however, there will always be people from disadvantaged backgrounds and there will always be a few people — many of them not from disadvantaged backgrounds — with strong and perverted personalities, who, through macho perversity, gain satisfaction from bullying and terrorism.
The influence of their degradation is way beyond their puny numbers.
Where the problem exists in one part of the country, or in one community, it is greatly magnified through the small screens in the sitting room, which multiply that problem by stimulating its imitation.
The situation is becoming worse, not better.
This is a useful Bill, but it papers over only one crack.
To be effective, justice must deter and it must be swift; at present, it is neither.
Manifestly, we have no effective deterrent for hooligan crime, or we would not be debating the issue.
What about fines?
Fines — for people with no jobs and no money?
My right hon. Friend the Minister rightly said that their parents could be fined, but some parents have less control over their children than Robert Maxwell's children had over their fraudulent father.
What about prison?
Should we send such people to prison, so that they can learn how to become professional criminals?
In the majority of cases, neither society nor the youths in question would be served by that.
What about community service?
In some cases, yes; but, in general, the people with whom we are concerned would not be deterred.
We require a proper deterrent and I am increasingly of the view that we need some threat of pain and humiliation to purge people of the pseudo-macho personalities that cause the problem.
The realisation must be forced on the’ big man’that, in reality, he is a little man.
Last week in the House, I suggested that such people should be given a sound thrashing.
I believe that my suggestion caused something of a stir.
I am not sure why; perhaps it was due to the appreciation that, in the country as a whole, the idea would — not surprisingly — gain considerable support.
It is done; it is over; it is finished.
It is a deterrent.
I wonder how the young Napoleons who terrorise their neighbourhoods would react if they believed that, in the end, they would suffer a sound thrashing.
Alternatively, what about a kind of hooligan litter squad?
Perhaps hooligans should be attired in some drab and identifying dress and required to carry out repairs and clean up the areas in which their depredations have taken place.
William the Conqueror was a cruel and harsh ruler, and I do not suggest that we should harry the north; but during his reign, although people were fearful of the monarch, they were not fearful of their fellow citizens.
There may be a moral here: perhaps we need a touch of barbarism to secure civilisation.
We must also have swifter justice.
A large proportion of these anti-social crimes are committed by young people who are on bail or yet to be tried — people who laugh at the law while continuing to break it.
Notwithstanding the striking lessons of the Birmingham Six and the other cases, I feel that we are in great danger of over-indulging civil libertarians at the expense of civil peace.
For one reason or another, either it is too long before the courts are available to try the cases, or the lawyers appear to require too much time to prepare the defence.
To say the very least, there is a suspicion that the legal system has been devised to suit the lawyers rather than to protect the public.
Justice without immediacy is justice perverted, not least when the guilty go free after a case has lapsed because the credibility of identity evidence has been undermined by delay.
I recently wrote to my right hon. Friend about a specific case.
I received an answer, but I am afraid that it was a long catalogue of half-measures and good intentions.
We need action — action this day.
It is fine for many of us, given the privileged lives that we lead; it is hell for many of our citizens and we owe them a great deal more urgency than is provided by this useful but inadequate measure.
Mr. Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield)
It is a pleasure to speak in the debate, although it is a little depressing that some hon. Members should despair of finding any real answers to the problem.
After all, law and order has collapsed in this country.
The crime rate has doubled in the past 12 years, and there has been a whirlwind of crime committed by young people: 50 per cent.
of all crime, and 75 per cent.
of burglary, is carried out by them.
That is very worrying.
Surely a Government's job is to address the overall rise in crime that has taken place while they have been in office, and also to deal with this new phenomenon — the amazing increase in youth crime.
If we consider only the superficial elements of these changes in society, and deal with the problem purely at the level at which the Bill deals with it, we shall not do justice to the House or to the people of this country.
Although we support elements of the Bill, we want to modify it; that is why we have tabled amendments, which we hope will improve it.
We had considerable reservations last week about the Prison Security Bill: we felt that our debate missed the opportunity to create a real piece of penal reform — legislation that would change our penal system radically, along the lines of the Woolf report.
We do not have great enthusiasm for the Bill.
We believe that it is a missed opportunity for tackling the deep-seated causes of crime.
The Aggravated Vehicle-Taking Bill follows a course that we have come to expect from the Home Secretary and the Government.
When a matter of serious public concern arises which leads to a great deal of media interest, someone in central office says,’ We must show that something is being done.’
To the horror of Home Department civil servants, they suddenly receive an order from the Home Secretary, to the effect that a quick fix is needed to make it look as though something is being done.
This, therefore, is a quick fix Bill.
Car theft is a matter of great public concern.
More than half of all recorded crimes are car crimes, involving the theft of vehicles or the theft of property from vehicles.
These offences are very much in the public eye, due to the appalling scenes that we saw on television.
Oxford, Bristol — which I visited last week — and Newcastle are suffering great problems.
The appalling scenes that we saw on television were brought home to us there.
Some of the reporting was irresponsible.
With hindsight, it appears that disturbances in other towns and cities can be attributed to the copycat element.
Most people do not want such offences to be tolerated.
Councils that conduct local polls say that that is the primary concern.
Only a couple of months ago, I visited a major industrial city where a poll had taken place.
I was told that people in that city were more concerned about being able to live safely in their homes, not having their cars stolen, and not being burgled or mugged than about unemployment or any of the other big economic issues.
This is not a new offence.
It involves predominantly young people who have been involved in taking vehicles without consent for many years.
The problem, however, has become very much worse.
It is escalating and taking on worryingly new manifestations.
It is happening with many other crimes, as crime figures spiral out of control.
The tragedy is that the Government have stood idly by and done little to prevent youth crime in general and this aspect of youth crime in particular.
I draw the Government's attention to the Home Office standing conference on crime prevention, chaired by James Morgan, which reported in August this year.
The working party, chaired by James Morgan, studied crime prevention programmes.
Of youth crime, it said:’ Considering the significant contribution that young people make to the crime problem, both as victims and offenders, the working group was surprised by the lack of references to specific strategies for preventing crime by and against young people.’
That is an important point.
We know that almost half of all recorded crime is carried out by people under the age of 21, yet far from developing a strategy that focuses on youth, as other countries, such as France, have done, the Government have been involved in a war of attrition against young people.
I do not draw the simple conclusion that young people have been badly treated — as they have — during the last 12 years.
One only has to look at the halving of the value of the youth training allowance and the way in which young people between the ages of 16 and 18 can no longer claim benefit, including housing benefit.
Many of them have been forced into having no stake in society.
All that is true, but I do not say that young people who have been deprived in that way should go out and steal cars.
There is, however, a clear relationship, as the Home Office research and all the other research shows, between deprivation and crime.
The Home Secretary pointed out in the debate on the Metropolitan police that Sir Peter Imbert had said that the map of deprivation matched almost exactly the map of crime in London.
The Home Office's own research shows the same close relationship.
I have studied some interesting research which shows that, on previous occasions, the Home Secretary and the Minister of State have drawn a comparison with the depression in the 1930s.
They state that crime did not rise then, and they ask why it did not rise then.
The research now available shows that crime tripled between the two world wars, particularly at the time of the great depression.
There is therefore a clear relationship between deprivation and crime.
The training and employment opportunities available to young people have declined and benefit has been reduced.
The result has been a substantial increase in homelessness and deprivation.
We can see it on the streets of London.
Mr. Mills
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Sheerman
No, not for the moment.
I am trying to keep to a very strict timetable.
All those factors are linked to rising crime rates.
No doubt a Conservative Member will cite the 1930s, just as has happened in the past.
I refer Conservative Members to the research, and I hope that they will learn a little from it.
Painfully little has been done specifically to tackle car crime, which is a major aspect of youth crime.
This is even more depressing when one realises that in various parts of the country there are projects run by the probation service and the voluntary organisations which provide an alternative to custody.
Hon. Members in all parts of the House have said that these schemes are successful.
The hon. Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow) has some interesting ways of looking at the problem, but he did not look at the fact that there are proven ways of taking young people who have committed offences and giving them a chance to confront their criminality.
They become involved in schemes which allow them to use up their energy.
The schemes involve the use of motor vehicles off the road.
There is a high success rate.
All too often, when I visit successful schemes throughout the country, I find that they are about to announce that they cannot carry on, or that they cannot diversify or increase the take-up because the Government have not provided any money.
I visited a scheme in Kirklees, near my constituency, which wants to turn into a car project instead of remaining a motor cycle project, but there is no money available for that purpose, even though it is a proven, cost-effective way of deterring young people from continuing to commit this kind of car crime.
The Government have done little to encourage such schemes.
The Opposition believe that we should consider alternatives and the ability of magistrates to say that something must be done with first offenders and that an alternative can work.
Instead of a young person being sentenced to a period in custody, which means that it is all too likely that he or she will continue in a life of crime, become a professional criminal and never get out of the criminal world, the alternative makes both moral and economic sense.
Is it morally right to sentence a young person to a period in custody?
The Home Office has also been remiss about security devices, an important subject that has been debated at length today.
The hon. Member for Meriden (Mr. Mills) knows a lot about the car industry, but my patience with it is wearing a little thin.
Six years ago, the Prime Minister invited the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders to No. 10.
They told her that they would respond, but they have not done so.
If uniformly high standards were imposed, manufacturers would have to meet them.
Competition would be the same and vehicle security would rapidly improve.
That is what people want.
With the change of cars, higher security would soon be achieved.
Young people often steal the most attractive and new models rather than old bangers.
I have been told that, in some cities, if someone wants to ensure that their car is not tampered with or taken, they should buy the rustiest and least attractive car available.
Against the background of Government inertia, we have a Bill that will achieve little, because powers already exist to deal with the taking of a car and aggravating factors.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) said this afternoon, any passenger who encourages and any driver who recklessly drives causing injury or damage is guilty of reckless driving, which was renamed dangerous driving in the Road Traffic Act 1991 and is liable to two years imprisonment.
The offence of causing death by reckless driving carries a maximum of five years, manslaughter carries a maximum of life, and deliberately damaging a vehicle carries a maximum of 10 years.
One wonders what contribution the Bill will make.
I share the misgivings of my right hon. Friend the Member for Sparkbrook about the speed of the passage of the Bill.
Hurried legislation is never good legislation; there are many examples of that.
There are deep deficiencies in the drafting of the Bill.
The Opposition have tabled a cluster of amendments.
We hope that the Government will listen reasonably to them, because they have been tabled in a reasonable frame of mind and do not make party political points.
If the Government use their majority, the only guarantee of consideration is another place.
We do not think that that is good enough.
The Bill should have been investigated in Committee.
I say that with some feeling because, in the three years, that I have been doing this job I have not heard so many well-qualified solicitors and barristers, people from the legal community and inquests and from pressure groups say that there are areas of deep concern.
That is not an ideological or party-political point; real concern has been expressed by our professional associations and by those who practise in the courts.
They worry that the Bill will damage British justice.
The most worrying feature of the Bill is the issue of fault.
A passenger who is screaming to get out of a car, who is trying to stop a driver driving dangerously, will still be guilty of the aggravated offence.
If any damage is done or if any injury occurs after the initial taking while the car is being driven, the aggravated offence is committed, even if the car is being driven sensibly or carefully.
The car does not have to be driven recklessly.
If it was travelling at 20 mph and someone else recklessly drove into it, the aggravated offence would have been committed.
The situation is the same if someone walked in front of the car and the driver had no chance of stopping.
A defendant would be guilty of the offence if he took the car, abandoned it and someone else damaged it before it was recovered.
The chairman of the Bar Council, Mr. Tony Scrivener — I hope that the remarks of Conservative Members from a sedentary position are not an attack on the Bar Council, which I think all of us would regard as an important and esteemed body.
Mr. Tony Scrivener referred to the Bill.
If the Home Secretary would listen to more experts, he would probably be a better Home Secretary.
If he listened to Anthony Scrivener, he would be a darned sight better.
Interruption
Interruption
Anthony Scrivener referred to the Bill as unique in jurisprudence because a defendant can be guilty of the aggravated offence even though he does no other act than commit the basic offence, and the event which makes the crime aggravated is outside his or her control.
That is bad law, which will lead to miscarriages of justice, and we shall seek to amend it.
It was refreshing to hear the hon. and learned Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) express his misgivings about this part of the Bill.
I say again — this is not based on party acrimony — that we have severe reservations about two clauses, which must be given serious consideration today or in another place.
There is the important question of the reversal of the burden of proof.
The defendant has to prove that he was not in, or in the immediate vicinity of, a car rather than the prosecution having to prove that he was.
On the face of it, that seems to be in breach of article 6(2) of the European convention on human rights, which states that a person is innocent until proven guilty.
Have the Government taken legal advice?
The reversal of the burden of proof is wrong in principle and will lead to injustice.
Surely we have had enough problems in the British judicial system with miscarriages of justice.
As the hon. and learned Member for Burton said, that reversal could easily lead to miscarriages of justice that we could sort out now.
It should not be an issue between us.
I hope that the Minister of State will respond positively to my criticisms.
The use of the term’ in the immediate vicinity’will raise enormous problems.
What if the passenger gets out because he is terrified by what is going on and the car crashes at the next corner?
He is still in the immediate vicinity.
What if the passenger gets out half an hour before the crash, but the driver continues driving in the area and crashes near where the passenger is still standing talking to his mates?
The reversal of the burden of proof would also affect alibi evidence called on behalf of the accused.
In many cases, a disqualification will be appropriate.
We believe that that is right, but the court should have a discretion, particularly where no fault lies with the defendant.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
What?
Mr. Sheerman
Where perhaps a defendant has been a passenger and is not accused of reckless driving.
May I finish my argument?
Disqualification can have a counter-productive effect.
Young people with years of disqualification ahead of them have no opportunity to take part in motor projects, to drive legitimately and to channel enthusiasm into responsible behaviour.
The Minister will know from many of the schemes that he visits that one of the carrots that they hold out to young people is the ability to drive vehicles off road and eventually to train for a full licence.
That is often the spur which gets them back to a proper relationship with the almighty car.
There is a national crisis of youth crime, but the Bill does not deal with its roots.
If Dickens could come back and watch the debate, he would see that most of us are dwelling on the surface of the problem, while beneath the surface something is wrong in England and Wales.
Mr. Anderson
But not, apparently, in Scotland.
Mr. Sheerman
But not, apparently, in Scotland or in Northern Ireland.
There is something deeply wrong.
The Labour party has a crime prevention policy and a youth crime prevention policy which will begin to deal with that problem.
We shall support the Bill but we shall also try to amend it sensibly.
We do not believe that it is the full answer which could have been brought to the House.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
I shall not follow the hon. Member for Huddersfield (Mr. Sheerman) down every path of his argument, particularly the last third of his speech.
If the House so decides, we may be able to consider some of the detailed points during the debate on the four sets of amendments which will be considered in Committee.
This has been a good debate.
I say that because some lawyers have spoken — my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) and the hon. Member for Swansea, East (Mr. Anderson).
Most of us listened carefully to those hon. Members whose constituencies have been affected by this hooliganism — the hon. Members for Tyne Bridge (Mr. Clelland), for Wansbeck (Mr. Thompson) and for Hartlepool (Mr. Leadbitter).
I was particularly taken by a good phrase used by the hon. Member for Hartlepool, who suggested that we should stop using the word’ joyriding’— none of us in the House does so any longer, except in unspoken inverted commas.
My hon. Friend the Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow) said that we should refer to’ car hooliganism’, which is another exceptionally good phrase.
Much closer to home for me, we listened to the hon. Member for Oxford, East (Mr. Smith), who represents and lives in the Blackbird Leys part of Oxford.
I represent the other half and represented the area in which he now lives until the boundary commissioners so cruelly took it from me in 1983.
I begin by revisiting the arguments in the opening speeches about why we need the Bill.
When the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) kindly let me intervene, I said that the Bill, should it pass into law, would provide us with not only a deterrent but a punishment and a way of keeping repetitive car crime offenders off the streets.
We need to legislate on this offence because of an evidential difficulty, which is compounded in several ways.
It is compounded when several people are involved in the aggravated taking of a vehicle — my hon. Friend the Member for Meriden (Mr. Mills) said that such people were not content with being in a car but wanted to be in the boot as well— and by the speed and lethal power of the Cosworths and other vehicles which they steal.
It is difficult for the forces of law and order to identify who is responsible for what, as the hon. Member for Oxford, East saw in Oxford in the autumn.
It is also difficult to establish when the damage occurred.
There are three problems — of identification, of intent and of witnesses.
That is why we need the Bill.
The difficulties are demonstrated by a simple statistic — only6 per cent.
of the people who take without consent are charged with criminal damage, yet four out of every 10 vehicles returned to their unfortunate owners suffer substantial damage.
The right hon. Member for Sparkbrook and the hon. Member for Huddersfield spoke about the unintended consequences of people's actions, and I understand the worries about that matter.
That an offender can be held criminally liable for the unintended consequences of his or her actions is a well-established legal principle.
A person who attacks someone and who wishes to do grievous bodily harm but unfortunately kills his victim can be convicted of murder after due process.
Moving closer to home, on the offence of causing death by dangerous or drunken driving, the hon. Member for Huddersfield referred to the Road Traffic Act 1991, whereby an offender will be found guilty if he drives dangerously, thereby causing someone's death, whether or not he intended to do so or even knew about it.
Mr. Anderson
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Patten
If the hon. Gentleman will forgive me, following the example of the hon. Member for Huddersfield, I must try to make progress in the interests of speed.
The hon. Member for Swansea, East obviously believes that the matter is important.
I always think that my points are important as well.
I give way to him.
Mr. Anderson
Surely it is not difficult to distinguish the point that the right hon. Gentleman makes about assaults.
That is done by considering a case in which a passenger can be held equally liable even though he sought to avoid being identified with the aggravated crime.
He may know that the vehicle has been taken, but seek positively to absent himself from the scene and the commission of the aggravated offence.
Mr. Patten
I gave way to the hon. Gentleman because he felt that his point was important, but it is covered by section 12(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
People who get in a car when it is stolen are associated with that act and can be convicted of exactly the same offence.
I shall take a more up-to-date example than one from 1968.
In the recent House of Lords judgment in the aptly named Savage case, the court ruled that a person can be guilty of actual bodily harm regardless of whether she — in that case — intended any harm or was reckless about causing harm, so long as she intended the assault.
In that case, Mrs. or Miss Savage emptied a beer glass over a person's head, the glass went with the beer and the person was hurt.
There was no intent, but she was found guilty and the conviction was sustained on appeal.
The right hon. Member for Sparkbrook made an important point about the minimum and maximum periods for banning and questioned whether that would help or hinder rehabilitation of an offender.
A youngster may have committed the offence only once.
However, such people must not be favoured, as the hon. Member for Oxford, East said in his powerful speech.
If a court decides on a two-year probation order, during the first year the person is mandatorily banned under the Bill and there is nothing to stop the court ruling that during the second year he or she should attend a motor course.
I have been to many throughout the country.
As my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary said, we are funding a great many such courses.
I have referred to some of the powerful speeches made by Opposition Members with particular constituency interests.
Among Conservative Members, my hon. Friend the Member for Lancaster (Dame E.
Kellett-Bowman) asked in her characteristically robust way why the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats do not see the urgency of this matter.
That urgency is self-evident.
Several hon. Members who spoke after the opening speakers — I shall not name them for fear of causing inter-party embarrassment — said that it was an urgent matter, and I applaud them.
Clearly, there is a gap between the Opposition Front Bench and those who have experienced these problems in their constituencies.
I thank my hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge (Mr. Shersby) and the police for their warm welcome of the Bill.
My hon. Friend raised the important point of what happens under the Bill if a man or woman leaves a child in the car and the car is taken.
He gave two examples.
I hope that I am not thought too patronising or authoritarian when I say that I do not believe that parents should leave children in unattended cars and they certainly should not leave the keys in the car as well.
But should parents do that and should the car be taken away with a child in it, those who took the car could be charged with a much more serious offence under section 2 of the Child Abduction Act 1984, punishable by up to seven years' imprisonment.
My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton is a member of the council of Justice — an organisation for which I have great respect and which operates under the presidency of Lord Alexander of Weedon.
He raised two particular areas where he felt that there might be some danger of miscarriages of justice should the legislation go through in its present form.
I listened carefully to what he said, and I have some answers.
First, on the’ liability for others' acts’point, the Bill contains safeguards — as my hon. and learned Friend knows from his study of it — when the accused can show that the aggravating event occurred before he committed his basic offence or that he was not near the vehicle at the time.
However, the general principle of liability for the acts of others to which my hon. and learned Friend referred is not at all out of line with the Theft Act 1968.
The basic taking without consent offence is that the taker and any passenger may be punished equally.
That was the point I made when responding to the intervention of the hon. Member for Swansea, East, when I mentioned section 12(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
It is also precedented in section 35(2) of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 — It is important that those who are concerned about the possibility of injustice pay attention.
Interruption
That section states that a person convicted of taking without consent is liable to pay compensation for any — and I emphasise that word — damage to the property’ occurring while it was out of the owner's possession’and that such damage is to be treated as’having resulted from the offence, however and by whomsoever' the damage was caused.’
The precedents are clear for the action which my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary is taking in the Bill.
Secondly, on the issue of the precedents for making a defendant prove his defence in the way in which the Bill requires, I argue that every year — certainly since I have been in the House — we have created numerous new offences which have defences attached to them, usually for those who can show that they acted reasonably or that they used due diligence to ensure that they avoided committing an offence.
All those defences are for the defendant to establish on the balance of probabilities.
We have traditional defences on, for example, diminished responsibility which allow murder to be reduced to manslaughter, or defences introduced in Acts that have been passed in the last couple of years.
The Food Safety Act 1990 is one which has a large number of such defences built into it, as does the recent Environmental Protection Act 1990.
Mr. Lawrence
I hope that my right hon. Friend will appreciate that objection is taken to eating more and more into the principle by which the burden of proof is on the prosecution to establish guilt and not on the defendant to establish innocence.
He is perfectly right that in recent years we have been eating into that principle, but if we continue to do so, the principle will go, and that is the civil liberties issue which the system of justice has always been anxious to maintain.
Mr. Patten
I entirely agree with my hon. and learned Friend about the civil liberties issue.
If the principle ever was firmly established, it has gone, but the principle's underlying weight is protected by the fact that the defences are there in law.
That is the way we have evolved the law over the years, but I shall consider carefully what my hon. and learned Friend said, and I shall read it tomorrow in Hansard.
My hon. Friend the Member for Ipswich (Mr. Irvine) was pretty savage about Labour Front-Bench spokesmen and criticised muddled Opposition speeches.
The notable fellow East Anglian and friend to both of us — my hon. Friend the Member for Cambridgeshire, South-West (Sir A. Grant)— was not satisfied and added’ nit-picking’to that criticism.
He also wanted us to be more severe in our handling of these offenders.
A life term is available for those who are convicted of deliberately causing death, whether the conviction is manslaughter —
Mr. Sheerman
Under the present law.
Mr. Patten
I am finishing my sentence.
The hon. Gentleman is treating me as though he were talking to someone from Louisiana and wanting to finish the sentence before it has been started.
However, I shall complete what I was saying.
My hon. Friend the Member for Cambridgeshire, South-West was right about car security and what he said was reflected in the speech of my hon. Friend the Member for Meriden, who urged us to do more about car security.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary and I will meet car manufacturers for a return match this Wednesday and there will be some plain speaking.
I pay tribute to the Association of British Insurers, to which we began talking a couple of years ago.
It said that it was difficult to use insurance mechanisms to cut car crime, but two years on, it is now using insurance premiums formidably well.
We look to the British car manufacturing industry and its European counterparts to do the same as quickly as possible.
My hon. Friend the Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham) was concerned about people who reoffend while on bail, and we shall deal as quickly as we can with the reports — and the analysis of them — which deal with that.
He and my hon. Friends the Members for Pudsey (Sir G.
Shaw) and for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin) were concerned about 15, 16 and 17-year-olds and their involvement with the social services.
I understand that the social services want to help people, but sometimes one can help people a bit more by nipping problems in the bud and dealing with them at an earlier stage.
Sometimes, to be firm with people can be more helpful than leaving problems until it is too late.
It is much better to step in and help people firmly rather than having to punish them at a later stage.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South and others were quite right.
The strongest support of all for the Bill came from my hon. Friend the Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow), who had a range of interesting ways in which to stoke up the legislation to higher and higher levels of severity.
I hope that there will not be a vote on Second Reading.
I understand that there will not be one, but I end on this note: that will allow the official Opposition to say that they did not oppose the Bill because there was no vote on Second Reading.
However, should we decide to consider the Bill in a Committee of the whole House, the first set of amendments tabled by the Opposition — should the Opposition win the vote or should we accede to them — would torpedo the Bill below the water line and sink it lock, stock and barrel.
They are wrecking amendments of the worst type.
Mr. John Patten
My hon. Friend the Member for Broxtowe (Mr. Lester) makes a constructive suggestion.
I know how long he has been concerned about the aggravated taking of vehicles and the mayhem caused by young men in parts of Nottinghamshire over the past couple of years.
His concern has been reflected by the chief constable.
I have not contemplated production of the type of leaflet to which my hon. Friend referred, but it is a good idea.
We shall try to do more about car crime during 1992, and I shall reflect on my hon. Friend's comments to see whether we can accommodate his request.
My hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science — the Member for Darlington (Mr. Fallon)— is on the Front Bench with me.
We know how important it is to educate children, sometimes even those in their late primary school years, about the offending temptations with which they may be faced.
Last week, I was at a Salford school, having visited one of those motor projects to which the hon. Member for Huddersfield referred.
I was struck by one of the comments of the primary school headmistress.
She said that she felt that children aged between seven and 11 were at particular risk of being cloned by their elder brothers or elder friends into people with the same offending habits.
We may well want to follow my hon. Friend's suggestion.
I believe that the Bill, as it goes to another place, has been properly and fully scrutinised on Second Reading and in Committee — as will be shown in Hansard.
I hope that this excellent measure will receive not only the assent of the House but the strong support of everyone who has been so concerned about this issue during 1991.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Question put and agreed to.
Bill read the Third time, and passed.
Teachers' Pay and Conditions
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Michael Fallon)
I beg to move That the draft Teachers' Pay and Conditions Act 1987 (Continuation)
Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 20th November, be approved.
In each of the past two years, Parliament has approved continuation orders extending the life of the Teachers' Pay and Conditions Act 1987.
Last year, an order was needed to ensure that the recommendations of the Interim Advisory Committee on School Teachers'
Pay and Conditions in 1991-92 could be given effect.
The IAC reported for the last time in January this year and, under the terms of the 1990 continuation order, the 1987 Act is due to expire on 31 March 1992.
During the debate one year ago, my hon. Friend the Minister of State assured the House that new arrangements for deciding teachers' pay would be in place by 31 March 1992, and so they are.
The School Teachers' Pay and Conditions Act 1991 received Royal Assent on 25 July.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has appointed the eight members of the schoolteachers' review body under the chairmanship of Sir Graham Day.
On 20 September, my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science asked the review body to submit its first report in January 1992, making recommendations on teachers' pay and conditions in the year commencing 1 April 1992.
There is, however, a need for a further continuation order, for entirely technical reasons.
Before my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State makes the order giving statutory force to the 1992 schoolteachers' pay and conditions document, he is required under the 1991 Act to consult interested parties on the review body's recommendations on the Government's proposals for implementation.
He has also agreed, following the practice adopted in previous years and as specifically requested by the employers and the teachers' unions, to consult the same interested parties on the details of the draft pay document giving effect to the Government's recommendations.
We will, of course, move as quickly as possible, but it is most unlikely that my right hon. and learned Friend will be in a position to make the first pay and conditions order under the new Act immediately upon the expiry of the 1987 Act on 31 March 1992.
Until the first new pay and conditions order is made under the new Act, the 1987 Act needs to be kept in being for a very short time for a very specific and limited purpose to ensure that all teachers continue to be covered by the existing pay and conditions order made under that Act.
Section 6(3) of the 1987 Act provides for statutory conditions of service to continue to apply to existing contracts until new provision is made.
Teachers who enter with new contracts of employment after the Act expires will not, however, be covered.
Therefore, we must ensure tonight that there is a smooth transition between the old and new pay and conditions orders and that the provisions of the 1991 pay document will continue to apply in the case of contracts of employment entered into after 31 March 1992, but before the new order giving effect to the 1992 pay and conditions document comes into force.
That is why we are obliged to take the House's time to seek approval for the final continuation order.
I commend the order to the House to afford continued statutory protection to the very small number of teachers taking up new contracts of employment during any hiatus between the current date of expiry of the 1987 Act and the coming into force of the first pay and conditions order under the 1991 Act.
The 1987 Act will finally be repealed alongside the making of the first pay and conditions order under the 1991 Act.
The continuation order has no bearing on arrangements for next year's pay settlement.
The new schoolteachers review body is hard at work.
It has received evidence from the teachers' associations, the employers and the Department of Education and Science, and has listened to the representations of all those bodies.
As I have already explained, it will present its first report to my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister around the end of January next year.
That report will make recommendations on the pay increase to be given to schoolteachers next year, with particular regard to any modifications which might be introduced to the system of selective payments to increase the flexibility of employers in meeting the needs of recruitment and retention.
It will also consider how the pay of schoolteachers might be more closely related to their performance, in line with the principles of the citizens charter.
The review body will recommend precisely as it sees fit.
The Government for their part have given a firm commitment to implement the recommendations of the review body unless there are clear and compelling reasons to do otherwise.
I am confident that the work of the review body will reinforce teachers' professionalism and raise still further the esteem in which society holds our teachers.
In the meantime, this order is required simply to ensure a smooth transition between the old and new statutory arrangements and to ensure that there are no gaps in the statutory provision for the pay and conditions of schoolteachers.
As such, I commend it to the House.
Mr. Derek Fatchett (Leeds, Central)
I thank the Minister for the way in which he introduced the debate and set out the technical reasons for the order.
We shall certainly not oppose the order because, as the Minister rightly explained, it deals with a particular provision relating to new teachers and their contracts of employment.
While we have had our differences with the Government about the interim advisory committee and the way in which it has worked, it might be worthwhile at this stage, in what might be our final debate on the work of the interim advisory committee, to thank its members for the work that they have done in the past few years.
They may not always have turned up with what teachers would have wished, but I am sure that there has been a great acceptance of the way in which they have carried out a very difficult task.
We wish those who worked on the interim advisory committee well and we look forward to the next phase in the determination of teachers' pay which is the work of the pay review body under the chairmanship of Sir Graham Day.
As the Minister knows, we had our disagreements on the School Teachers' Pay and Conditions Bill and on the School Teachers' Pay and Conditions (No. 2) Bill last year.
To get to the pay review body involved an interesting and long gestation period by Ministers.
It would not be appropriate to go through the arguments again today, but I suspect that teachers will judge the effectiveness of the pay review body not by our arguments on the Floor of the House or in Committee last year, but merely by the way in which it delivers.
We expressed our reservations about the conditions attached to the pay review body — both the preconditions and the ability of the Minister or the Secretary of State to interfere at a later date.
We look forward with interest to what the pay review body will report in January.
We note that the Government are asking that organisation to bear in mind an increase in line with inflation, and feel that that may well not be sufficient, but we await the outcome with interest.
I agree with the Minister that there is a need for a consultation process.
It is almost unique to hear a Minister — particularly, perhaps, the Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science — talk about the need for consultation.
It has not been a characteristic of the Department of Education and Science in the past few years — The Minister seems not to accept that, but if he talked to teachers about one or two recent arbitrary changes in education provision, he might well hear the view that there could have been more consultation.
We welcome the promise of consultation on the report of the pay review body and hope that when that consultation takes place the Government will listen to the views expressed.
It is no use having a one-way consultation process: the Government must listen.
Interruption
We recognise the need for and the purpose of the order, and we shall not oppose it today.
Mr. George Walden (Buckingham)
I begin by echoing what the hon. Member for Leeds, Central (Mr. Fatchett) said about the interim advisory body.
I have always felt a little uncomfortable about the interim stage.
The Government cannot say that because, by definition, the Government have to be comfortable with everything, but it has not been a profitable period for teachers in terms of their pay.
It seems that it is impossible — or should be impossible — to discuss any aspect of teachers' pay, however technical, without relating it to the quality of teachers' performance and teaching methods.
If my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State does not object, I should like to pay tribute to the Government's overall strategy.
While the Government are rightly pursuing the pay review body, which I believe and certainly hope will result in a substantial rise in teachers' pay, they are simultaneously engaged — not before time — in asking serious questions about some of the methods used in our schools, most recently in primary schools.
I hope that you, Mr. Speaker, will agree that there is a fundamental connection between teachers' pay — and the mechanics of it — the esteem in which teachers are held and the methods that they use.
One of the main reasons why teachers have fallen in public esteem is that the public have lost confidence in teaching methods, which, in turn, seem to have lost contact with common sense as perceived by the man on the Clapham omnibus.
In supporting the order — one could scarcely do otherwise — I should like to stress that the way forward does not lie merely in improvements in teachers' pay, necessary though they are.
The way forward must also lie in a two-track policy by which we continue to promote a public debate on some of the catastrophic failed philosophies of the past.
Last week, my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science said that he was not going to tell teachers how to teach in primary schools or pre-empt the outcome of the inquiry that he had just announced.
He then proceeded to make some characteristically common-sense comments which might seem to carping critics to pre-empt that inquiry, but who cares about that, provided his comments made good sense, which they did?
I commend the Government's handling of the pay review body and their general approach of marrying this policy, which will lead to higher pay for teachers, with a determined critique of the elements of teachers' performance which need to be discussed and openly and rigorously criticised.
Mr. Fallon
This has been a brief but interesting debate.
I thank those who took part in it, and I echo the gratitude that they expressed to the interim advisory committee as the end of its days draws nigh.
I was a little surprised to hear the hon. Member for Leeds, Central (Mr. Fatchett) looking forward to the review body's recommendations.
We should not forget that his party voted against a review body.
Even though tonight's debate has been reasonably even-tempered, we shall lose no opportunity when the time comes next year to remind teachers who supported a review body and who opposed it.
The hon. Member for Leeds, Central suggested that we wanted the increase from the review body to be in line with inflation.
That is not quite what we suggested, which was that it should have regard to affordability.
The hon. Gentleman has read one too many union submissions to that body.
My hon. Friend the Member for Buckingham (Mr. Walden) must be right to say that pay should increasingly be linked to performance.
That idea is in the Secretary of State's remit letter to the review body.
I look forward to that beginning to apply to the teaching profession.
It is long overdue and it will be warmly welcomed by senior and successful classroom teachers, who can look forward to seeing the additional efforts and successes that they have achieved in the classroom being properly rewarded in their pay structure.
In general, we look forward to the recommendations of the review body.
Sir David Price (Eastleigh)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that his declared intention to integrate our reserve forces more closely with the regular forces will be widely welcomed?
With that in mind, will he assure the House that he will try to integrate training between reserve forces and regulars far more than in the past?
Mr. King
That is very much one of our purposes.
Integration and complementary roles are necessary for effectiveness in the new strategic dispositions of our forces, not least for the Rapid Reaction Corps.
In training, twinning the work of the regulars, the TA and the volunteer regiments is also the way to use them most effectively.
It is important to ensure that the reserve forces reach the highest possible standards, and I shall certainly concentrate on that.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
The Secretary of State has told us once again that the whole package, including the Scottish element, is based on the assumption that there will be longer warning times of any conflict — up to a year instead of a matter of weeks or a month.
Will the right hon. Gentleman remind the House how much warning time he had of the conflict in the Gulf, how much warning he expects to have from the IRA before any outrage and how much warning he expects of the consequences of the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the activities of extremists like Mr. Le Pen in France?
Mr. King
Warning time is a NATO concept to do with the situation on the central front and the threat of aggression from the east.
It has nothing to do with warning time for the invasion of Kuwait, which has no relevance to my statement.
We do not envisage using the TA to respond immediately to outrages in Northern Ireland or to make it the first wave of our assault for the repossession of Kuwait.
Mr. Robert Boscawen (Somerton and Frome)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that there is much to be commended in general in his decision to reduce the infantry battalions by only 12, 13 or 14 per cent., which is a great deal better than what he did for the Regular Army?
Will he ensure that these infantry battalions are more swiftly available in future?
Will he give us an idea of the future role of the Royal Corps of Transport?
Will it, like other forces, merge with the Regular Army?
Mr. King
The role of the Royal Corps of Transport will take account of the lower overall force levels and hence its new scale of responsibility.
It will also take account of the successful introduction of DROPS — the demountable rack offloading and pickup system — which has made a significant contribution to the capability of the Royal Corps of Transport, given the quantity of stores that can be shifted with the available resources.
When hon. Members read the fact sheet attached to my statement, they will see that it is difficult to compare like with like.
Many of the units are not fully manned units, and hon. Members will see that the number of regiments, squadrons or batteries that we propose to keep in future show the truth of this.
We will, for instance, keep the same number of signals regiments, but that will involve a 20 per cent .
increase in manpower — a reflection of the fact that many of the present units are not fully manned.
Mr. Michael J. Martin (Glasgow, Springburn)
I was pleased to hear the right hon. Gentleman's remarks about the Army Cadet Force.
Over the years, many children from underprivileged families have been able to join youth clubs from which they were able to go away on camps during the Glasgow fair fortnight and at Easter and in September.
I am encouraged to learn that TA companies will be expected to offer support, because I know that, when cadet units have been based with TA units that supported the Army Cadet Force, the boys got more training and help.
Finally —
Mr. Speaker
Briefly, though, please.
Mr. Martin
Sorry, Mr. Speaker.
If the force is to be linked with the Regular Army, legislation must come before the House to make employers give leave of absence.
It was ridiculous that highly trained personnel were prevented from going to the Gulf because of their jobs.
Mr. King
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for what he says about the Army Cadet Force, with which many hon. Members will agree.
I have referred to the complicated question of administration, which will require careful drafting, but we want to try to ensure that those who serve in the voluntary reserve forces are available when they are needed and that their position is properly protected.
Dr. Charles Goodson-Wickes (Wimbledon)
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his enlightened proposals for a revised and enhanced role for the TA in these uncertain times.
I particularly welcome the close relationship between the TA and the regulars.
Will my right hon. Friend add a new dimension to the debate by commenting on whether any studies have been carried out on how the TA could provide relief in the event of natural disasters, which would have the agreeable effect of combining military efficiency with humanitarian benefits?
Mr. King
As my hon. Friend knows, the TA already does do that on occasion, and I am interested in the ways in which it could be developed.
I do not wish to comment further now, but I am sympathetic to his point.
Mr. Dick Douglas (Dunfermline, West)
The Secretary of State has clarified the position on savings, but will he give us some idea of the savings which will result from a reduction of effectiveness in Scotland?
Can he clarify the position in relation to 15 Para and talk in terms of numbers rather than amalgamations?
What will be involved in the reduction from a battalion to one company in Scotland?
Are we to take it that the company headquarters, not the battalion headquarters, will be in Glasgow?
What will be the cost-effectiveness of having four subdivisions of a company?
How can that possibly be cost-effective in terms of the operation of a paratroop battalion?
Mr. King
I am not sure that I can give the hon. Gentleman the first information that he requested.
The picture is complicated because there are a number of changes — pluses and minuses — in the situation in Scotland.
Until the further consultation to which I referred in my statement takes place, it is difficult to know which drill halls will continue and where the detachments will be based.
When the hon. Gentleman sees the full details for the range of different places involved, he will realise that there are some complicated plans for north of Inverness — for example, at Dingwall, Kirkwall, Stornoway, Thurso and Wick — and it is not yet possible to determine how they will work out.
Fifteen Para will be a company with a company headquarters, with the option, if it wishes, to have detachments in places where the paras are presently located.
Mr. Colin Shepherd (Hereford)
Does my right hon. Friend recall that, at one time, considerable concern was expressed that the Marches, including Herefordshire, would not have the opportunity to contribute fully towards the defence of the realm in terms of reserve activities?
Can he confirm that 5 Light Infantry will continue its activities in that part of the world, which, if so, will be welcome?
Will he confirm that the disposition of companies is not yet set in tablets of stone, and that circumstances relating to premises and recruitment records will have a distinct bearing on where those will be finally located?
Mr. King
On the first point, I can confirm that 5LI will continue and will include a company from the 4th battalion the Worcestershire and Sherwood Foresters Regiment.
I can also confirm that it is for the TAVRAs and for the local people to determine the most appropriate location for the individual company headquarters.
Mr. George Galloway (Glasgow, Hillhead)
Fifteen Para, which has its headquarters in my constituency, was being marched to oblivion until public opinion brought itself to bear on the Ministry, and I am grateful that it has taken a step backwards, but we still do not know what size that step is.
For the fourth time of asking, what will be the impact on 15 Para of the change from battalion to company status, where will the battallion headquarters be, why is it being taken out of Scotland, and, at a time when the Secretary of State says that flexibility and mobility are the key attributes of Britain's Army, why are we making major reductions in a force which is the most flexible and mobile in the British Army?
Mr. King
I think that the hon. Gentleman knows that the TA parachute regiments are not charged with a parachute role, but serve mainly in an infantry and national defence role — as do ordinary infantry regiments.
Unfortunately, 15 Para was significantly not as well recruited as the other two parachute regiments.
It had four companies with only a 67 per cent.
level of recruitment.
Although the hon. Gentleman accepts that my announcement represents an improvement over the previous situation, I am anxious to see that those who want to serve have an opportunity to do so.
I believe that the arrangements that we have announced give the best chance of ensuring that that will be the case.
The hon. Member for Dunfermline, West (Mr. Douglas) sought to undermine that, but he will see how far we have gone.
Sir Charles Morrison (Devizes)
My right hon. Friend reminded the House that the Territorial Army is currently under-recruited in comparison with establishment.
Is he aware that the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry Squadron at the Royal Yeomanry Regiment, based in Swindon, is notably, if not extravagantly, over-recruited?
Will he confirm that that squadron will continue to enjoy old and new opportunities?
Mr. King
I should like to check on that before replying specifically to my hon. Friend, but I will certainly write to him.
I know of his close interest in that matter.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
As a demob-happy Member of the House, may I ask the Secretary of State whether he realises the absolute shambles that he has made of Territorial Army recruitment?
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware, for example, that when my wife and I were strolling along Blackpool promenade during the recent summer, I was accosted by a Territorial Army recruiting sergeant and put under enormous pressure to join the TA?
Is the Secretary of State's announcement of a reduction in the age, health and fitness qualifications for membership of the Territorial Army meant as a calculated insult to me, or to the TA?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman will know — although the House may not — that, if there is one person who greets the news of his demobilisation with a particular sense of grief, it is his old pair.
I cannot accept it with any great tranquillity.
However, I am not sure that even any relaxation of more flexible age and medical standards could quite accommodate the hon. Gentleman in his present seniority.
Mr. John Browne (Winchester)
Does my right hon. Friend envisage the creation of a Territorial Army element in the Household Division, which would go some way to alleviating the greatly increased overstretch that the 40 per cent.
cuts in the regular Household Division have caused?
That would maintain the dual role that is vital to recruiting to the Household Division itself.
Mr. King
That suggestion has not been made to me.
Rev. Martin Smyth (Belfast, South)
The Secretary of State will remember my exchanges with the Prime Minister in respect of volunteering, so he will understand my regret at the reduction in opportunities for those who want to volunteer for the TAVR in Northern Ireland.
It seems rather strange that, if one does one's job well, one's opportunities are reduced.
Having said that, I welcome the retention of the Ulster Air Defence Regiment.
However, is it to be reduced to two batteries — one in Coleraine and the other in Belfast — as originally planned, bearing in mind the tremendous tradition that regiment has?
When may we expect a statement on the medical services aspects which are so important to the Northern Ireland situation?
Will there be protection for those who have served in the Territorial Army for some 10 years, so that they may be allowed to complete their service and receive their TA decorations?
Mr. King
I will need to consider the hon. Gentleman's latter point, and I cannot comment on it now.
I appreciate the disappointment felt in Northern Ireland, because I know the willingness to serve that exists there.
It is striking how many more people proportionally have served in the TA in Northern Ireland than in other parts of the United Kingdom.
I make that point with proper sensitivity.
Those who wish to continue to serve can volunteer to do so on a part-time basis in the Ulster Defence Regiment.
We are maintaining a significant presence in Northern Ireland: there will still be a higher percentage of volunteers per head of population there than in all but two of the other TAVRA areas.
We are moving on with the medical services.
All the services are involved — the regular medical services of the RAF, the Navy and the Army.
The question then arises of the most suitable arrangements to be made for the Territorial Army.
In the past, the TA has been responsible for massive field hospitals; the current approach is to make such hospitals much smaller and more flexible, and to increase their number.
Work is now in progress, although I cannot give an exact date for its completion.
I have noted the hon. Gentleman's interest in the matter.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I must protect our subsequent business, on which there is considerable pressure.
I will allow questions to the Secretary of State to continue for 10 minutes; if hon. Members ask brief questions, they will all be called.
Mr. John Wilkinson (Ruislip-Northwood)
May I congratulate my right hon. Friend particularly on the formation of a second Territorial Army Air Corps squadron?
Is it not a little perverse that, while the Army seems to recognise the value of flying reserves, the Royal Air Force is not yet convinced — unlike the air forces of the United States, Switzerland and Israel?
Would it not be more cost-effective to use auxiliary jet pilots who have come out of the service under’ Options for Change’than to train women as fast jet pilots, however keen they may be?
Most of them will probably go off and get married.
Mr. King
In that interesting contribution, my hon. Friend has probably managed to offend two distinct groups.
He has expressed some fairly pungent criticisms, but his point is interesting, and I take note of it.
Mr. David Marshall (Glasgow, Shettleston)
Is it not astonishing that the Secretary of State, having made a decision on 15 Para, cannot or will not answer the pertinent points put to him by my hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Hillhead (Mr. Galloway) and the hon. Member for Glasgow, Govan (Mr. Sillars)?
Cannot the right hon. Gentleman accept that the Para battalions should have been the last to be cut, and that, if cuts must be made, they should be made on the basis of operational effectiveness, not political expediency?
Is not this the worst possible decision for both 4 and 15 Para?
For how long can the right hon. Gentleman guarantee the existence of a 15 Para based in Glasgow?
Why did he not decide to reduce the three para battalions to the new standard size?
Mr. King
I am interested to hear what the hon. Gentleman has to say.
I am sure that that announcement will be greeted with great interest by the 1st and 2nd battalions the 52nd Lowland Volunteers and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd battalions of the Highland Volunteers.
They happen to believe that they, too, make a pretty pertinent and effective contribution to the Territorial Army from Scotland.
Of course the paras make a valuable contribution.
That is why we have sought to respond to representations, and to continue to give people in Scotland who wish to serve in the parachute regiments the opportunity to do so.
There will be a number of such opportunities, whether they be among the commandos or the Marine commandos, or in the SAS, the new Royal Engineers Regiment — whose headquarters will be in Scotland — or the new Scottish Yeomanry Regiment which is to be set up.
Certainly, it is no secret that, in proportional terms, Scotland has done rather well out of the arrangements.
Mr. Patrick Cormack (Staffordshire, South)
Is there any message of consolation that I can take to the very bruised people in Staffordshire, who watched with pride as the 3rd battalion received its new colours in September?
Will that battalion be allowed to survive?
Mr. King
I am not sure which battalion my hon. Friend means, but I shall look into the matter and reply later.
Mr. John McFall (Dumbarton)
The Secretary of State's catchphrase’ smaller is better’has now given way to’so small that it is almost non-existent’in regard to 15 Para.
With only one company left in Glasgow, is it not a fact that numbers will fall from over 600 to 150?
That will do nothing for morale and recruitment in Glasgow.
Does not the Secretary of State agree with one of my constituents, Brigadier Alastair Pearson, who was the regiment's honorary colonel until 1989?
In a letter to me, the brigadier said,’ It is nothing but political.
It is Treasury-led.
It is not based on military criteria, and it will do nothing whatever for Scotland.’
Mr. King
Sadly, that comment is completely uninformed.
I do not know when it was made, but it is incorrect.
The hon. Gentleman serves on the Select Committee on Defence, and he knows that a settlement has been made.
The Select Committee has taken an interest and has recognised that we have fully funded the programme that we set out.
Far from being Treasury-led, it is defence-strategy-led, and the Treasury has now agreed to fund the programme, so the comment was uninformed.
I am sorry that the hon. Gentleman cannot see the broader picture of what is happening to the other units and that it is not an unfair arrangement.
I apologise to my hon. Friend the Member for Staffordshire, South (Mr. Cormack) for not responding to him.
I confirm that the 3rd battalion will continue.
Mr. Ian Grist (Cardiff, Central)
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the dismay that his proposals have caused in Wales?
Why have the cuts been so disproportionately heavy there?
Mr. King
When my hon. Friend has a chance to read the full details, he will see that, although there is an amalgamation of regiments, other units will be moving into Wales and there will be new opportunities for serving in Wales.
Proportionately, the reduction in Wales is less than the average for the United Kingdom as a whole.
Mr. William McKelvey (Kilmarnock and Loudoun)
Has the Secretary of State made any advance in redressing the ridiculous situation of the Scottish soldiers in the territorial units who served in the Gulf for 51 days and who were constantly under attack by Scud missiles?
They have been informed that they do not qualify for their bounty because they have spent insufficient days at summer camp, despite serving 51 days in the Gulf.
Are not 51 days in the Gulf more of a training exercise than running around the sand dunes at Barry with thunderflashes?
Mr. King
I know that my right hon. Friend the Minister of State for the Armed Forces is considering the issue, having given an undertaking to the House to do so.
I shall ensure that the hon. Gentleman's interest is drawn to his attention.
Mr. Peter Viggers (Gosport)
As to the background, does my right hon. Friend agree that, such is the high level of unit loyalty, any change will be greeted with apprehension by the Territorial Army community and the reserve community?
However, does he agree that the news that he has announced today is good news for the reserve forces, because the units will be well equipped and will have an important role, and there will be full support for good recruiting areas such as Hampshire?
Mr. King
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
He has summed up the issue much better than I could.
That is precisely the point — the new reserve forces that we have announced will have important roles, will be relevant to our new defence strategy and will be well supported and equipped.
That is our absolute intention.
It is also our intention — this differs from what has been the case for a long time — that they will be fully manned units.
Dr. Norman A. Godman (Greenock and Port Glasgow)
Is it likely that the changes and related developments will lead the Ministry of Defence to release land in Scotland which it presently owns and leases for training purposes?
On a more parochial basis —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Only one question, please.
Dr. Godman
The Secretary of State mentioned’ Grennock’— was he referring to a detachment in Greenock?
Mr. King
That pronunciation is a mistake that I made all the time that I worked in Scotland and I know the sensitivities which it aroused.
I apologise.
There will be some rationalisation of the estate, but not in terms of training areas, of which there is, if anything, a shortage.
Following the changes under’ Options for Change’and the withdrawal of our units from Germany, there will be considerable pressure on our training areas.
However, there may well be some rationalisation in terms of drill halls and buildings, and some buildings may become available.
Mr. Patrick Thompson (Norwich, North)
Although I welcome the way in which my right hon. Friend has responded to pressure from those of us who are concerned about the future of the volunteers in the Territorial army and elsewhere, and I especially welcome his statement about the future of the Army Cadet Force and the support it receives from the reserves, what are his particular plans for the three reserve battalions of the Royal Anglians?
I understand that the changes are fairly limited, and I should be grateful if he could give me any further information.
Mr. King
I think that there was concern that, under the previous proposal, one further Royal Anglian Regiment battalion would be disbanded.
I can confirm that the 5th, 6th and 7th volunteer battalions of the Royal Anglian Regiment will continue.
That should deal with some of the problems about which my hon. Friend is concerned.
Mr. Robert Banks (Harrogate)
May I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the structure and military role that he has announced today?
Will he consider the historical importance of many units, especially in Yorkshire, which have provided reservists for emergencies?
Will the 8th (Yorkshire) battalion the Light Infantry Regiment be maintained?
Mr. King
I am grateful for what my hon. Friend says.
I give him that assurance.
Mr. Conal Gregory (York)
Will my right hon. Friend take the opportunity of the review of the Territorial Army to commend to the Confederation of British Industry, to the Institute of Directors and to others the training that is given by the TA so that greater public recognition can be given to it?
For the TA's members in Yorkshire, can my right hon. friend give any reassurance to the House in connection with the Yorkshire Volunteers, which will next year celebrate its silver jubilee?
Are there any plans to re-badge the Yorkshire Volunteers?
Mr. King
The 1st and 2nd battalions of the Yorkshire Volunteers continue, and the 3rd and 4th will be amalgamated.
My hon. Friend also has an interest in the Light Infantry, which is relevant to Yorkshire.
In respect of the role of the CBI and of employers, I pay tribute to the work done by employers and by the National Employers Liaison Committee.
What my hon. Friend said is profoundly appreciated by those who have employees who serve in the TA.
The quality, calibre, extra capability and extra commitment that they give are well worth any time that may be given up to volunteer reserve service.
Mr. David Marshall
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
When I put my question to the Secretary of State for Defence, I referred to the hon. Member for Glasgow, Govan (Mr. Sillars).
I should have referred to the hon. Member for Dunfermline, West (Mr. Douglas), who comes from Govan.
I apologise for the error.
Points of Order
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You will recall that, over a week ago, I raised with you the fact that an hon. Member had clearly used the free post improperly on behalf of Islington, North Labour party.
I have been sent another example, which is rather more serious.
The hon. Member for Leicester, East (Mr. Vaz) is specifically identifiable on this occasion.
It seems that he has been using the free post to send out quantities — I do not know how many — of his so-called’ Annual Report’.
It has been sent back with a frosty message from one of his constituents, who is unidentified.
There is plainly an abuse.
I seek your guidance on two further matters, Mr. Speaker.
The royal crest is used on the front of the annual report, which I should have thought was improper.
I know that the hon. Member for Leicester, East thinks that he is important, but he is not that important.
The crest of Parliament is used on the inside of the report.
I thought that that could not be used, so I seek your guidance, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I asked the hon. Member before to bring the matter to my office.
I will look into it.
From what he says, there appears to have been an abuse.
BILLS PRESENTED
Amusement Machines (Protection of Children)
Mr. Patrick Thompson presented a Bill to empower local authorities to prohibit in their areas the use by children of amusement machines:
And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Friday 7 February 1992 and to be printed.
[Bill 39.]
Established Church
Mr. Michael Latham presented a Bill to abolish the General Synod of the Church of England, on a date to be appointed; to provide for the creation of a Church of England Assembly, consisting of a house of all diocesan, suffragan and assistant bishops, and a joint house of clergy and laity, to be directly elected by all Church of England clergy and lay persons on parochial electoral rolls; to make provision for the Diocese of Sodor and Man; to empower the Assembly to decide on all appropriate matters, except those within the legal responsibilities of the Church Commissioners, without further reference to Parliament; to provide for the election of new bishops by members of the house of bishops, saving the right of final approval of the chosen candidate by the Crown; to abolish the Ecclesiastical Committee; to abolish the automatic places of bishops in the House of Lords; to permit ordained clergy of the Church of England, with the consent of a diocesan bishop, to seek election to the House of Commons; and for connected purposes:
And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Friday 7 February 1992 and to be printed.
[Bill 40.]
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS, & c .
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101(3) (Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Representation of the People
Ordered, That the draft European Parliamentary Constituencies (England)(Miscellaneous Changes) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Question agreed to.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I am not sure what you referred to just now as’ an abuse’.
You have not yet seen the document out of which the tell-tale hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) is making a career day in and day out.
Before you consider the document, may I remind you of a letter that you received from the convenor of Stirling district council?
The hon. Member for Stirling (Mr. Forsyth)— I am not complaining about him, so I do not apologise for not having given him notice that I should raise the point — uses the crest of the House of Commons on his parliamentary report.
He also uses the crest of the House of Commons on his advertisements for his constituency advice bureau.
I honestly do not see anything wrong with that, and I am not complaining about it.
However, with respect, Mr. Speaker, I have seen your reply in which you said that using the crest of the House of Commons on such material was not an offence, so I hope that you are not referring to that aspect of the issue that the tell-tale Member has just raised with you.
Mr. Speaker
I think the hon. Gentleman is quite right.
I am constantly enjoined not to give my reasons, but I did.
When I said that I must look into the matter, I was referring to the franked envelope, not its contents.
ESTIMATES DAY
1st Allotted Day
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 1991-92
CLASS XIV, VOTE 1
[Relevant documents: The fourth report from the Social Security Committee of Session 1990-91 on the Financing of Private Residential and Nursing Home Fees (House of Commons Paper No. 421) and the first report from the Health Committee of Session 1991-92 on the above report (House of Commons Paper No. 28).]
Residential Homes
Motion made, and Question proposed, That a further sum not exceeding £1,680,076,000 be granted to Her Majesty out of the Consolidated Fund to defray the charges that will come in course of payment during the year ending on 31st March 1992 for expenditure by the Department of Social Security on non-contributory retirement pensions, Christmas bonus payments to pensioners, pensions etc., for disablement or death arising out of war or service in the armed forces after 2nd September 1939 and on sundry other services, on attendance allowances, invalid care allowance, severe disablement allowance, mobility allowance; on pensions gratuities and sundry allowances for disablement and specified deaths arising from industrial causes; on income support, transitional payment, child benefit, one parent benefit, family credit, and on the vaccine damage payment scheme.
Mr. Frank Field (Birkenhead)
It is my privilege to open the debate on the report of the Select Committee on Social Services into the financing of private residential and nursing home fees.
It gives me the opportunity not only of placing on the official record the Committee's thanks to its staff for their work, not only of drawing to the attention of the House what I think is the first debate on community care to be initiated in the Chamber which is not part of a debate on another measure, but also of drawing attention to the number of firsts that we score with this report and debate.
This is the first joint report to be submitted to the House by the Select Committees on Social Security and on Health.
This is the first time, speaking in this capacity, that I have welcomed my hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Withington (Mr. Bradley) to the Opposition Front Bench.
Anyone who knows my hon. Friend's track record before he became a Member of the House will know how well deserved that promotion is.
This is also the first time that the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Maidstone (Miss Widdecombe), has been allowed out to speak from the Treasury Bench in the Chamber.
We heard from the hon. Lady several times in Committee, but the Secretary of State for Social Services has kept her firmly muzzled on other occasions.
Hon.
Members can draw an important lesson from the hon. Lady's rise to office as a junior Minister in the Department.
She got the post because she proved such a thorn in the Government's side on this very issue.
Those hon. Members who are told by the Whips that their loyalty, obedience and voting record will all be taken into account may rest assured that those things are, indeed, taken into account, but in a totally different way from what one is led to believe if one wants to speak in the House from either Front Bench.
With those introductory remarks, I hope that I have drawn attention to the firsts that we celebrate in this debate, but although those matters are important, matters of far greater importance form the substance of our debate.
I refer to what has been, is and will be happening to the financing of some of the most frail and vulnerable members of our community who live in residential or nursing homes.
I know that my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) wishes to contribute to the debate if he is able to catch your eye, Mr. Speaker.
From the many written questions that my hon. Friend has tabled on this matter, I note not only that the numbers of people in residential and nursing care have increased substantially, as we all know, but also the surprising fact that there has been only a modest fall in the numbers of people in local authority care.
I had thought that there had been a really massive shift from what one might call the public sector into the private sector.
Although there has been a slight fall in the numbers of people in local authority care in the past 10 years, there has been a remarkable increase in the numbers of people cared for in what is described as the private sector — in the homes run as nursing or residential care homes.
I know that criticisms will be made as a proper part of our deliberations today about whether that is the best use of the money.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield raised such criticisms in Committee and may well do so again later.
However, on behalf of many of my constituents — I am sure that this is true for many other people around the country — I should like to stress that, although none of us thought in 1979 that we would be discussing this situation today, as a result of it many of our constituents have received a quality of life far superior to that which they might otherwise have had.
I certainly recall visiting residential and nursing homes in my constituency of which one could genuinely say that one would be pleased to be a member of that community.
We are called upon to make such statements in all sorts of circumstances in our constituencies and sometimes we do it slightly with tongue in cheek, but I can genuinely make such a statement about many homes.
I do not want any criticisms that we may have of some home owners or some trends to detract from that important fact.
We all agree, however, that there are some real problems with the current provision.
Many of us share some deeply felt worries about what will happen under the current procedures until the changeover takes place in 1993.
While our minds may boggle at the difficulties which exist now, goodness knows what the scene will be after 1993.
We welcome to our debate the Minister for Health, who is in her place on the Treasury Bench.
First and foremost, there has been a remarkable and outstanding growth in the social security budget for residential care.
This is one of the few occasions in the House when I can say that many hon. Members on both sides of the House told the Government that that would happen if the Government allowed the policy to develop in the way it has.
Hon. Members made a plea in the early stages of the 1979
Parliament that the Government should allow local authorities to appoint gatekeepers who would judge whether people qualified on not only income grounds but more general medical needs grounds for the care that they sought.
Every time hon. Members put that point to the Treasury Bench, the Government knocked it aside.
One of the consequences of that is a high level of provision, from which many of our constituents benefit.
But if some of our constituents had been offered other options, they would not have chosen residential or nursing care.
It is because the Government would not allow local authorities to appoint a couple of gatekeepers that we face a bill probably in the region of £1.9 billion.
Undoubtedly, the Under-Secretary of State will bring us up to date on that.
I think that it is fair to say that, if hon. Members on either side of the House had realised 10 years ago that we would be debating a sum of almost £2 billion, none of us would have recommended the one-track community care solution that has been adopted.
To some extent, that is water under the bridge.
I do not say that to score a cheap point.
It is not a party point but a House of Commons point against the Treasury Bench.
I make the point because, in the report that we are debating, we make several recommendations and we wish the Government to take them more seriously than those that we made in the past.
The fact that the Government disregarded our recommendations largely accounts for the debate that we are having today.
The next problem that the Government face is the fear of evictions.
If I were the Secretary of State for Social Security, which I am not, my nightmare would be the early morning phone call from the Department's press office saying that an eviction is taking place that day, that the media and particularly the television cameras will be there and asking whether I would be there and what were the Government's comments.
It is because that fear exists that some home owners know perfectly well that they have the Government over a barrel.
When they want to see fees generally jacked up, we get talk of impending evictions.
The Under-Secretary of State said in her discussions with the Select Committee that she did not have any examples of evictions, yet the Association of Metropolitan Authorities told us that 24 per cent.
of its members had reported evictions to it.
It added a phrase so extraordinary that I quote it directly:’ although these were felt to be isolated incidents.’
All that I can say is, thank God that they were isolated incidents.
Even so, a quarter of the authorities reported to their central body that such incidents had taken place.
It is a real worry that evictions might take place.
It is because we wish to strengthen the Government's hand against a fairly well organised industry which seeks universal general increases that we make a series of recommendations in the report, to which I shall come in a moment.
The Government are vulnerable at any time, but especially in the run-up to a general election, to the prospect of evictions of people who are no longer able to pay the full fees for which the home owner calls.
The Committee has highlighted two other problems.
When the policy was first implemented, there was no question but that those who were then on supplementary benefit and are now on income support gained a first-class service from the homes.
Indeed, many of the homes said that the fees from supplementary benefit were so adequate that the people who came in on that ticket were given some of the best accommodation in the establishment.
That is not so now.
There is not only a form of filtering within homes of the rooms offered to those on income support, but homes sometimes put up a bar against those whose only contribution is up to the ceiling laid down by the Government.
Within homes, a two-tier system is developing.
More importantly, a different tier system is developing in different parts of the country.
I see the hon. Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) in his place and I know that he hopes to catch your eye, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
He is a member of the Select Committee on Health and played an enormously valuable part in our proceedings.
We were given evidence by Age Concern England.
It quoted a Health Advisory Service report on Bromley, which said:’ Frail, elderly people face exile in private residential homes far from Bromley’.
In other words, the rates that the Government lay down are such that one must be extraordinarily lucky in Bromley and many other places to obtain a place near one's home.
It gives a new and cruel twist to community care that people may have to be shipped perhaps as far as Birkenhead to find a community home.
That provision will cut a person off from all that he or she most values — family and friends.
That is the background to some of the problems that the report has highlighted.
I come quickly to our recommendations.
I stress that we have made them in the most constructive vein possible.
I sought to score points earlier on the cavalier way in which previous Ministers dismissed the suggestions from the then Select Committee, by which we sought to limit the rate of increase in the residential care part of the Government's budget.
We did so not because we did not want money spent on community care, but because we did not necessarily believe that a one-track policy was the best way to ensure the ideal form of care.
We want the Government to think carefully and respond positively to our recommendations, because we are anxious that the rate of increase in the Budget from now on should not be jacked up by the powerful lobby of the industry and the influence that it can exert on the Government.
Therefore, our recommendations were tailored to some selective targeted measures which the Government could implement to avoid conceding increases across the board.
We emphasise in our report that we do not see those measures as a way of dealing with the shortfall.
We are interested in how to make good that shortfall.
That is what our recommendations are about, but we also aim to help the Government to limit the rate of increase in the budget.
I wish to touch on three proposals.
First, the Secretary of State told the Committee and the House that the new form of community care, which will be run by local authorities, would have the extraordinary advantage that people in the locality who knew the scene would make the decisions.
Why cannot that proposal be brought forward, so that the local offices of the Department of Social Security could make the decision about topping-up arrangements?
Secondly, as new residents in homes will be able to claim housing benefit under the new proposals, why cannot housing benefit be claimed as a way of helping to make good the shortfall?
Thirdly, as the Government are turning a blind eye to many of the disregards being allowed for people on income support and in residential and nursing care, could that be codified and made safe for all forms of disregard?
We hope that the Government will respond to other priorities and suggestions in the report, which I shall list as headings because I know that other hon. Members wish to speak and will doubtless develop many of those arguments.
We are worried about the date on which local authorities will know the size of their budget.
Will the Government issue clear guidance on which responsibilities will fall to health authorities and which to social services?
How far down towards the locality will the decision on housing benefit be made?
One more issue, which I often return to from these Benches, although I hope that before long I shall be able to support those on the Treasury Bench from the other side of the House —
Mr. John Marshall (Hendon, South)
Is the hon. Gentleman crossing the Floor?
Mr. Field
When I am ready for residential care, I may totter over to that side of the House, but until then I am happy to stay on this side.
Finally, on the proposals in our report about extending freedom, many of us fear that, after the changeover, people's freedom will be limited under the Government's proposal, although so much of their rhetoric suggests the opposite.
We have three proposals.
First, as we wish to encourage carers and strengthen families — even the extended family — if a person who is caring for someone loses them to a home, the person's home should not have to go on the market to meet the cost of fees.
We are not saying that taxpayers should not be able to claw back some of the costs at a later stage, but the carer's position should be protected.
Under the new system, we want people to have rights to choose the sort of care that they receive, rather than be directed to it.
We all have too much experience of what it is like for council tenants trying to exercise their supposed freedom for us to lie easily with the Government's assurances on that matter.
The most important issue regarding freedom is that we fear that, far from more people being given control over their lives, when the new system comes into play, fewer people will have control.
Our plea to the Government is that they take a leaf out of their own book on the independent living fund, which was set up in haste and has played a role that it was never meant to play.
It has been a noble role, as it has allowed people grants and cash to fix the level of care that they want.
They have been in control.
Under the new system, we want an increasing proportion of the budget to go into a pot of cash, which local authorities will be able to give out.
That cannot happen in year one, but as the years went by, it would enable people to build their own packages of care rather than having to take care designed by others for them off the shelf, as in a supermarket.
As I have emphasised three times, the previous Select Committee on Health and Social Services made a number of pleas to the Government not to get us into the position that we are in now.
I am being polite about the way in which the Government have behaved when I say that they have dealt with our recommendations in a cavalier fashion.
When the Under-Secretary of State responds, I hope that we will know that the joint recommendations from the Select Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social Services will be taken more seriously than previous recommendations.
Mr. David Shaw (Dover)
I pay tribute to the Chairmen of the Social Security Select Committee and of the Health Select Committee, who have found a way around the difficulties of operating together and have produced a more interesting report as a result.
Having been through that process once, the Social Security Committee is clearly interested in other areas.
When problems such as those created by the Maxwell affair, for example, come to light, that Committee and the Department of Trade and Industry could operate together.
The report therefore establishes an important precedent: it means that Government policy will not always be departmentalised but will be seen in the round.
The problem with Select Committees is that they are sometimes compelled to take a narrow view, rather than the broader view that is reflected by the report.
The report gives further evidence that residential and nursing homes are an enormously important and valuable source of care for the elderly.
The Government have made significant improvements in that regard.
I am sure that my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State must be delighted that she will be summing up in a debate that concerns an area of activity in which expenditure has increased 160 times under this Government.
Even given the expenditure that the Government have devoted to the public sector, there cannot be many Ministers who find themselves in such a favourable position.
The number of claimants has increased from 12,000 in 1979 to 220,000.
There were 9.5 million old age pensioners in 1979, but there are now some 10.5 million.
Those extra 1 million pensioners must account for many of the additional claimants.
The frail or very elderly account for an increasing number of pensioners, and that emphasises the importance of nursing home and residential care.
The evidence to the Select Committee suggests that the private sector has not only expanded well in terms of growing numbers and additional services, but of maintaining its assets.
There was, however, evidence that public sector homes have been poorly maintained and that councils had spent their money elsewhere.
Councils have had an enormous amount of money through their hands, and have spent it in an equally enormous number of areas over the past 12 years.
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
A recent report named my local authority of Calderdale as the second most efficient metropolitan council in the country.
Because of the threat of poll tax capping this year, it was compelled to cut £5 million from its budget.
I do not think that even the hon. Member for Dover (Mr. Shaw) could accuse that authority of being profligate, but those cuts will affect the care of the elderly in Calderdale.
Mr. Shaw
The hon. Lady ought to examine local authority budgets.
I was on a local council for some years that thought it was well run, but we still found it possible to get rid of a tier of management.
It is always possible to do that, and to use elsewhere the money saved.
Many councils have employed too many staff over the years, have been too inefficient, and have not maintained their homes for the elderly and residential care homes as well as they should have done.
The Committee was told of a backlog of maintenance.
That is because councils do not keep proper accounts or records.
One of the problems in the public sector is that no one keeps a balance sheet, so there is no proper record of maintenance costs and of depreciating assets — whereas the business man or woman who manages a private care home is alive to the importance of maintenance, and of protecting the value of that asset.
The Government made a good move in calling in Price Waterhouse, because clearly there was concern among residential care home owners about their funding through the income support mechanism.
We welcome the Government's commitment to keeping finance and income support levels under review; the Committee will examine the position from time to time, and ensure that the levels remain reasonable.
As the Committee's Chairman pointed out, the Government must maintain a fine balance.
They must be careful not to make income support too generous, thus causing the taxpayer to lose out and causing funds to be taken from other provision for the elderly and disabled.
The Government must exercise the wisdom of Solomon: although they must not put too much money into that sector, if they put in too little, the owners of care homes will tend to withdraw the little extra facilities that are so enjoyed by the elderly people.
As the report points out, resources must be made available to those who enter residential care with no resources of their own for those’ little extras’.
Their spouses may not have been able to save much during their lives; they may have had low-paid jobs.
Thank goodness, the current pensions policy is improving the position: many more people will retire with second pensions.
Many others, however, will have retired some time ago, and will not have sufficient resources.
The Government should consider setting up a scheme to provide top-up money when residents' families cannot provide it themselves.
The question of evictions is open to misconception.
The evidence of such evictions is very weak; I felt that the evidence presented to the Committee was based more on political considerations than on hard numbers.
One organisation suggested, however, that — although no actual evictions had taken place — some people had been discouraged from going into homes because of the cost involved.
We recognise that some homes are more expensive than others, and that some provide more facilities than others; we must ensure, however, that no one falls through the net because basic income support is not available.
The report makes a recommendation about the assessment of claims for income support, and the payment of such support.
We are led to believe that there are administrative problems.
As we know, all Government Departments have such problems, but a review of administration might be helpful.
In my constituency, a care home owner admitted an elderly person over a weekend after that person had suffered a fall in her own home.
The home owner had not waited for the bureaucratic processes to be completed; she had acted out of the goodness of her heart.
Rather than being rewarded by the social security system, that home owner suffered a disadvantage.
Payment of income support is related to pension payment days, and she was not remunerated for the first five days of the elderly person's occupation.
The home owner had to pay herself.
It is clear that legitimate and reasonable owners of residential care homes are suffering.
The less money is given to such homes, the less is available for the’ little extras’to which I have referred.
The hon. Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) mentioned alternatives to residential or nursing home care.
Although I disagreed with some of what he said, I agree that we should consider whether more people can stay in their own homes.
As I have said, there has been a substantial increase in the number of pensioners, but surely new technology and the availability of volunteers could enable more people to stay at home for longer.
We should take a radical approach to the position of elderly people beyond the year 2000, and consider whether technology can allow them to enjoy a better standard of living and to rely less on residential and nursing homes.
Surely, in the early years after retirement, fewer people will need to go into such homes.
I commend the report.
I believe that many of its recommendations deserve wider and deeper consideration, and I hope that the Government will take them on board.
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Birkenhead (Mr. Field) on his excellent chairmanship of the Committee; I also congratulate the hon. Member for Macclesfield (Mr. Winterton), who played an important role.
I welcome the recommendations in the report.
The report addresses itself very well to a specific’ client group’, the elderly and sick.
Over the past decade, the care of that group has been privatised: the hon. Member for Macclesfield illustrated the process very clearly when he referred to an excellent nursing home in his constituency, a fairly large institution containing trained nurses.
The taxpayer financed the training of those nurses: there is a hidden bonus for the owner of that home, and for the owners of many others.
In the Select Committee, the hon. Member for Teignbridge (Mr. Nicholls), who is not in the Chamber now, moved to amend paragraph 88 of the report.
I am sad about that.
The paragraph clearly spelled out the story of supplementary benefits and income support payments to fund care in residential and nursing homes, saying that it was a telling example of what could happen if change was made in an ad hoc way.
The section that was deleted struck me as very important.
It pointed out:’ no overt decision had been made to phase out geriatric wards; the practice grew as health authorities saw the opportunity to transfer costs to the budget of another Government Department by transferring one aspect of care to the voluntary and private sector.
That practice has now brought about a major change in the NHS.
A service free at the point of delivery is being changed, for some, to one in which they or their relatives are asked to make what is often a considerable weekly contribution.’
When Opposition Members talk of creeping privatisation, that is exactly what we mean.
I am sorry that an excellent paragraph was amended, effectively to blame carers — or their neighbours or female relatives — for neglecting to do their unpaid duty.
Paragraph 94 expresses dismay that the funding of nursing home care should be private, and that health authority managers should draw a distinction between the elderly and others who need care.
I hope that the Minister will take note of that important paragraph.
I have argued with my district health authority for many years I know that many hon. Members have done the same with theirs — because it has for various reasons shifted the problem of elderly sick people to the private sector.
It is increasingly difficult for the relatives of the elderly sick to obtain even respite care in many hospitals when they themselves need a rest.
The crisis has occurred because of the Government's policy — which, whether or not it was deliberate, has been disastrous, as my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) said.
We have ended up in a mess.
The hon. Member for Dover (Mr. Shaw) attacked local authorities, but that will not wash.
It is no good knocking local authorities — we have only to consider the figures to see the massive amount that has been removed from rate support grant while the number of elderly people has increased.
If the local authorities had been given the money that has been poured into the private sector to be spent on domiciliary packages, more home helps, special care attendance and occupational budgets to provide aids and adaptations for people in their own homes, we could have saved the Government and the country millions of pounds.
My local authority of Calderdale spent responsibly, and a Government Department patted it on the back, saying that it was the second most efficient metropolitan authority in the country.
I think that my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield said that £1.7 billion has gone into the private sector in the current year.
With that money, we could have provided what the people wanted and real choice.
I imagine that, for 90 per cent.
of the elderly sick, the choice would be to receive nursing home treatment under the national health service or the care packages which would enable them to stay in their own homes.
If local authorities and councillors had wasted the money in the way that many of us believe the Government have done, they would have been surcharged and hounded out of office.
It is a disgrace that Government Departments are not subjected to the same scrutiny and punishments.
I do not want to criticise those who provide private care, because I recognise that there is as much good care in the private sector as there is bad.
However, I criticise the trend towards not having highly paid and experienced staff.
Many of the private homes are pretty, Laura Ashley, chintzy places, but do they have rehabilitation programmes or free therapy for their residents?
Do they have the orientation programmes which I have seen in many of the local authority homes that I have visited in my constituency?
The crux of the report is funding, and the growing gap between income support and what it now costs to keep people in either nursing homes or elderly residential homes.
The growing gap now means that the elderly people or their relatives must find that difference.
When the Under-Secretary of State for Social Security, the hon. Member for Maidstone (Miss Widdecombe), was in a less exalted position, I remember listening to her make a clear and, I thought, slightly emotional but honest contribution to a debate in the House.
She talked about Florence Smith, an elderly constituent of hers, and how she was caught in such a gap.
Since she became Under-Secretary, I have written to the hon. Lady about such gaps experienced by many of my constituents.
I am afraid that her reply was not as sympathetic as the contribution that she made as a Back Bencher when talking about Florence Smith.
She also told me that there had been no evidence of evictions, but, however hon. Members interpret it, the evidence given to the Select Committee by Mr. Harris of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities was clear.
He said:’ about 24 per cent.
of our member authorities are saying to us that they have recorded instances of eviction.’
Mr. David Shaw rose
Mrs. Mahon
I shall finish this point, and then I shall give way.
A constituent of mine was on the verge of being evicted.
Fortunately, her relatives were able to move her to another home which was cheaper: that is an increasingly common practice.
Elderly residents are being downgraded and sometimes have to share rooms, and that situation will get worse.
I am concerned that that will happen long before the community care changes come into force.
I want to draw the House's attention to recommendations (vii) and (viii), which are important.
They deal with hospital discharge procedures and state that district health authorities should obey circulars.
We need to know how the recommendations will apply in the new internal market for health care.
We know that circulars that go to trusts are sent for the purpose of information, not action.
If the recommendations are shortly to be accepted by the House, we want to know specifically whether the opted-out hospitals will be excused from obeying that recommendation.
If so, there is not much point in us debating the issue.
The report is excellent, and I hope that its recommendations will be carried out.
I finish where I started, by saying that the report confirms absolutely that there has been a wholesale privatisation of care for the sick and elderly.
That is unfair, and it is also slightly sinister to say that, when somebody reaches a certain age, he can no longer receive care under the NHS.
I welcome the fact that that has been exposed and, despite the amended paragraph 88, I welcome the recommendations as a whole.
Mr. Michael J. Martin (Glasgow, Springburn)
I shall be brief, as I understand that the Opposition Front-Bench spokesman and the Minister want to reply to the debate.
I also wish to put on record my congratulations to the Select Committee and its Chairman for their hard work.
I hope that we never reach the position that I have sometimes, although not often, met in my constituency, when I have received a phone call from a private home to the effect that it could no longer keep a patient who had perhaps become doubly incontinent.
If the relatives could not pick the patient up, he would be lodged in the casualty department of the local hospital.
It is scandalous that elderly patients should be treated in that way.
I repeat what the hon. Member for Antrim, South (Mr. Forsythe) said about patients' private needs payments.
It has been brought to my attention that that money, which patients regard as pocket money, is sometimes taken from them by private residential homes to be used as payment.
I take issue with some Conservative Members who spoke of second pensions solving the problems of the elderly in our communities.
I ask them to visit some of the communities that I represent, from which industry has disappeared and in which it is not only the person approaching pensionable age who is unemployed and in receipt of social security benefit, but the caring young people in the family who want to do the best for their relatives.
I do not see how those people can accrue a second pension.
To get a second pension, a person needs a job, and the jobs are just not there.
I have no objection to private residential care for those who can afford it, but the Minister must admit that local authorities do an excellent job in terms of residential care and that there should be more local authority residential care places.
The Minister must know that, when Conservative Members attack local authorities, they are attacking — sometimes unconsciously — dedicated men and women who have fought for years to get first-class old folk's homes.
If we mean business in looking after our elderly — and not just the elderly, as young and middle-aged people may be stroke victims or have other problems which mean that they need residential care — local authorities should be encouraged to build more places.
I hope that the Minister will encourage local authorities which do an excellent job in terms of residential care.
Mr. Keith Bradley (Manchester, Withington)
It gives me great pleasure to commend to the House the fourth report by the Select Committee on Social Security.
It is a model of detail and clarity in reporting on private residential and nursing homes.
It is of great credit to the Committee that it describes the situation so clearly and that it points out many of the problems that have come about as a result of Government policy towards private residential care over the past few years.
I thank my hon. Friend the Member for Birkenhead (Mr. Field) for his kind comments in his introduction to the debate.
No one has more expertise or knowledge of these matters, and it is to the credit of the House that he brings those qualities to bear in our debates.
He has always been a source of inspiration to me and I hope that he will take it as a compliment when I say that, from the days when I was a student, he has been an inspiration to me.
I intend to reinforce and highlight some of the recommendations that have been mentioned in many thoughtful contributions this afternoon and I will pose a series of questions to the Minister, whom I welcome to her first estimates debate.
I hope that, in the short time available, she will be able to answer those questions.
I support my hon. Friends the Members for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) and for Halifax (Mrs. Mahon) in their general comments on the broad area of policy on residential and community care.
Many people who care or who are cared for find it difficult to understand why they cannot get the resources for that care when such vast amounts go towards people who are in residential care.
Such people have been disappointed, to say the least, that the Government postponed the community care programme by two years because they saw it as an opportunity for the balance of resources between residential care and community care to be readdressed.
They also saw it as an opportunity to get the packages of care that they sought implemented as early as possible.
My hon. Friend the Member for Halifax made the point that the rundown of long-stay care for the elderly in our health service and the move towards the elderly having the opportunity to go only into private nursing care is to be deprecated.
I am not in favour of long-term institutional care in hospitals, but the balance between the opportunity for decent health care for the elderly in our hospital services and the opportunity for other care has gone much too far.
In my local hospital in Withington, the number of beds for the elderly has decreased in the past few years from 140 beds to barely 20.
I was informed today that elderly people who are trying to get into hospital are being put on to wards in which the nursing staff have not been designated specifically for the care of the elderly.
They are put into such wards because there are not sufficient resources in the health service to open up other wards that have been closed because of the general lack of resources in the health service.
We must consider clearly the balance between health care provision in the national health service and health care provision in private nursing homes.
We must also examine the way in which the run-down of resources through personal social services and housing, as my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield pointed out, has led to local authorities having to suspend many innovations.
Cities such as Sheffield and Manchester have been at the forefront of examining alternatives to residential health care to ensure that people can live happily in the community.
I commend the programme of the development of elderly persons' resource centres in those cities.
In Withington, we have such a centre, which provides domiciliary care, meals, laundry services, recreation services, shopping facilities and companionship.
The people who attend those centres can still live in their own homes because of the support staff who work from those resource centres.
The number of people in the catchment area of the resource centre who now seek residential care has dropped dramatically.
Few now seek residential care because of that support in the community.
I hope that the Government willl re-examine the funding of such developments in local authorities in conjunction with their community care programme so that local authorities and others can again consider a flexible response to ensure that we do not only seek residential care, but that we look forward to proper community care and support in the home.
My hon. Friends have highlighted some of the report's recommendations.
The report is clear that there is substantial evidence from many organisations such as the citizen's advice bureaux, the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, Mencap and MIND — the National Association for Mental Health — that the level of income support does not match the costs in private residential care and that there is a threat, although Conservative Members may doubt it.
People in such homes are anxious that, because of the gap between income support and charges, there is a threat of eviction.
Indeed, there are cases of eviction.
They may be few and far between, but they cause worry to elderly people who fear that the gap may lead to them being put in the same position.
An AMA survey in September 1990 showed that 24 per cent.
of local authorities gave evidence of evictions.
It is a particular problem in the south-east, where there are escalating costs.
There have been examples in local councils in the south-east — Hertfordshire springs to mind — of evictions taking place.
We must study the gap closely and we must realise that, in many of the homes that have come on to the market, on which there has been significant capital outlay by people moving into the private sector, the costs have escalated because of the massive increase in interest rates.
Those costs have been passed on to the residents, so the gap has widened.
We have heard today that the gap has had to be filled by resources from relatives, from charitable organisations and, most appalling, from the meagre personal allowance available to people in residential homes.
They cannot then use that small amount for the few personal items that they may want to buy when they are in residential homes.
We must ensure that the gap does not lead to anxiety about possible eviction.
We must also ensure that the escalation of costs does not lead to elderly people having to move from a single-bedded room to shared accommodation, which would be a lowering of standards in their residential home — and it is their home.
We must ensure that those problems in the south-east are addressed.
I support the recommendation — I hope that the Under-Secretary will do likewise — that the extra allowance that is given in the Greater London area should be extended to out-of-area boroughs that have similar high charges.
Her Department should act on the recommendation that local officers should be able to top up that gap for claimants if no other resources are available.
There should be local flexibility through income support benefits to meet the different charges around the country.
I also support the suggestion that has been made by the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux about housing benefit continuing to be paid until the new system commences in 1993.
I am pleased to see the Secretary of State for Social Security in his place, because he has said that the decision in January 1991 to stop such payments was taken because’ It has never been the intention, nor is it sensible, that in the generality of cases Housing Benefit should be available as an alternative to income support’.
After 1993, the finance to meet the charges will come from income support, housing benefit and local authority community care budgets.
Therefore, would it not be sensible to reintroduce the housing benefit element now to ensure that that gap can be met?
I strongly urge the Under-Secretary to look closely at the recommendation that the personal allowance should not be used as a contribution to bridge the gap between the charges and the benefits.
The personal allowance must be ring-fenced to ensure that people in residential care can have a small amount of money for their personal needs.
Several hon. Members have highlighted the position of carers who may be disadvantaged because of the capital rules on income support.
Their position was well summed up by the Carers National Association, which has stated that the current rules could have’ disastrous consequences’for the family and friends of the claimant who may have moved into the home to take on the caring responsibilities.
We must not do anything to discourage people from taking on that caring role.
People often give up their own home to move into the home of the person for whom they will be caring but may lose that home as a result of the income support capital rules.
Although a spouse may be protected if he or she stays in the home, if the partner goes into permanent residential care, the spouse may want to move into smaller and more appropriate accommodation.
In that case, the spouse must forgo 50 per cent.
of the proceeds of the sale of the property, which means that his or her opportunity to purchase something more appropriate is diminished.
I urge the Minister to comment on that and to look at the way in which capital is treated for income support purposes to ensure that such disadvantages do not continue.
Perhaps the most crucial recommendation is that relating to the funding that will be available for community care after April 1993.
The report highlights three issues: the amount of money to be transferred from the budget of the Department of Social Security; the way in which housing benefit will be calculated after 1993; and the division of responsibility between the health authorities and the local social service departments.
The first issue is the amount of money that will be transferred in income support from the social security budget into the community care budget.
The Association of Metropolitan Authorities estimated in its evidence to the Committee that there would be a £300 million shortfall in that provision.
Although the Secretary of State questioned that figure in his evidence, he did not say what he believed the shortfall would be.
However, there is irrefutable evidence that there will be a shortfall, and if we do not ensure that that gap is identified and ascertain where the resources to meet that gap will come from, not only will the people who are currently seeking community care be disadvantaged, but, more importantly, future generations who might seek care in the community will not receive the resources that at present they believe that they will get.
I should be grateful if the Under-Secretary could comment on the way in which housing benefit is calculated.
I hope that the Government do not intend to set a national figure that will apply throughout the country.
Without regional and local variations, a further gap will be created.
We must ensure that there is local flexibility when assessing housing benefit so that it is sufficient to meet the charges that are imposed locally and to ensure that the gap does not widen.
We must also ensure that the Department of Social Security and of Health reach a clear understanding about the way in which the community care system will operate in future.
From my reading of the evidence, it appears that there is a certain amount of buck-passing between the Ministers in the two Departments about who will identify the gap, where the resources will come from and who will come clean about the budget that will be set for community care provision.
The local authorities need to know now how the standard spending assessments will be calculated so that they can make definite financial plans.
Such planning is crucial if our hopes for community care are to be realised after 1993.
The local authorities need to know where the resources will come from and how they will be allocated between the different areas of the country.
I end with some final thoughts for the Under-Secretary.
Many questions have been posed and many recommendations highlighted in this debate.
The Opposition commend them all, and I hope that the Minister will say that she will implement them.
More crucially, however, will she tell the House how the Government will meet the identified shortfall in community care funding?
If they do not meet that shortfall, there will be a sorry start to the future system of community care.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Miss Ann Widdecombe)
I begin by joining in the congratulations paid by hon. Members of all parties to the hon. Member for Birkenhead (Mr. Field) on the production of an excellent report, and to my hon. Friend the Member for Macclesfield (Mr. Winterton) who chaired the Select Committee on Health, which was also involved.
I welcome the hon. Member for Manchester, Withington (Mr. Bradley) to the Opposition Front Bench and look forward to many a debate with him.
I look forward especially to a future opportunity to develop his views on the desirability of keeping national insurance contributions as low as possible and of working out exactly how that fits in with the policies of some of his right hon. and hon. Friends, but that is for another occasion, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Before turning to the detail of the debate, my hon. Friend the Minister of State for Health, who has been present for most of the debate, has asked me to apologise to the House on her behalf for the fact that she could not stay throughout.
The hon. Members for Birkenhead and for Halifax (Mrs. Mahon) and my hon. Friend the Member for Macclesfield referred to my part in the events of 1990.
It could scarcely be more vivid in their memories than it is in mine, but what is also vivid in my memory is the aftermath of those events, which was the Government's sensible accommodation of the fears and anxieties that had been expressed.
I refer not only to the substantial amount of money that was made available, resulting in a £45 per week rise for nursing homes, which cost us a total of £225 million, but to the amendment that allowed the Secretary of State, after community care had been in place for some time, to take account of the local authorities' assessments of reasonable rates and of their experiences in general.
I will not say that much of this debate has been irrelevant, because that sounds as if I am dismissing what has been said, which I am not, but it is irrelevant in the context of 1993, because the advent of the new system will answer many of the problems that have been identified.
The fact that we can examine what local authorities are doing has been comprehensively ignored, yet it could have an effect on many of the points that were raise.
The hon. Members for Birkenhead and for Withington raised the problem of evictions.
They seemed to be selective in the evidence that they quoted.
I was particularly surprised to hear the hon. Member for Withington home in on Hertfordshire, because, among those giving evidence to the Select Committee was a Mr. Herbert Laming, the director of social services in Hertfordshire.
He said:’ there is no statistical evidence that is known to me at the present time of people who are actually being discharged from the private sector We do not have evidence to bring to you of a substantial number of people who have been discharged against their will from the private sector.’
We must take into account that evidence, as well as the other evidence, which seems to point the other way but has not been statistically upheld and has never been put before us in any form that we could check or examine.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Will the Minister accept that I have an example?
A private care home in my constituency accepted an elderly lady for respite care.
Her son and daughter who cared for her were going abroad for a fortnight's holiday.
After a period, the home evicted the woman, put her in a taxi and sent her to the local police station.
Is that an eviction?
Is that responsible behaviour by the private sector?
Does the Minister accept such behaviour?
It is happening elsewhere to my knowledge.
It is not merely anecdotal evidence.
There is clear evidence.
Miss Widdecombe
The hon. Gentleman said that it was happening elsewhere to his knowledge.
Perhaps he could produce chapter and verse evidence of such incidents.
Mr. Hinchliffe rose
Miss Widdecombe
May I finish, please?
If the hon. Gentleman sends the evidence, we will examine it to see what happened in that case, and whether it is evidence of a larger problem.
There will always be homes, local authority as well as private sector, which do not always behave as well as they should within the rules.
That is not evidence of a general trend.
The hon. Gentleman has not produced evidence of a general trend.
The problem of carers was sensibly raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) and by several other hon. Members, including the hon. Members for Withington and for Birkenhead.
We already make exceptions to the capital rule where homes are occupied by a spouse, a relative over the age of 60 or a relative who is incapacitated.
We have considered whether any further easement is possible.
Although I cannot give the House any good news on that score tonight, I can say that we are considering the matter.
We have to consider factors other than merely resources.
Opposition Members seemed to suggest that the hold-up was resources, but there are other factors, not least the fact, that, if we needed primary legislation, it would come on stream in about 1993, when the responsibility for assessment and the decision about what to pay passes to local authorities.
No new cases would come on stream for us to deal with.
There seems to be a slight practical difficulty there.
Furthermore, we would have to devise fairly tight rules.
Yes, the cases quoted are clear ones, in which carers have been in the home for a long time, but obviously we would wish to avoid a position in which the carer was in the home for a short time in the expectation that he or she would then be allowed to stay there.
All those factors are being taken on board.
The hon. Member for Antrim, South (Mr. Forsythe) raised the problem of the personal allowance, as did several hon. Members.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State alluded to the problem when he was giving evidence to the Select Committee.
It is my understanding that, after 1993, the personal allowances will have to be given to the individual, but we have a problem.
The personal allowance belongs to the individual.
It is for the individual to do what he or she likes with it.
We cannot forbid individuals to use that allowance in whole or in part to pay fees for their care.
So that is another problem.
Opposition Members want us to forbid the use of that personal allowance, if only in part, for a particular purpose.
My hon. Friend the Member for Chislehurst said that, on Ministers' own admission, we no longer paid the full rate of fees.
That is not true.
We have said that we have never been committed — it is not something new — to paying the full fees, however high.
In many instances, the income support rates cover the fees.
Mr. Frank Field
The Minister asked my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) to give her more evidence of evictions.
May we ask her for evidence?
History seems to be being rewritten.
Could she give us just a handful of examples of people who were moved from geriatric beds into the private sector in the early stages of the development of the policy and were given the assurance that she says was publicly given that the Government had no intention of meeting fees, however high?
Is not the truth that practically everyone was told,’ Don't worry — social security is picking up the bill.’
Miss Widdecombe
Social security has always been committed to meeting a reasonable rate.
The hon. Gentleman has acknowledged, indeed it is in his report, that, by simply increasing the income support rate, all that we do is cause the fees to rise behind it.
That point has been made consistently.
That is the point that we have addressed in saying that we will not meet fees, however high.
I do not believe that we ever said to anyone in geriatric care or anyone who entered a home for any other reason,’ Don't worry — social security will pick up the bill, however reasonable or however high.’
The hon. Gentleman challenged me, but I challenge the hon. Gentleman to provide the examples of where we said that.
The hon. Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe) made an interesting speech.
He seemed to suggest that the problems with the policy had largely been caused by the Government withdrawing funding from local government for domiciliary and other services, thus forcing people into residential care.
I do not know how he reconciles that with the 59 per cent.
increase in spending on local authority care services since 1979.
The hon. Member for Wakefield said that he did not like private institutional care.
May I draw his attention to comments in the recent issue of’ Community Care’by the hon. Member for Birmingham, Perry Barr (Mr. Rooker) The hon. Member for Perry Barr is not an apologist for the Government, but he said that the Labour party was committed to a mixed economy.
I welcome his commitment.
That also means a commitment to private residential care as much as to local authority residential care.
Miss Widdecombe
I would like to make progress, because the hon. Member for Birkenhead wishes to reply to the debate.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Will the Minister give way?
Miss Widdecombe
For the last time.
Mr. Hinchliffe
I said that I did not like institutional care, whether private or public.
We have more of it in Britain than in any other country in Europe, and it is wrong.
Miss Widdecombe
The hon. Gentleman said that private residential care was effectively institutional care, and went on to say that he did not like institutional care.
By the application of simple logic, anyone can work out that that means that he does not like private residential care.
The hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) was the only hon. Member to refer to recommendation (ix).
I shall turn to the other recommendations in a moment.
Recommendation (ix) calls upon local offices and the Department of Social Security to give higher priority to those entering residential care to to make sure that their claims for income support are processed in good time so that people do not have weeks of worry or possibly weeks in a home without paying.
I was grateful to the hon. Gentleman for raising that, because it is not often realised that such claims can be made up to three months before the person enters care, although I am aware that the circumstances do not always allow that.
Few people enter care on the spur of the moment as a result of a catastrophe.
For most people, it is a planned exercise.
Therefore, I welcome the opportunity to exhort people who are considering the option of residential care to make inquiries as early as possible with the social security department.
Of course, there are national targets for all categories of claim.
The target for income support is five days.
Obviously, there will be difficult cases, especially where there is perhaps a house or capital to be considered.
However, we will take on board the recommendation and try to ensure that people are not kept waiting on any appreciable scale.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Eastbourne for raising the matter.
The hon. Member for Eastbourne also quoted a Price Waterhouse survey at some length, and referred to shortfall between what we pay and the fees charged.
If I heard him correctly, and I thought so, judging by the figures that he was quoting it must have been a more recent Price Waterhouse survey, not the original.
The more recent survey was based on an example of 85 homes.
We based ours on an example of more than 700.
Therefore, statistically, one should take the results of the first survey, and we based our rates of income support on its median rates.
I shall now deal with the rest of the recommendations which have attracted debate in turn.
The comments on recommendations which relate to the responsibilities of my hon. Friend the Minister for Health will be passed to her for examination.
Two major recommendations in the report have attracted most publicity.
The first is top-up payments, which the hon. Member for Birkenhead recommends should be made by local offices; the second is the reintroduction of housing benefit.
I shall deal with the second recommendation first, because it is based upon a complete misunderstanding.
Housing benefit was never payable in addition to income support, but was used in place of it by people who would not have qualified for income support, such as people living in a room run by a close relative, the long-term disabled and various other categories of people under pensionable age who were not eligible.
They were protected when the change was made.
However, we were not keen for housing benefit to be used in place of housing support for care, which is properly the provision of income support.
The hon. Member for Birkenhead also misunderstood what will happen after 1993.
Yes, housing benefit will be an element of the total package, but will not be for the whole cost of care and will not be wholly additional to current rates of care.
It will be the rental element of the home, but there will still be a package.
Housing benefit will not come in on top of the rates.
Mr. Frank Field
That is what we advocated.
Miss Widdecombe
The hon. Gentleman says that that is what he is advocating, and says that we should reintroduce it now for those who face a shortfall in fees, but it would not make up the shortfall, because it would be part of the reasonable rate of fees.
Mr. Field
It would be additional.
Miss Widdecombe
It would not be additional.
I am afraid that the hon. Gentleman has not understood the working of housing benefit.
The remarks about top-up by local offices was also based on a misunderstanding.
In his opening speech, the hon. Member for Birkenhead said that we should’ bring forward’the arrangements which will prevail after 1993, but it will not be down to the local adjudication officer to assess people to decide the appropriate care and to assess the reasonable rate.
The hon. Gentleman is proposing something entirely different, which would certainly be without the law, which is not an advance on 1993 and which is probably impossible.
Local adjudication offices could not assess individuals and it would be difficult to decide why Mrs. Y should get a top-up but Mrs. X should not.
That is simply meeting the fees, no matter how high, in a more disguised and reasonable form.
It would work in exactly the same way as a general rise in rates.
The hon. Member for Halifax asked whether national health service trusts would be subject to the same guidance rules and discharge procedures.
She is a victim of her own propaganda.
NHS trusts are NHS trusts, so they are subject to NHS guidance after 1993.
Mrs. Mahon
We know that when NHS circulars are sent to trusts they are sent’ for information’, but that they are sent’for action’to directly managed units.
I was asking about that.
Miss Widdecombe
On discharge procedures and the trusts having to take care — in exactly the same way as health authorities now have to take care — of those for whom they believe that care is appropriate, the same rules should apply.
In the last minutes of the debate — the hon. Member for Birkenhead need not worry; I am leaving him time within the advice that I have been given — I must mention the generality of the issues raised.
Time and again we have heard tonight — especially from the hon. Member for Withington — about shortfall and about the measures that we should take to meet it.
Throughout the debate, shortfall has been defined as the gap between fees charged by some homes and the maximum level of income support which we will pay for different categories of persons in those homes.
The crucial thing is that we are talking about fees charged by the homes, not about reasonable costs.
We are talking not about reasonable fees, which have been independently assessed, but about a fee levied by a home.
That is vastly different from saying that we should consider the shortfall between the fees and the costs incurred by the homes.
The answer is that we do not intend to meet all that shortfall.
We have never committed ourselves to meeting it, no matter how high the rate.
In the light of all the sedentary interruptions from the Opposition, I would be interested to hear whether those hon. Gentlemen intend — in the unlikely event that they ever change places with us — to meet that shortfall, no matter how high the fees.
The hon. Member for Wakefield said that under an incoming Labour Government local authorities would receive much more support.
We cannot wait for a Labour Government.
We have to act in 1993, and we shall do so.
Unless Opposition Members are prepared to stand up and pledge that they will meet the costs of every private home, no matter how high and heavy, our proposals for 1993 will overtake most of their objections, and I am grateful to have had the opportunity to respond to the debate.
Mr. Frank Field
I am grateful to have the opportunity to respond to the debate.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
Order.
The hon. Gentleman requires the leave of the House.
Is that agreed?
Hon. Members
Yes.
Mr. Field
With the leave of the House, it remains for me only to thank the Select Committee on Energy for allowing us to hear the Government's reply.
Even if the election is postponed until July, the Government will not be able to maintain the line that we have heard from the Dispatch Box.
The debate was concluded, and the Question necessary to dispose of the proceedings was deferred, pursuant to paragraph (4) of Standing Order No. 52 (Consideration of estimates).
Colliery closures
Mr. Malcolm Moss (Cambridgeshire, North-East)
The hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) made a number of assertions, to which my hon. Friend the Minister will no doubt reply later.
As to the case for Monktonhall, it seems that the hon. Gentleman is seeking privatisation before a Bill has passed through the House.
That is an interesting line from the Liberal Democrats.
Few industries in this country or in the Community as a whole have seen such tremendous changes over the past decade as the coal industry.
Those changes essentially relate to a slimming down in the industry itself, but also to significant structural changes.
On the debit side, over the past 10 years output reduced by 35 million tonnes or 28 per cent., but the parallel decrease in consumption is much less.
It has fallen by only 11.6 million tonnes, or 9.6 per cent.
On the plus side, there have been dramatic productivity increases, from 2.32 tonnes per man shift in 1980-81 to 4.70 tonnes in 1990-91 — a rise of 103 per cent.
in 10 years.
That was not achieved at the expense of health and safety, because over the same period fatal accidents fell by 72 per cent.
Over the same period also, British Coal cut colliery costs by 40 per cent.
in real terms.
Those are not the statistics of an industry in terminal decline.
It is high time that some of the myths presented by Labour Members were buried once and for all.
The first is that the British coal industry will be decimated in the near future; the second is that the present Conservative Government are actively working to achieve such a decline, together with the substantial job losses that accompany pit closures.
The Government's commitment to the coal industry has been clear over the past 10 years or more; they have also shown their commitment to a successful future for the industry.
After all, who invested more than £25 billion over the past decade — some £2 million each working day?
Who put British Coal on a solid financial footing by writing off its debts with a massive £5 billion capital reconstruction programme?
Who introduced a Bill — long overdue — to deal with the coal mining subsidence problem?
Who restructured British Coal so that it was able, last year, to make a profit of £78 million — the first bottom-line profit for 13 years?
Was it the Labour party, operating behind the scenes?
Was it the National Union of Mineworkers, under its renowned leader?
Were those achievements the result of efforts by Labour Members?
Of course not; they are the tangible evidence of a Government's full commitment to one of the country's major industries.
Let us contrast those achievements with Labour's record in office.
The Labour Government closed more pits in their two terms than the current Conservative Government have ever closed.
Under Labour, between 1964 and 1970 and again between 1974 and 1979, a total of 295 pits were shut down; since 1979, there have been just under 140 closures.
That is half the closure rate under Labour.
Mr. Jimmy Hood (Clydesdale)
Can the hon. Gentleman tell us what percentage of collieries have been closed under the present Government, and what percentage were closed under the last Labour Government?
Mr. Moss
I think that absolute figures are much more important than percentages.
In the last analysis, they relate to the number of pits, and the number of jobs available at each pit.
Under Labour, productivity increased annually by an average of just 2.5 per cent.
Since 1979, under the present Government, that figure has trebled to more than 6.5 per cent.
The message is loud and clear; according to any measurement that we care to take, the Conservative Government's record on the coal industry is significantly better than that of Labour.
What of the future?
Of course, the coal industry faces real challenges — environmentally, for instance .
Stringent targets relating to carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nox emissions make it difficult for coal to compete with other fuels, especially in power generation.
Coal also suffers from competition from gas, which is more environmentally friendly, and — as we have heard this evening — is becoming far more important in terms of baseload electricity generation in the near future.
The third challenge comes from the liberalisation of world energy markets, a trend that will undoubtedly continue through the GATT negotiations.
None the less, British Coal has achieved remarkable improvements in the past decade, which can and should continue.
Tribute should be paid to both management and work force for those tremendous achievements: they deserve the highest praise.
The same management and work force face the challenges of the current position, but there is nothing to suggest that they lack the collective will, expertise or enterprise to negotiate a very successful future for themselves and their industry.
Much has been made of the contracts coming up for renewal with the main power generators in the United Kingdom — National Power and PowerGen.
Their generating capacity, however, still lies to a significant extent in coal-fired generation.
Their new gas plants will not be on stream for several years; they need a secure, well-priced coal contract for a long time to come.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) pointed out, as negotiations are currently progressing, there is every chance that some 50 million to 55 million tonnes will form part of that contract negotiation.
Coal-fired plants are mainly located inland, and very close to existing coalfields.
That surely gives British Coal a distinct advantage over importers in negotiations.
The hon. Member for Mansfield (Mr. Meale) raised another possibility for British Coal's immediate future.
British Coal produces the cheapest deep-mined coal in Europe; the cost is substantially lower than that of coal from many other producers in the European Coal and Steel Communities.
Surely there is tremendous scope for diversification of British Coal sales into European Community countries, particularly Germany.
Here, national subsidies are under continual threat of elimination as discussions progress within the ECSC and under the treaty.
As we have stated clearly and repeatedly, the Government are pledged to achieve the largest economic coal industry that the market can support.
To say anything less would invite protectionism, ring fencing and subsidy.
With privatisation, after the next election, the industry will be more effectively structured to meet its challenges and build on its achievements.
What of Labour's plans for the future of the coal industry?
Its pledge is to maintain the industry’ at around about its current size’.
Let us ignore for the moment what Labour actually means by that; how will it deliver on its promise, bearing in mind the fact that the nuclear industry is already ring fenced, gas contracts have already been signed and committed to combined cycle gas turbine plant, and coal imports are perfectly legal under European law?
Labour's coal strategy simply does not stand up — first, on environmental grounds.
Labour is pledged to freeze carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000; that is five years ahead of the Government's pledge.
How will that be possible, given that Labour wishes to phase out nuclear, which could easily push up carbon dioxide emissions by at least 10 per cent.
a year and prevent the development of combined cycle gas stations, which emit half as much carbon dioxide as coal-fired stations?
Sulphur dioxide emissions would also increase if that strategy were implemented.
The only way in which to meet sulphur dioxide targets would be the adoption of a massive flue gas desulphurisation programme on existing coal-fired stations.
Who would pay for that?
If Government grant is given to the companies running the stations, it will come from taxpayers' money.
Or will National Power and PowerGen be forced to do the retrofit?
That would mean significant increases in the price of electricity for consumers.
We have heard nothing this evening about where the money will come from.
Mr. Eric Illsley (Barnsley, Central)
The hon. Gentleman said that Labour would need to implement an FGD programme, and asked who would pay for it.
Surely the Conservative Government have already set out proposals for such a programme: they should be telling him where the money would come from.
Mr. Moss
The existing programme represents a commitment by National Power and PowerGen to retrofit about 8 GW.
That is clearly contained within their financial programmes.
Labour's plans involve an increase, or a stabilisation, of coal burn in our power stations, at the expense of gas or nuclear, at the same time as a reduction in both carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide levels.
Without FGD retrofit across many more stations than are represented than those 8 GW, I do not think that that will be possible.
Mr. Barron
What does the hon. Gentleman think about the fact that National Power and PowerGen are currently importing orimulsion and getting permission to burn it?
Orimulsion emits three or four times as much sulphur as coal.
Mr. Moss
The point at issue is whether National Power and PowerGen meet the carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide targets that have been set for them.
The hon. Member for Rochford (Dr. Clark) raised the question of clean burn technology.
I have no doubt that additional points will be raised about that aspect later because of the Select Committee's excellent report.
I have little doubt that it represents a future for coal-fired power generation in the next decade.
However, it seems that the technology is not right at the moment in economic terms to fill the gap and to play a part in the crucial current round of negotiations in which the future of the coal industry in the next three to four years is the most important issue.
Furthermore, Labour's policy of reducing or banning imports of coal and of reducing the development of gas-fired stations is, in many eyes, quite illegal.
First, the banning of imports might land the Labour Government in the future in front of a European court and, secondly of course, if the Labour Government attempted to use their 40 per cent .
stake in National Power or PowerGen to bring pressure to bear on those companies to reduce the development of gas-fired stations, they might end up in a United Kingdom court for breaking United Kingdom company law.
I believe that Labour's statement that it will maintain the coal industry at’ around about its current size’is unworkable — especially in the light of the developments that are already in train — and also uncosted.
British Coal has an excellent future.
There are still sizeable markets within this country and in the European Community.
We cannot consider the future of British coal with preconceived notions of output, size and number of pits because that would be unrealistic.
Further improvements in productivity and price are, of course, necessary but the price gap between British coal and the generators is certainly not unbridgeable.
Mr. Alexander Eadie (Midlothian)
In considering this important subject, it would be churlish not to congratulate the Select Committee on Energy on the report that it has produced, which to some extent analyses the current position of the mining industry and its position in the future.
However, I wonder whether the Government will pay a blind bit of notice to the report, which illustrates not only what will happen to the mining industry but what will happen if we allow it to contract.
When the Chairman was introducing the report, I intervened on the question of nuclear power.
I do not say this in a malicious way or to score debating points, but I said that the chairman of Scottish Nuclear had argued at the Nuclear Forum that there might be a case, in the strategic interests of the nation, to subsidise nuclear power.
We have argued for a long time that there is a peripheral argument that in the strategic interests of the nation we should be concerned about the coal industry.
To judge from the way things are going, there will be difficulties in respect of the size of the industry.
The hon. Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) wiped about £30 million or £40 million off the take from the coal industry.
He said that his first speech in the previous coal debate made the headlines of Coal News, but I do not think that the chairman of British Coal will be grateful that the hon. Gentleman has halved the take and production of coal in his remarks.
If we see the demise of the coal industry, the nuclear power industry will be subsidised.
That is, in essence, what I was told.
Let me remember how unforgiving the nuclear power industry is.
To think that we should destroy the coal industry and then say,’ Well, if we have no coal industry, we shall have to have a nuclear power industry and what it costs does not really matter because it is in the nation's interest to do it,’does not make sense.
When one reads and analyses the admirable report, one discovers a number of threats — the importation of foreign coal, the question of how the board will react to privatisation and the Government's Rothschild report which is not, in fact, a report but a slaughter of the coal industry.
The estimates that we are debating propose that a further £4 million should be spent on preparing the future privatisation of the coal industry, but what is £1 million or £2 million between friends?
If the taxpayer understood what the Government are planning with this privatisation and what they are doing to the coal industry, there would be no doubt what would happen at the next general election.
It is absolutely disgraceful that this proposal should be put before us.
Who is getting the millions of pounds?
It is certainly not the miners.
The whole point of the admirable report is to point out what is the biggest threat to the coal industry.
It is, of course, the gas industry — there is no doubt about that.
It is a threat because the Government have sat back willingly and said that they do not care if another 30 million tonnes of coal is taken out of the take and if there are to be gas-fired power stations.
One of the hon. Members who spoke earlier pointed out the dangers, and I wonder whether the Government are aware of the dangers of the policy that they are pursuing in relation to gas-fired power stations.
It will affect not only the coal industry but the consumers who will have to pay an ever-increasing price for gas.
There is an assumption that gas is a green fuel.
The Government are helping to support the idea that coal is a pollutant but that nuclear power is green friendly and that gas is green friendly.
In addition, it is said that gas is cheaper, but that is not true on two counts.
Because of the lack of time I shall draw attention to a recently published report entitled’ UK Energy Policy Post-Privatisation’which was written by Professor Fells.
He meets head on the issue of the future of gas and its price.
It is time that the Government examined the issue because as a result of the policy that they are actively backing — or at least not opposing — the consumer will face colossal electricity bills because of the escalation in gas-fired power stations.
The report to which I have just referred states:’ Reserve depletion, especially of oil and gas, must still be a concern for the long-term, but in the medium-term, constraints of supply security and the environment are more worrying than is depletion of the resource base itself.
Probably now, and certainly after 1992, it is not certain that gas in the United Kingdom sector will be landed in the United Kingdom; it is likely to be sucked into mainland Europe, where prices are higher.
Viewed in this perspective the privilege of the United Kingdom is temporary; the price and availability of natural gas in the United Kingdom depend’ on many other factors into which I do not have time to go.
I put that comment on record as the position is serious.
The hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) said that he met the consortium today.
He has not discussed the matter with me, although Monktonhall is in my constituency.
I have never made any secret about the fact that my view on Monktonhall colliery is that British Coal should reopen the colliery.
We have had many meetings on that, and the miners' parliamentary group has met the chairman of British Coal several times.
We have had long meetings with the Secretary of State for Energy on the future of Monktonhall.
There is no question that the issue of Monktonhall was not put forward, as the hon. Member for Gordon seemed to imply.
I have never made any secret of the fact that I believe that the future of Monktonhall lies in British Coal working the pit and we have said that from the start.
It is a bit much for the hon. Member for Gordon to show a report and to say that it was compiled by Labour-controlled Lothian regional council.
He obviously has not read the report —
Mr. Malcolm Bruce
I have.
Mr. Eadie
If he had, he would not have made the remarks he did.
The report on Monktonhall was compiled by an independent consultant; it had nothing to do with political views.
It was unanimously agreed by Lothian regional council, including Liberal Democrat councillors and Tory councillors, that there should be a report.
The hon. Gentleman did not say that.
The report said that what was happening at Monktonhall should be costed.
It went into great detail about how much it would take to start the colliery again and said that it would cost millions of pounds.
It said that the capital's availability in the open market was doubtful and suspect.
My view of the consortium has always been,’ Good luck to it.’
However, I am concerned about where the money will come from and what the rates of interest will be.
I want to ensure that my constituents do not lose the money that they are supposed to invest.
One does not have to look at the report which the hon. Member for Gordon has thrown away with such disdain.
The Government with British Coal decided that they would get an independent consultant's report to study how the mine could be put up for licence — whether under the consortium or under private ownership.
I have a copy of the consortium's report and the hon. Member for Gordon should have got a copy because it was identical to the Lothian report.
The only difference was that the consortium's report said that it would cost another £250 million for subsidence damage.
The consortium has been advised by a mining engineer who was made redundant by British Coal.
He proposes that the coal seams should be worked in the advance.
It is good mining practice that if one is to work all the mine that has already been developed — and £60 billion has been spent in its development — one does not work it in the advance, but in the retreat.
I have good reasons to be doubtful.
The hon. Member for Gordon says that the people of Midlothian are sick of the Labour party.
The people of Midlothian are sick of the Liberal Democrats, because an argument is going on at present in Midlothian about who most wants to back the consortium and whether it is the Scottish National party or the Liberal Democrats.
The Liberal Democrats write to The Scotsman and say that they were the first to back the consortium.
They should not play about with people's livelihoods.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce
We did not back the consortium.
Mr. Eadie
I did not interrupt the speech by the hon. Member for Gordon.
If the hon. Gentleman wants to make a speech about the constituency of Midlothian, he will have to do a lot more homework than he did tonight.
We have problems, and the hon. Gentleman is one of them.
We have problems with the Liberal Democrats, who change their mind every five minutes and who have a different policy for every constituency.
I want to try to be kind to the hon. Member for Gordon because he is out of his depth.
He knows nothing about mining.
I do not know what will happen about Monktonhall.
I want it to remain open, but I also want to understand the position.
I do not want only Monktonhall, but the 100 years worth of coal which stretches to Musselburgh bay to be developed.
Incidentally, I knocked down the girders that were to go to develop a new pit which would come from Monktonhall into those reserves.
I do not need the hon. Member for Gordon to lecture me about my affinity with the mining industry.
I worked in that industry for 30 years.
My record will stand alongside his in relation to the future of mining in Scotland or in relation to any miners in Midlothian.
If the hon. Member for Gordon wants to make speeches criticising the Labour party, he should do more homework first.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and constituency neighbour for giving way so that I can express the East Lothian interest in Monktonhall because Musselburgh bay lies under the east Lothian coast.
My hon. Friend has long experience in the mining industry and is aware that the proposed privatised operation at Monktonhall would be restricted to an underground work force of only 150 people.
Does my hon. Friend feel that justice could possibly be done to the coal reserves in that pit with such a small squad?
Mr. Eadie
I am obliged to my hon. Friend for his intervention.
The hon. Member for Gordon treated this matter as a little joke, saying in the local press that everything could be changed in only five minutes.
He has said that one only needs a dispensation from the mines inspectorate.
That is a load of rubbish.
One could not get a dispensation from the mines inspectorate to increase the manpower.
I appeared on the Front Bench in the Committee Sitting in which the hon. Gentleman referred and received an assurance from the Minister that getting a dispensation would not be a problem.
However, when I tabled a question to that effect, the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Wells (Mr. Heathcoat-Amory), answered by stating that, before the position could be changed, primary legislation would be required.
The hon. Member for Gordon does not seem to understand either that primary legislation would be required or that such primary legislation takes longer than five minutes to be put on the statute book.
I shall finish on this note —
Mr. Andy Stewart
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Eadie
If the hon. Gentleman does not mind, I will not —
Mr. Stewart
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving way, because I listened to what he said earlier and have since checked my speech.
There is only one small difference between what I said on 14 November and what I have said today.
I said on the 14th that the equivalent of 25 million tonnes of coal gas contracts had been given, with a further equivalent of 10 million tonnes lying on the table for the Secretary of State to sanction.
I have since discovered that that figure is not 10 million tonnes but 17 million tonnes.
That is the only difference.
Mr. Eadie
The hon. Gentleman should read his speech again.
I shall conclude now because I am taking up valuable time.
When I first became a Member of the House, I learned that one should never speak about things that one does not know or does not understand.
As that applies also to the subject of mining, I shall give that advice to the hon. Member for Gordon, who spoke on a subject about which he knows very little — and it showed.
Mr. Geoffrey Lofthouse (Pontefract and Castleford)
I am sorry that the hon. Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) appears about to leave the Chamber, as I intend to refer to him.
The Chairman of the Select Committee on Energy apologised to me earlier for the fact that he has had to leave the Chamber because he is due to make a speech on clean coal technology elsewhere in London.
I listened with interest to the hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) when he said that the Labour party did not have much interest in or seek to represent the Monktonhall miners.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that the Select Committee carefully considered the Monktonhall bid and that our discussions were forcefully led by my hon. Friend the Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion).
I do not mean to be offensive to the hon. Member for Sherwood when I say that he has entertained us with his prepared briefs in many of our coal debates, but that it is a bit rich of him continually to criticise the contraction of the coal industry when he has supported many of his Government's policies on the industry.
I hope that the Nottinghamshire miners and Coal News will note that that is hypocritical.
When I read Coal News after our last coal debate, it appeared as though the only people to speak on behalf of the mining industry were the hon. Member for Sherwood and his hon. Friend the Member for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo).
I hope also that British Coal has not helped to produce some of the briefs that we have heard in previous coal debates.
I am a long-standing member of the Select Committee on Energy and like, I am sure, many other members of that Committee, am beginning to feel like a parrot.
We have produced reports year after year expressing anxiety at what was happening to the British coal industry.
Over the years, we have had different witnesses, different Secretaries of State and different chairmen of British Coal.
They have told us,’ There are no figures at all.
All you read in the newspapers about running down the mining industry has no truth in it.’
However, the Select Committee report is based on clean coal technology, on which we have taken a great deal of evidence from expert witnesses.
I am trying to cut my speech short because other people want to speak.
I simply say that it is fairly obvious that Britain could have taken the lead in clean coal technology.
Unfortunately, we have failed to do so.
We have had leading opportunities in British Coal's topping cycle for coal-fired generation.
We had the British Gas Lurgi coal gasification and coal liquefaction.
We have failed miserably to support those experiments financially.
The Government contribution to the Grimethorpe project was much less than that of foreign Governments.
We now find that, because we have failed in the past 10 or 12 years, to recognise the need for clean coal technology and support the schemes that were in operation, it will take eight to 10 years for plants to become operative and produce clean coal.
In the meantime, foreign competitors are moving ahead of us.
The biggest problem is that when the clean coal technology plants are available, judging by present progress, the British coal industry will be run down to such an extent that it will not be able to meet the demand from the plants.
Once again, we shall be in the hands of our foreign competitors.
It is rather ironic that we continue to run down our coal industry and sterilise billions of tonnes of coal.
I shall refer to the Rothschild report later.
I hope that the Government have read the latest British Coal press release from its chairman.
I shall not read it out, because there is not time, but it makes the very point that, purely and simply for medium-term policies and commercial reasons, we shall sterilise billions of tonnes of coal.
Mr. Illsley
May I draw my hon. Friend's attention to the Government's response to the Select Committee report?
Both he and I were members of the Committee when the report was produced.
The Government's response was:’ it is not true to say that the reserves are lost forever if pits currently accessing them are closed.’
On the following page, the British Coal memorandum says:’ The Committee is right to draw attention to the fact that, once a mine is closed, the capacity is effectively lost.’
Does that not show how wrong the Government are?
Mr. Lofthouse
Now that my hon. Friend has brought me to the matter, it is right to put on record the comments of the chairman of British Coal in the press release.
:’ Speaking in London almost a year after becoming Chairman of British Coal, Mr. Clarke said — What we are seeing is a sort of energy arms race, with attempts to justify it on the grounds of guaranteeing security, diversity and competition — but in reality, guaranteeing nothing but higher electricity prices, a rapid abandonment of other fuel reserves, and reliance on as yet unproven overseas resources.'
Coal's advantage still held good when account was taken of the cost of fitting flue gas desulphurisation equipment, said Mr. Clarke.
The next supply contracts which British Coal will negotiate with the big electricity generators would offer electricity users an even better deal because of coal's success in reducing costs.
This is no exercise in abstract economics for British Coal, ' Mr. Clarke stressed.
The dash for gas affects us directly, and in a particularly perverse way.'
The economics of gasfired stations meant that investors wanted long term supply and sale contracts to make them bankable.
Typically, such contracts were for 15 years.
Each new contract, each new gas station, eats into coal's share of the market — a share we could supply competitively.
And we have to close down capacity as a result.
Because we can't re-open mines, that capacity is lost for ever.'’
That is the case, and no expert would refute it.
The future of British Coal depends on the results of the next general election in a few months' time, and I do not think that any hon. Member or the Minister would refute that.
That will decide whether we have a mining industry able to supply the demand for coal in the medium and long term, or whether we shall have the Rothschild recommendations.
The Minister has an obligation to tell us whether the Government intend to implement Rothschild if they are returned to power.
If that is the case, we may as well throw all our debates and the report out of the window.
The Minister has heard speeches from the chairman of the Energy Select Committee and all its members, including my hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley, Central (Mr. Illsley) and the hon. Member for Erewash (Mr. Rost), who have been privileged to listen to expert witnesses.
People without any political bias have given honest evidence and enabled the Select Committee to produce the report, which was a genuine effort to draw to the attention of the Government their folly in running down the coal industry to the extent that they are planning to do.
The Committee has done so in the past, but the Government have taken no notice.
Even though they are hellbent on privatising the coal industry, I hope that at this late stage they will take notice of the Committee's report.
It is a sincere and honest endeavour to try to inform the Government of exactly what is happening to the industry and what folly it would be if they allowed privatisation.
I hope that there will be no opportunity for the Government to introduce the Rothschild recommendations and that a Labour Government will be returned.
They will treat the mining industry and the country in a responsible way and will maintain reserves of fuel which the country so badly needs in the medium and long term.
Mr. Kevin Barron (Rother Valley)
I do not know whether the Minister would agree that, until now, we have heard explanations from both sides of the Chamber about the imperfect and expensive competition which has arisen as a result of the privatisation of the electricity supply industry.
The House should ask what we are doing taking a decision on class V, vote 9, which will give the Government an extra £4 million from the Consolidated Fund’ to defray the charges that will come in course of payment during the year ending on 31st March 1992 for expenditure by the Department of Energy in connection with the privatisation of the coal industry.’
I do not know whether the Minister agrees with the evidence given by the hon. Member for Erewash (Mr. Rost) and by my hon. Friends about privatisation of the electricity supply industry.
However, it is obviously as much a waste of funds to give money to privatisation of the coal industry as it was to give money for the poll tax.
A lot of nonsense has been talked — and a lot of myths — when the privatisation of the coal industry has been discussed in the House and elsewhere.
’ Now the first myth that deserves a liberal dollop of embalming fluid is the notion that British Coal management can't do the business.
That a change of ownership would usher in new ideas and allow productivity to soar and new markets to be exploited.’
I do not know whether the Minister agrees.
’ I can tell you that's absolute rubbish’.
Also, people believe that there can be’ a quick fix’.
I do not believe that there is a quick fix for the coal industry.
Anyone who thinks that he can improve on the commitment and effort of British Coal managers reveals how little he knows about the coal industry and coal mining.
Those two quotes about’ absolute rubbish’and’a quick fix’are not my words; they were taken from the speech made on Thursday last week by the chairman of British Coal.
He ought to know; he was appointed by the Department to run British Coal.
He says that the idea that British Coal can bring anything new to the industry or the nation is a myth.
I should like the Minister to tell us whether he believes the myth about privatising the coal industry.
If it is a myth, how can he justify the request for another £4 million of public funds to be spent on merchant bankers and other advisers like N. M. Rothschild sending reports into the country in brown envelopes which show that the future of the British coal industry is bleak?
We are debating the issues in the report of the Select Committee on Energy.
I welcome the commitment of the Select Committee to secure the future of the coal industry in Britain and to develop a credible long-term strategy for research and development of clean coal technology.
The whole House should commend the conclusion of the Select Committee in paragraph 89 that the strategy must include’ recognition that the UK is unlikely to succeed with clean coal technologies against foreign competition unless the Government is as supportive towards those technologies as competitors' governments.’
The failure to support our industry is amply illustrated by the Bilsthorpe and Grimethorpe projects.
In the case of Bilsthorpe, the Secretary of State's excuse for lack of Government support was that the project was neither commercial nor a demonstration project.
In paragraph 78, the report records the Secretary of State as saying:’ the view that we took was that the technology that was involved was reasonably well proven We were perfectly satisfied that it would work.’
While the Government were refusing to take a 20 per cent.
stake in the project, a fluid bed boiler of the same size and design was built at a mine in Lorraine on the initiative of the French Government, who funded 60 per cent.
of the cost.
That is a fair example of how Britain is lagging behind the rest of Europe.
In their response to the report, the Government have said that the Bilsthorpe project failed to achieve the support of the European Commission after an assessment by technical experts.
Is not it the case that the European Commission, through the THERMIE programme, would back Bilsthorpe only if it was certain to go ahead, and that the only way to ensure that was through Government support?
All the indications are that the Government did not support it and, as a consequence, it was not supported by the European Commission.
Now the Government choose to blame the European Commission instead of putting the blame where it rightly lies — on their own lack of support for the project.
We have also had what is described by the Select Committee as the’ sorry tale’of the Grimethorpe topping cycle.
In paragraph 72, the Select Committee says that it reflects’ the lack of a long-term strategy and the failure to review the R & D role of the Government and other bodies in the wake of privatisation.’
Apparently, the Government now agree that such a long-term project needs to be funded in such a way as to avoid unnecessary delays.
I wonder whether the Minister can tell us whether the project at Grimethorp is now securely funded, so that it will be able to complete its programme of 1,250 hours of operation?
Will the money run out, as it did once before, with the consequential loss not only of the technological advantages gained but of the scientific and technical expertise?
My hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley, East (Mr. Patchett) has taken an avid interest in the Grimethorpe project, not only because of its impact on his constituency but because of its impact on energy development.
Will Grimethorpe complete its current programme without any further problems?
My hon. Friend and I want to know the answer.
The report of the Select Committee is notable because it managed to clarify the Government's position in relation to the generators commitment to retrofit flue-gas desulphurisation systems to coal-fired power stations.
Paragraph 107 of the report notes the Secretary of State insistence that PowerGen, the smaller of the two generators, cannot withdraw from its programme of 4 GW of FGD retrofits to coal-fired stations.
However, from evidence submitted by McLoskey Coal Information Services and the British Association of Colliery Management it is clear that orimulsion, the fuel from Colombia, has a higher sulphur content than British coal.
That means that those coal-fired power stations which use that fuel need FGD retrofitting.
National Power and PowerGen have been given permission to burn that fuel at their power stations at Pembroke, Richborough and Ince.
The Select Committee took a great interest in the issue of FGD retrofitting.
Will the Minister confirm that the Government will take the necessary steps — if necessary through Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution — to ensure that PowerGen complies with its commitment to retrofit 4 GW of coal burn should it not do so voluntarily?
The Ferrybridge sea power station has not got permission for its 2 GW coal burn.
That power station is the biggest sulphur emitter in Britain, and any investment in plant to get rid of sulphur emissions should be directed at such a power station.
Will the generators be required to retrofit FGD if they decide to burn orimulsion?
Would the sulphur emitted by that coal be in addition to the 4 GW limit set now?
It is a pity that the hon. Member for Cambridgeshire, North-East (Mr. Moss) is not in the Chamber.
Attendance on the Conservative Back Benches is thin to say the least, especially when the Government tell us how much they support the coal industry.
I note that my hon. Friend the member for East Lothian (Mr. Home Robertson) has moved to those Benches in an attempt to put the imbalance right.
Mr. Cryer
My hon. Friend has illustrated powerfully the double standards employed by the Government to deal with ordinary people and those in the City.
My hon. Friend should accept from me that his powerful case is ample justification for his award as Back Bencher of the year and why I believe that a serious error was committed in West Bromwich on Saturday.
Mr. Nellist
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for putting that on the record.
Many of those who have been sent to prison rely on income support alone.
Others, such as pensioners, are on fixed or low incomes.
Some have no income.
A number of women with no income have been sent to prison because they were unable to pay the poll tax.
No doubt the Minister will tell us that safeguards were built into system when income support was increased to cover the 20 per cent.
of poll tax for which everyone is liable.
That support was based on the false assumption that it covered the rise in real poll tax levels as opposed to the notional, national averages.
It was also based on the even worse assumption that the actual level of income support in April 1990 was sufficient for people to live on in the first place.
Four years ago, I argued with the then Secretary of State for Health and Social Security about the Fowler review, which led to cuts in income support.
A 33-year-old widow with four children in my constituency lost free school meals and housing benefit — a total loss of £25.
Millions of people lost as a result of those cuts, but the difference between their anger and that felt by those in the poll tax battle is glue.
In the anti-poll tax struggle, nearly 2,000 groups emerged, and at its peak we had 25 groups in Coventry.
Those groups welded people together and provided collective community action.
People did not have to face the problem alone as they do so often when it comes to social security benefit cuts.
In April 1990 the amount of income support was not sufficient for people to live on, so the increase to cover the 20 per cent.
poll tax charge was not sufficient.
Thorough research conducted by Newcastle polytechnic has been passed on to me by the Rev. Paul Nicholson, who has done sterling work to highlight the problems of those on income support.
He has also opposed the imprisonment of those unable to pay their poll tax.
The research revealed that, in April 1990, the income support — including the supplement to cover 20 per cent.
of the poll tax — for a family of two adults and two primary school children who use the cheapest form of fuel and do not’ waste’their income through smoking and drinking, constituted two thirds of the minimum sum experts have identified as sufficient to meet their living requirements.
Those who were compelled to use oil for heating and enjoyed a drink and a smoke received an income support entitlement that was just over half of what experts identified as necessary to meet their requirements.
The Secretary of State has refused to answer my questions on this matter.
The Government trumpet the £140 reduction, but the reduction given to those on income support is inadequate and does not match the needs of those in receipt of that money.
In conjunction with the Home Office, the Department of the Environment should issue a circular immediately to every magistrates court.
I do not know whether the rules and procedures governing magistrates' decisions on poll tax cases have been communicated to them in a proper training package.
I have tabled parliamentary questions about that, but I have received no proper answers.
The Secretary of State should issue an instruction tonight to all magistrates to the effect that they have the power to remit the payment of the poll tax for anybody who cannot afford to pay.
It should be their automatic policy from tonight that anyone in receipt of income support or low incomes equivalent to income support — and, say, 50, 60 or 70 per cent.
above those levels — should automatically have their poll tax debts remitted.
I now intend to bring before the House a series of private Member's Bills.
The first will be designed to bring English and Welsh law into line with Scottish law, which four years ago, under the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987, abolished in Scotland the medieval barbarity of putting people in prison for civil debt.
That law should apply in England and Wales as well.
Were it to do so, literally hundreds of thousands of people would tonight not be sitting at home frightened about whether they might be dragged into the courts and on to prison.
Many people have been forced, when trying to pay the poll tax, into choosing between food, fuel and clothing and paying the tax.
In 1991, we should not be making the poorest in society the scapegoats for a policy that even every Tory Member admits is dead, is dying and should be abolished.
We could do something tonight by having the Minister announce that magistrates will stop putting in prison people who cannot pay their poll tax.
He should seek immediate discussions with the Home Office with a view to having the law altered, to bring English and Welsh law into line with Scottish law.
I ask the Minister to do one more thing for those millions of families, many of whom are part of that 250,000 who are more than six months in arrears with their mortgage repayments, who fear that their homes will be taken from them and who have paid the poll tax.
They have been responsible locally, particularly in areas of the highest deprivation, and they are paying surcharges to local councils of £20, £50, £70 and more a year for those who cannot pay the poll tax.
Those who have paid have been surcharged.
That should be on the national Exchequer, not on those locally who are trying to make ends meet.
I am grateful for the opportunity to put those arguments before the House.
I do not expect much joy from the Minister tonight, but I give warning that, for the time I remain on these Benches, with the label on which I came here eight and a half years ago — as a Labour Member of Parliament, albeit a Member who has a label beneath his name on the TV as an expelled Labour Member — I shall bring before the House the necessary measures not just to talk about the death of the poll tax but to bury it once and for all.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Robert Key)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Coventry, South-Eas (Mr. Nellist) on his success in raising an important issue on the Adjournment.
I also congratulate him on winning The Spectator's Back Bencher of the Year award.
I fundamentally disagree with his proposition, although I congratulate him on the stand that he has taken for his principles.
Many parliamentarians would also congratulate him, however strongly they might disagree with him.
The hon. Gentleman illustrated his argument graphicaly, and so shall I. No hon. Member will forget the riots in Trafalgar square and elsewhere in the country that were provoked by those opposed to a system of taxation endorsed by Parliament.
Nor will we forget those hon. Members who were regarded as the darlings of the rioters.
Whatever justification there may have been 600 years ago for riot and revolt, there was never such justification today.
The House will recall just how often in recent years the hon. Gentleman was compared to Wat Tyler, leader of the peasants' revolt of June 1381.
They have precious little in common, except that they both worked in the construction industry before journeying to London.
I begin my answer to the hon. Member by reminding the House that those who ignore history are destined to repeat it.
I will show why the hon. Gentleman has achieved nothing of any worth or substance by his protest.
Tyler was a mob leader.
He would have been quite at home in those Trafalgar square riots.
He and his comrades sacked and pillaged their way from Rochester to Canterbury, from there to Lambeth palace and Southwark.
They dragged Archbishop Sudbury from the chapel in the Tower of London and plundered and slaughtered their way through London.
They, too, felt strongly about prisons.
They incited prison riots, burned prisons down and sacked and burned John of Gaunt's splendid palace of the Savoy.
Was history repeating itself when The Spectator magazine recently perpetrated the huge joke of wining and dining the hon. Member for Coventry, South-East on his success as Back Bencher of the Year at today's Savoy palace?
Wat Tyler was defeated by the courage and judgment of his king — a boy of 14 — and the wisdom of Parliament.
History surely repeats itself in the poll tax rebel's end.
Wat Tyler was struck down and fatally injured by the sword of the loyal Lord Mayor of London, whose name is commemorated in time-honoured fashion.
In the road named after him, today's so-called tribunes of the people decided to bring to an end the antics of the hon. Member for Coventry, South-East.
The Lord Mayor who saved the king and all that he stood for was William Walworth.
The young king had made concessions to appease the rioters and prevent further loss of life and bloody rioting, but within a year, they were revoked by Parliament, and no permanent results were obtained by Wat Tyler's poll tax revolt.
None have been obtained by the hon. Gentleman, either.
The legislation ensures that people have a statutory right to pay the community charge in manageable instalments.
The community charge regime is an improvement on domestic rates in that respect.
On receipt of a bill, the charge payer is given a specified date by which he or she should pay each instalment.
The date governing the first instalment cannot be sooner than 14 days after the issue of the bill.
If an instalment is not paid, a reminder is issued.
That requires the outstanding instalments to be paid within seven days.
The authority may issue a second reminder notice, but it is under no obligation to do so.
Charge payers are therefore given at least two opportunities to pay their community charge instalment.
If, following the issue of the reminder, the charging authority still does not receive payment, the right to pay by instalments is lost and the charge payer becomes liable to pay the authority the full amount of community charge outstanding for the remainder of the year.
That sum must be paid to the authority within a further seven days.
If payment is still not received, the authority will take enforcement action against that person to ensure that the required sum is paid.
To start that procedure, the authority applies to a magistrates court for a summons.
The summons requires the person to attend the court to explain to the magistrate why the sum has not been paid.
If the bill and the reminder notice have been issued in accordance with the regulations and the charge is still outstanding, the magistrate must issue a liability order to the council so that it can take action against the defaulter.
That order is made for the aggregate of the sum payable and for costs incurred by the charging authority and the court in obtaining and issuing the order.
Once the order has been issued, the charging authority has a number of recovery options available to it.
We have strengthened and widened those powers compared with those that were available to authorities for the enforcement of the old domestic rates.
Under the rates, the only means of enforcement available were to distrain and sell the ratepayer's goods in order to discharge the debt or, if insufficient goods were found, to apply for a committal warrant.
Both remedies apply in the case of the community charge and will apply to the council tax.
In relation to the community charge, we have given authorities the powers to attach a defaulter's earnings or to ask the Department of Social Security to make deductions from income support payments.
Those remedies were added because we believe the payment of debt by manageable amounts to be more civilised than distraint.
Those are powerful additions to an authority's enforcement battery.
They will also apply to the collection of the council tax.
Mr. Nellist
First, will the Minister give an assurance tonight that his Department will start to collect statistics on the attachment of earnings orders and how many have been collected or returned?
I have asked for those figures, and apparently none exist.
Secondly, why is there imprisonment in England and Wales when the Government abolished it four years ago in Scotland?
Why are there two different systems of law?
Mr. Key
That is an historical question, which the hon. Gentleman should address to the Secretary of State for Scotland.
I have answered parliamentary questions from the hon. Gentleman when I have been able to do so.
Where the information was not available, I was obviously not able to do so.
On imprisonment and so-called amnesties, it is illegal and irresponsible to withhold payment of the community charge.
Such action merely deprives authorities of funds that they need to provide services enjoyed by the whole community.
It also transfers the debt to those law-abiding charge payers who pay their charge, many of whom will be earning considerably less than hon. Members who chose to default.
The Government have made it clear on a number of occasions and I repeat it now: there will be no amnesty for non-payers.
People must realise that local authorities will pursue non-payers until they have secured payment, however long it takes.
The introduction of the council tax will not mean that people who have not paid their community charge can forget about it.
If they still owe their local authority money, they must pay it: they will not be let off the hook.
As I explained earlier, the community charge procedures give charge payers every opportunity to pay their community charge.
Enforcement action can be stopped at any stage by the payment of the amount due.
If a charge payer is in financial difficulties but is prepared to offer to pay off any arrears at a reasonable rate, most authorities will accept such arrangements.
However, if someone wilfully refuses to pay the charge, it is right that he should have to pay the price for his illegal action.
In those circumstances, a magistrate can sentence someone to a maximum of three months in prison.
So far, only a tiny minority of the 36 million law-abiding charge payers in this country have chosen to face that ultimate sanction.
Most of them did so to make a political point and to gain publicity.
The hon. Gentleman has made much of the power of imprisonment for non-payment.
He has pointed to the difference between the treatment of offenders in Scotland and England, and said that the Scots do not imprison defaulters following their acceptance of the Scottish Law Commission's report, which recommended that civil imprisonment for the non-payment of rates and taxes should be abolished.
The collection position in Scotland is far worse than in this country.
The Scottish National party must take much of the blame for the lack of payment in Scotland.
They have irresponsibly encouraged people to withhold payment, and then at the eleventh hour they have made payments, leaving those poorer people who were foolish enough to follow their appalling example to face the consequences of now owing a lump sum.
The threat of imprisonment for non-payment of local taxes is not unique to the community charge.
It existed under the old domestic rating system, and still exists for those who do not pay rates in Northern Ireland.
Among our European colleagues, people in the Netherlands who do not pay local taxes can also be imprisoned.
To deprive someone of their liberty is never an easy decision to make.
Imprisonment is a harsh measure that should be used only when every other reasonable avenue has failed.
However, I state again that enforcement procedures offer plenty of opportunities for someone to pay their dues and so avoid imprisonment.
Before any committal warrant is issued, the magistrates court must hold a means inquiry, and it is only following that that a warrant can be issued.
The courts have shown themselves sympathetic in cases where the charge payer does not have the means to pay.
The court will issue such a warrant only where it is satisfied that the failure to pay the charge was wilful or negligent.
Those warrants do not necessarily need to be served by the police.
A local authority can make its own arrangements to arrest defaulters, which can include the use of bailiffs, and the defaulter must comply with such a warrant from the court.
People who go to prison for non-payment of the community charge do so because they choose to lose their liberty rather than pay the amount that is rightfully theirs to pay.
Some Opposition Members have campaigned to stop the imprisonments.
We have no wish to see people imprisoned any more than they have, but the law must be upheld.
If someone deliberately flouts the law in that manner, they only have themselves to blame for the consequences.
I urge all Opposition Members who have not paid their poll tax to do so without delay.
Mr. Terry Lewis
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Key
Of course I shall not give way.
There is no question of my giving way — The Motion having been made after Ten o'clock and the debate having continued for half an hour, Mr. Speaker — adjourned the House without Question put, pursuant to the Standing Order.
Adjourned at seven minutes to Eleven o'clock.
European Council (Maastricht)
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a statement on the European Council in Maastricht which I attended with my right hon. Friends the Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The European Council has reached agreement on a treaty on European union.
The relevant texts have been deposited along with the presidency conclusions.
The House will be invited to debate the outcome next week.
Let me set out the main provisions of the agreements we reached.
The treaty covers economic and monetary union and political union.
It follows the structure for which the United Kingdom has consistently argued.
The treaty creates a new legal framework for co-operation between member states in foreign and security policy and in the fight against international crime.
That co-operation will take place on an intergovernmental basis outside the treaty of Rome.
That means that the Commission will not have the sole right of initiative and the European Court will have no jurisdiction.
On defence, we have agreed a framework for co-operation in which the primacy of the Atlantic alliance has been confirmed and the role of the Western European Union has been enhanced.
As the House knows, there was strong pressure over many months for all aspects of co-operation to come within European Community competence.
That was not acceptable to this country.
Instead, an alternative route to European co-operation has been opened up.
I believe that this will be seen as an increasingly significant development as the Community opens its doors to new members, and more flexible structures are required.
I turn now to the main features of the text.
The treaty provides for the possibility that member states will wish to adopt a single currency later this decade, but they can do so only if they meet strict convergence conditions — conditions for which the British Government have pressed from the outset.
These cover inflation, budget deficits, exchange rate stability and long-term interest rates.
A single currency may come into being in 1997, but only if a minimum of seven countries meet the convergence conditions, and eight of the Twelve vote in favour.
The treaty lays down that a single currency will come into being by 1999, but only if those convergence conditions are met and only for those countries which meet them.
It is therefore highly uncertain when such a currency will be created and which countries it will cover.
In the House on 20 November, I said that there must be a provision giving the United Kingdom the right to decide for ourselves whether or not to move to stage 3.
That requirement has been secured.
It is set out in a legally binding protocol which forms an integral part of the treaty.
The protocol was drafted by the United Kingdom and fully protects the position of this House.
The effect of the protocol is as follows.
We have exactly the same option to join a single currency at the same time as other member states if we wish.
We shall be involved in all the decisions.
But, unlike other Governments, we have not bound ourselves to join regardless of whether it makes economic or political sense.
The treaty text on political union provides for enhanced intergovernmental co-operation on foreign and security policy, on defence policy and in the fight against terrorism, drug trafficking and other crimes.
International crime knows no frontiers.
Terrorists and other criminals must not be allowed to escape justice or to retire abroad with the proceeds of their crime.
This text gives us a new basis for co-operation with our partners in bringing these criminals to justice.
The text provides for joint action in foreign policy, building on what was already agreed in the Single European Act.
But, as I told the House on 20 November, if Britain needs to act on its own, it must be free to do so.
The treaty meets that requirement.
Joint action can take place only if we agree.
Where there is no joint action, each member state is entirely free to act on its own.
If, after joint action has been agreed, a member state needs to take its own measures to meet changed circumstances, it may do so.
There was pressure from other member states to take foreign policy decisions by majority voting.
I was not prepared to agree that Britain could be outvoted on any substantive issue of foreign policy.
Some of our partners also sought to draw a distinction between decisions of principle, where unanimity would apply, and implementing decisions which could be subject to majority voting.
No one was able to explain how that distinction would work.
I told the European Council that, if such occasions did arise, we should consider the case for majority voting on its merits.
The treaty reflects our view.
It provides that the Council may, but only by unanimity, designate certain decisions to be taken by qualified majority voting.
But we cannot be forced to subject our foreign policy to the will of other member states.
We have, in fact, preserved unanimity for all decisions where we decide that we need it.
We are agreed that Europe must do more for its own defence.
We should build up the Western European Union as the defence pillar of the European union, but the treaty embodies the view set out in the Anglo-Italian proposal two months ago, and endorsed at last month's summit of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation that whatever we do at European level must be compatible with NATO.
The WEU must in no way be subordinate to the European Council.
It is not.
We have avoided the danger of setting up defence structures which would compete with NATO.
We have created a framework in which Europe can develop its defence role in a way which complements the American presence in Europe and does not put it at risk.
In these negotiations, we put forward a series of proposals designed to be of direct benefit to the European citizen.
All of them were accepted.
The Community has agreed to increase the accountability of European Community institutions; to strengthen the European Parliament's financial control over the Commission; to allow the European Parliament to investigate maladministration and to appoint a Community ombudsman accessible to all Community citizens; to build up the role of the Court of Auditors, which becomes an institution of the Community; and to ensure compliance with Community obligations by giving the European Court of Justice power to impose fines on Governments who sign directives but subsequently do not implement them.
We wanted — and secured — a sensible enhancement of the role of the European Parliament.
We did not accept the proposal made by other member states for a power of co-decision between the Parliament and the Council.
As I told the House on 20 November, the Council of Ministers must be the body that ultimately determines the Community's laws and policies.
I also said then that we were prepared to consider some blocking power for the European Parliament.
That has now been agreed.
The treaty sets up, in a limited number of areas, a conciliation procedure where there is disagreement between the Council and Parliament.
In the last analysis, the Parliament would be able to block a decision in those areas, but only if an absolute majority of its members turned out to vote the proposal down.
The House has been rightly concerned at the creeping extension of Community competence over the last few years.
The Commission has often brought forward proposals using a dubious legal base, and the Council has found it difficult to halt that practice in the European Court.
We have taken significant steps to deal with that problem.
First, the structure of the treaty puts the issues of foreign and security policy, interior and justice matters and defence policy beyond the reach of the Commission and the European Court.
Secondly, the treaty itself embodies the vital principle of’ subsidiarity’, making it clear that the Community should only be involved in decisions which cannot more effectively be taken at national level.
Thirdly, in some areas — notably health protection, educational exchanges, vocational training and culture — we have defined Community competence clearly for the first time.
Fourthly, there will be no extension of Community competence in employer-employee relations — the so-called social area.
We have a high standard of social protection in this country.
Our national health service, free at the point of use, is the envy of many in Europe, but we recognise the Community's social dimension.
Also — unlike some of our European partners — we have implemented that dimension too; 19 out of the 33 measures in the social action programme have been agreed.
But there is no reason for the Community to get involved in employment legislation, which must be for each country to decide for itself.
Over the past 12 years, we have transformed labour relations.
In 1979, 29 million working days were lost in strikes.
Last year the figure was less than 2 million.
I was not prepared to see that record put in jeopardy.
Nor was I prepared to risk Britain's competitive position as the European magnet for inward investment.
I was not prepared to put British jobs on the line.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
A great many people outside the House are interested in what the Prime Minister has to say.
The Prime Minister
Many of our partners have a wholly different tradition of employment practice which is reflected in the separate arrangements which they have agreed, which will affect only their countries and for which only they will pay.
But even among these member states there are many who fear the effect of Community measures on their jobs and their ability to compete.
Our arguments are based not only on our national interest but on the risks we perceive to the competitive position of the Community as a whole.
This week's events in the Soviet Union were a salutary reminder that reform in the Community is not an end in itself.
The Community's primary task must be to extend its own advantages of democracy, stability and prosperity to eastern Europe.
At British initiative, we committed ourselves at Maastricht to the further enlargement of the Community, starting with the EFTA countries.
When they and, in due course, the new democracies of eastern Europe are ready to join the Community, we shall be ready to welcome them.
With this in mind, the Commission will report on enlargement to next June's European Council in Lisbon.
Thereafter, it will be for the British presidency to carry that work forward.
I look forward to doing so.
We agreed a number of statements on foreign policy issues.
I will single out two of them.
On the Soviet Union, the European Council calls on the republics to respect the rights of minorities, to implement international agreements on arms control and nuclear non-proliferation, to control and secure their nuclear weapons, and to honour their obligations in respect of the Soviet Union's external debt.
The European Council has endorsed the demands which we, France and the United States have made to the Libyan Government requiring them to abandon their support of terrorism and to hand over the alleged perpetrators of the Lockerbie bombing.
The founders of the Community knew that they could not create a viable organisation if they established goals that could never be achieved.
In talking about European union, we are talking about concepts that have to be cast in the reality of national legislation and everyday life.
The Single European Act started as a grandiose design and ended up as a workmanlike blueprint for a free market.
Those treaties have followed the same course.
Our role has been to put forward practical suggestions — and sometimes to rein in the larger ambitions of our partners.
Where we believed their ideas would not work, we have put forward our own alternatives.
Those can be found throughout this treaty.
As with all international negotiations, there has been give and take between all 12 member states.
But the process was one in which Britain has played a leading role, and the result is one in which we can clearly see the imprint of our views.
This is a treaty which safeguards and advances our national interests.
It advances the interests of Europe as a whole.
It opens up new ways of co-operating in Europe.
It clarifies and contains the powers of the Commission.
It will allow the Community to develop in depth.
It reaches out to other Europeans — the new democracies who want to share the benefits we already enjoy.
It is a good agreement for Europe, and a good agreement for the United Kingdom.
I commend it to the House.
Mr. Neil Kinnock (Islwyn)
May I first of all welcome aspects of the outcome of the Maastricht Council, including the strong statement against racism, the reaffirmation of policy on the middle east, the commitment to the enlargement of the Community, the statement on the republics of the Soviet Union, and, of course, the statement on Libya as a host Government for terrorism?
The statement that we have just heard is a statement from a double opt-out Government who have isolated Britain —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kinnock
It is a statement from a double opt-out Government who have isolated Britain on the most vital issues of economic and monetary union and the social charter.
It is impossible to regard the Government's actions as effective negotiation when they have simply opted out of the two basic economic and social issues and have left an empty chair in the European Community.
That is abdication, not negotiation.
Is it not clear that the Government's self-imposed exile from the main stream of the Community will severely disadvantage the British people?
Isolation means sacrificing essential influence over the process of European monetary union; it means shadowing the creation of others and ultimately accepting conditions determined by others; it means throwing away all chance of getting the European central bank to Britain.
The agreement, which the Prime Minister has accepted, will exclude Britain from any say in the appointment of the president, vice-president and executive board of the ECB.
The way in which the Government have sidelined themselves on EMU means uncertainty for business and industry in their planning for the future.
When a major purpose of investing is to take advantage of access to a single market with a growing monetary union, the opt-out country reduces its value as a place for investment.
That is how the Government are putting Britain into the economic, financial, industrial and employment second division in Europe.
Will the Prime Minister confirm that the protocol on social policy which he agreed at Maastricht means that, when social policy and employment standards are discussed in the Community, the United Kingdom’ shall not take part’, shall not vote or have a voice?
How can the Prime Minister claim to be seeking the best deal for Britain when he is determined to get the worst conditions for British workers?
By refusing to agree to the social chapter, is not he wanting to exclude British people from the provisions for equal status for 6 million part-time employees, many of whom are women; for fair and equal treatment for women at work; for proper protection for young people at work; for rights to minimum holiday leave; and for better information for employees?
He claims that those decent basic provisions for individual employees, whether they are in or out of trade unions, would inhibit competitiveness.
But how does he answer his fellow Conservatives like Herr Kohl, or Mr. Eyskens, of Belgium, who says:’ It is a fact that the most competitive countries in Europe are also the ones with the best social and employment provision’?
When will the Government learn the lesson that civilised standards help efficiency and competitiveness, while exploitation and injustice harm them?
When will they listen to the British people, the great majority of whom know that there should be improved and common employees' rights for all Community countries in the single market?
After the summit, we must ask how the Prime Minister can claim to be at the heart of Europe when, because of his actions, our country is not even part of the key decisions that will shape the Europe of the future.
Our country's interests cannot be served by isolation or opt-out.
They will be served by maximising influence, full involvement and insistence on the best standards.
That is how a Labour Government will serve the British people.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the Leader of the Opposition for welcoming some aspects of our agreement.
At the outset of his remarks, he referred to a double opt-out.
I was surprised to hear him say that because he was clearly referring to economic and monetary union.
As the shadow Chancellor said on 24 November:’ We should not commit ourselves now, in advance of 1997, to enter into a single currency.
That is the point of agreement all sensible people will have’.
I agree, and that is what we have negotiated.
I am sorry that some others have apparently taken leave of their senses.
As for the second alleged opt-out, the right hon. Gentleman confuses the distinction between the social dimension of the Community, to which Britain is fully committed — it has implemented all 19 of the directives thus passed — and the so-called social chapter, which deals with employment and labour laws where they are best determined in this country and in this House, and not imposed from outside.
The right hon. Gentleman referred to investment, but I fear that his judgment is not shared by others.
He said that inward investment will not come to Britain.
Perhaps he should have a word with the President of the Commission, Mr. Delors, who said yesterday:’ Britain will become a paradise for Japanese investment’.
The right hon. Gentleman wants to know what we shall not accept from Europe.
We are not prepared to accept the imposition of other people's directions on many forms of flexible job opportunities now available in this country.
We are not prepared to accept restrictions on the employer's right to recruit the best qualified person for the job.
We are not prepared to accept new trade union powers to represent individual employees and bargain on their behalf.
The right hon. Gentleman may be prepared to hand over the government of this country to trade unions abroad, but that is not the position of the Conservative party.
The right hon. Gentleman said that this country would not be part of the key decisions on economic and monetary union.
He should read the treaty: we are part of all the decisions on economic and monetary union, with the additional point that, unlike our European Community partners, we have the choice, when the decision is made, whether to go into stage 3.
It is a choice for the House whether we go in or stay out.
That choice is best made in the light of the conditions that prevail at the time.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I was pleased to hear the Prime Minister say that there is to be a debate next week.
Perhaps it will help hon. Members to know that those who are called to put a question today may not stand quite such a good chance in next week's debate.
Mr. Paddy Ashdown (Yeovil)
Although the Prime Minister did not say it, the agreement that he signed yesterday in Maastricht is historic.
It marks the point of irreversibility in the continuing process of the integration and unity of Europe.
The pity of it is that the Prime Minister, who said that he wanted to be at the heart of the process, has instead condemned this country to be semi-detached from it.
The Prime Minister has told us that it is a good agreement for Britain.
He is wrong: it is a bad agreement for Britain.
Does not the Prime Minister realise that, after 40 years in which this country has been dogged by the uncertainty of its position in Europe, he had the opportunity to answer that question once and for all, and he ducked it?
The rest of Europe said yes; the best that he could say for Britain was maybe.
Does he not realise that his maybe will cost us?
Oh yes, it will.
Does he not realise that uncertainty about Britain's future in Europe will mean higher interest rates when the pound comes under pressure?
Whatever President Delors says, it will mean lower inward investment.
It will mean that we cannot shape the institutions to which subsequently we shall have to submit.
Interruption
That uncertainty will mean that the City of London will lose any aspirations that it has to accommodate the central European bank.
Does not the right hon. Gentleman believe that that is too high a price to ask the people of Britain to pay in order that he may put the divisions of the Conservative party before this country's long-term prosperity?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is mistaken in much of what he says.
British industry and the City have welcomed the agreement reached yesterday, which is a step towards European co-operation.
Most importantly, it opens up new ways of co-operation with our European partners, not just the way of straight-through Community competence and the European court of Justice.
In no sense is the United Kingdom semi-detached from the decisions that will be made in Europe.
It will be part of all the decisions made in Europe.
That was an odd comment to come from the right hon. Gentleman who, judged from his comments in recent days, would not have accepted the social charter.
Like us, he would have opted out.
I welcome the support of the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) on that issue.
No doubt the right hon. Member for Yeovil,(Mr. Ashdown) would have regarded himself as semi-detached.
We have a part in shaping all the decisions of Europe.
That is clearly understood by our partners and has been agreed in the treaty.
I am sorry that the right hon. Member for Yeovil did not have the grace to accept that.
Mr. David Howell (Guildford)
My right hon. Friend has shown the utmost skill and stamina over the past two days in keeping us away from the dangerous path towards the centralised Europe that none of us who are good Europeans want to see.
Does he agree that the time has come to put forward with ever greater clarity the kind of Europe which we want and which he has already outlined in his comments?
Does he further agree that that needs to be a Europe which is not only open and ready to trade fully with the rest of the world, but also ready to grapple with the greatest danger facing European stability, a danger which was scarcely mentioned at Maastricht, and which must be faced by ensuring that the nations of eastern Europe make it all the way to open democracies and that the vast and scattered nuclear arsenal of the former Soviet Union is brought under proper control and we prevent a great proliferation of nuclear weapons in the successor states?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my right hon. Friend.
We discussed collectively, and I discussed bilaterally with President Mitterrand, the specific points that my right hon. Friend mentions and, in particular, the potential dangers of nuclear proliferation within the republics of the Soviet Union.
It is precisely because of our wish to create the sort of free market and wide community that we have in mind that we have included, at our insistence and with the agreement of other colleagues, a declaration in the presidency conclusions about the future enlargement of the Community.
We propose to carry that principle forward, both in communal discussions next year and as a key part of the British presidency in the second half of 1992.
Mr. John D. Taylor (Strangford)
Since yesterday's decisions are clearly further progress towards European union, can the Prime Minister say whether the United Kingdom has moved any closer to the acceptance of a single European currency?
Will yesterday's decisions mean any increase in the United Kingdom's contribution to the European Community budget?
Was there any discussion on further Community support for the regions such as Portugal, Greece and Northern Ireland?
The Prime Minister
We are a full part of the process towards economic and monetary union and a single currency.
As I said both in my statement and in an earlier answer, we have the option to decide at a later stage, when others enter stage 3, whether that is the right thing for this country to do.
It is a choice that is fully there for us to make at the same time and in the same fashion as other countries, except that we have the additional option of deciding that it would not be right for this country.
The right hon. Gentleman asked about the regions of the Community.
A cohesion fund was agreed that would turn out to be a subset of structural funds with the intention of ensuring that money which is diverted within the Community for the right purposes goes to the areas that most need it.
Mr. John Biffen (Shropshire, North)
I join the many others who will welcome the prominence that my right hon. Friend gives to the enlargement of the Community, especially in the context of central and eastern Europe.
When the issue of the single currency was being discussed at Maastricht, did its promoters suggest that this would make more easy that enlargement, and how did my right hon. Friend respond?
The Prime Minister
It is a matter that has been discussed among the Finance Ministers on many occasions.
I do not think that there is an expectation among people that it will make it easier, and that is one of the arguments that we have frequently advanced against it.
One of the difficulties of proceeding with the single currency, particularly if a small number of member states within the Community were to proceed on their own, is that it would become increasingly difficult for others to join them at a later stage.
It is for that reason that, if and when the decision is made to move forward, it would be desirable for as many members of the Community as possible to move collectively.
Mr. Peter Shore (Bethnal Green and Stepney)
For those who do not want a federal future for this country there are many reasons for concern in the Prime Minister's statement on the treaty of union.
If the treaty bears the imprint of our views, how can the Prime Minister explain the acceptance of article 104B, under which present and future Governments of this country would be limited by European authority to a borrowing requirement of no more than 3 per cent.
of GDP?
Is this not an intolerable interference with the freedom of action of any British Government, and is the Prime Minister aware that, in 12 of the past 18 years, successive Governments, Labour and Conservative, have spent more than 3 per cent.
of GDP on their borrowing requirements?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman might have been better advised to raise that matter at a meeting of the parliamentary Labour party than inviting me to answer it.
I have two points to make in reply to him.
First, as a result of the negotiations by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor, there is considerably more flexibility now than there was with the 3 per cent.
figure that the right hon. Gentleman mentioned.
Secondly, the 3 per cent.
does not apply in stage 2 and, even with that greater flexibility, would apply only to those countries that decided to enter stage 3.
That will be a factor that the House will be able to have in its mind when it decides on whether to enterstage 3.
Sir Norman Fowler (Sutton Coldfield)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that, entirely contrary to what the Leader of the Opposition has just said, the settlement that he has won will be welcomed by the overwhelming majority of people in this country?
Is it not clear that the so-called social measures that he rejected would have led to unemployment and the loss of jobs?
Are those not exactly the issues that should be settled in this country and not in Brussels?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for his remarks, with which I entirely agree.
It was precisely because the measures in the social chapter would have damaged first employment prospects and secondly our competitiveness against Japan and the United States that I found them unacceptable.
A further reason is that measures of this sort are best decided in the House, in accordance with the traditions of this country, and not abroad by trade unions and others.
Sir Patrick Duffy (Sheffield, Attercliffe)
Does the Prime Minister recall my earlier concern that the parameters that he was instrumental in drawing up at the Rome summit, to separate an incipient European Community defence policy from NATO's responsibilities for the defence of Europe, should be preserved?
Will he now reassure the House that they have not been breached by article B of the agreement in what The Guardian this morning called a defence compromise?
It commits the Community to the’ eventual framing’of a defence policy.
Do not those words portend an eventual challenge by the Franco-German axis to the primacy of NATO?
The Prime Minister
Of course it was challenged in the discussions, but the outcome is that set out in the Anglo-Italian paper.
It is a good outcome for NATO and the United Kingdom.
It is the right framework for the European Community in the 1990s.
It means that there will be a stronger European contribution to common defence, and that is right.
That will be organised through the Western European Union and it will not be subordinated to the European Community.
Mr. Cranley Onslow (Woking)
I add my congratulations to my right hon. Friend and his team on what will rightly be seen in the country as an excellent result for Britain and Europe, especially on enlargement.
As it is now all the more important that Europe should prove that it can walk before it tries to run, may we look forward to a rigid application by our European partners of all those directives that they have so far chosen to ignore?
The Prime Minister
Yes, we can look forward to that application, for under the provisions agreed in the treaty, if we and our European partners fail to implement directives that we sign up to, we shall be subjected to substantial fines by the European Court of Justice.
Mr. Jim Sillars (Glasgow, Govan)
Is the Prime Minister aware that his claim to have reined in the ambitions of our partners is a vain boast that bears no relation to reality, and that going into Maastricht we had a Community of 12 and coming out we had a Community of 11 and a half?
The 11 are ambitious, able and united and, judging by history, are likely to be successful, and the half is a self-disabled United Kingdom.
Is he aware that what he achieved, or failed to achieve, might please the little Englanders behind him but will be a tragedy for the people of the United Kingdom and the Scottish part of it through the 1990s?
The Prime Minister
An odd comment from a home ruler for Scotland, I must say.
The agreement is good for the United Kingdom and good for Europe.
It is an agreement to which our European partners were happy to sign up, and they have gone back to their own countries to celebrate.
They do not share the views that the hon. Gentleman has just expressed.
Rev. Ian Paisley (Antrim, North)
Will the Prime Minister take it from me that all right-thinking people would like to congratulate him on escaping unbruised from the street fighting at Maastricht, where he met the heavies of Germany and France?
Was the vexed question of extradition discussed at the Council?
Is the United Kingdom financially committed to the policies of cohesion and convergence?
The Prime Minister
The question of extradition is one of the matters that would fall under the interior and justice pillar to be decided on an intergovernmental basis.
It is likely that under those agreements extradition within Europe would in future be easier than it has been in the past, which I think the hon. Gentleman would welcome.
Mr. Tony Benn (Chesterfield)
Is the Prime Minister aware, first, that people will want to study in detail what he has brought back and will need far more time to do that, and, secondly, that a treaty committing us to a European union probably represents an even bigger change than our entry into the Community in 1975, the long-term effect of which over many Parliaments will be great?
In those circumstances, does he really think that a dying Parliament, a week after the Maastricht summit, should empower a lame-duck Prime Minister to use the royal prerogative to sign that treaty without any consultation with the British people whose rights will be affected far more than this Parliament?
Does he not think that, with a general election coming, if he is confident in his position, the least that he could do would be to put that forward in a general election so that at least people will have an opportunity to give a view before they are committed by the right hon. Gentleman's signature of a treaty of this magnitude?
The Prime Minister
But that is the case.
Legislation will need to be drafted and taken through the House in order to ratify the agreements that have been provisionally reached at Maastricht.
That legislation cannot be carried through in the remainder of this Parliament and will be a matter for the next Parliament.
With regard to the right hon. Gentleman's earlier remarks about opting in, I suggest that he discusses that matter with his right hon. Friends who would have signed the treaty in full without waiting to see what the economic conditions were at a later stage.
Does that not give an absolute lie to the belief that the Opposition are united on Europe?
Mr. Julian Amery (Brighton, Pavilion)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the agreement that he has secured will be widely welcomed in northern and eastern Europe, particularly as they are the new frontier of Europe and of all of us?
In particular, I congratulate my right hon. Friend on having laid the foundations — not more than that yet — of a European defence and foreign policy as pillars of the European house distinct from the collective will of the European Commission.
The Prime Minister
My right hon. Friend has it exactly and precisely right in terms of laying the foundation for European action on foreign affairs and defence, and that is the right direction in which Britain should go.
I welcome very much the options that are now open for both the EFTA states, and, in due course, when their economies are ready, the eastern European states, to join the EC.
Perhaps not in the political lifetime of most hon. Members but at some future stage, we may see a Community that stretches from one end of Europe to the other, for which I for one will wish to work.
Mr. Giles Radice (Durham, North)
The Prime Minister has said that the Maastricht settlement is game, set and match to Britain.
Quite apart from the inappropriate Chamberlainesque triumphalism, how can it be game, set and match to Britain if the Government have decided to opt out of future social developments and remain undecided about a single European currency?
The Prime Minister
I set out the Government's objectives in a speech in this House before I went to Maastricht.
We met all those objectives.
Mr. Nicholas Budgen (Wolverhampton, South-West)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the lesson that we learned from the Single European Act was that, whenever there is an extension of Community competence, the institutions of the European Community seek to extend that competence?
Does he also agree that, where he has extended the competence of the institutions of the European Community, we shall increasingly see, as we have seen in relation to Sunday trading and British Aerospace, the emergence of two forms of law — first, British law, which we encourage the population to obey and honour, and, secondly, European law, which we try to avoid — and thus we shall succeed in undermining the rule of law here?
The Prime Minister
There have been twin forms of law since this House took the decision to enter the Community 20 years ago.
I know that that is not entirely agreeable to some of my hon. Friends and to some Opposition Members, but that is the fact of life — and has been for many years.
What we sought to do, in terms of Community competence, in the discussions was to extend it in areas where we thought it was appropriate and to define it more adequately than it has been defined in the past in order to prevent, as far as it is possible to prevent it, that element of creeping competence that so offends many people in this country.
Dr. Dafydd Elis Thomas (Meirionnydd Nant Conwy)
Does the Prime Minister accept that we are pleased that the United Kingdom is signatory to a treaty that commits it to an ever closer union among European peoples, where decisions are to be taken as close to the citizens as possible?
When does the Prime Minister intend to implement that part of the treaty in respect of Wales and Scotland?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his earlier remarks.
The subsidiarity agreement was particularly an aim of both the United Kingdom and Germany.
The intention is to ensure that decisions are taken at national level whenever that is the most appropriate way to deal with the decisions.
That is what we have achieved.
Mr. James Kilfedder (North Down)
From a different political viewpoint, may I congratulate the Prime Minister on his ability and the authority that he demonstrated during the negotiations that secured this agreement, which, despite all the odds, will be beneficial to the United Kingdom.
I am sure that it will be beneficial to Northern Ireland, in view of the number of unemployed people in the Province and the need for Northern Ireland to become more closely involved in Europe.
Is the Prime Minister satisfied that sufficient steps have been taken to deal with terrorism?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's remarks about the overall agreement that we have reached.
I share his view that it is a good agreement for this country and a good agreement for Northern Ireland.
The decisions that we have made on the interior and justice portfolio — to deal with terrorism more closely in an intergovernmental agreement — open up the possibility of much greater co-operation against terrorism.
We are studying specific plans, under the Europol heading, that will be geared specifically against terrorism, mafia activities and drug dealers.
It will provide for far more cross-European co-operation against crime than we have ever known.
Mr. Jack Ashley (Stoke-on-Trent, South)
The Government are great disciplinarians.
Can the Prime Minister explain why participation in the exchange rate mechanism is a beneficial discipline for British industry, whereas participation in the social chapter is a damaging discipline?
Is not the real answer that the Conservative party has very little time and even less concern for British workers?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is inaccurate, and I believe that he is fair-minded enough to know it.
The exchange rate mechanism is a discipline to reduce inflation.
As for the provisions in the social chapter, that would be a discipline that would reduce jobs.
Mr. Terence L. Higgins (Worthing)
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the skill with which he conducted the negotiations.
Is he aware that the setting of arbitrary deadlines for a move to a single currency is really gesture politics, and that he is right to dissociate Britain from it?
I am delighted to see that he has also dissociated us from the objectionable features of article 104B regarding fiscal deficits.
Will he not rest on his laurels?
Should he not turn his attention vigorously to sorting out the common agricultural policy, which is endangering the Uruguay round and remains a serious blot which is totally inconsistent with the sort of policies that are embodied in the new treaty?
The Prime Minister
My right hon. Friend's third point is right.
In recent weeks, I have had several opportunities to discuss that matter with the presidency of the Commission and with the Commissioners who negotiate on behalf of the European Community.
There is no doubt that the European Community needs to make amendments to its common agricultural policy and to its agricultural policies to ensure that an agreement on the general agreement on tariffs and trade can be reached.
Agreement on GATT is as important to this country as anything else at the moment, and the Community will have to make amendments to its policy to play its part in reaching that agreement.
I referred earlier to article 104B, and I have nothing further to add.
My right hon. Friend is correct about the deadlines.
The deadlines refer to the time at which the convergence conditions will be examined.
The dates for moving forward must be subordinate to the convergence conditions.
Without the convergence conditions, it would be improper and absurd to contemplate moving forward.
Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South)
Will the Prime Minister confirm that there is a protocol in the Maastricht agreement calling for greater involvement of national Parliaments and Assemblies in the work of the Community?
I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his kind remarks about the work of the Select Committee on European legislation made during the debate on 21 November.
Is he aware that that Committee is charged with the responsibility of assessing the legal and political impact of EEC proposals on the United Kingdom and for its reports, together with the proposals, to be debated here before decisions are made by the Ministers concerned?
Therefore, is not it inappropriate for the Government to place before the House a motion endorsing the Maastricht deal before comparable examination of the draft treaty has taken place?
Is not that against the resolution of the House and its spirit, and is it not a reduction, not an increase, in the involvement of this national Parliament?
The Prime Minister
I can confirm the hon. Gentleman's remarks about the protocol.
We shall be placing a motion before the House inviting it to endorse the agreement.
However, as I told the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn), there will be an opportunity in due course for the legislation that enacts the agreement to be considered in detail by the House.
So there will be ample opportunity for every hon. Member to consider in detail what the agreements into which we have entered would commit the country to.
Sir Michael Marshall (Arundel)
Will my right hon. Friend accept that there will be a warm welcome for his commitment to a widening process on his own behalf and that of Her Majesty's Government?
Recognising the difficulty that arises in the countries of central and eastern Europe, can he commit himself to the urgent introduction of EFTA applications, recognising the special bridges that they have with those countries and the Baltic states?
The Prime Minister
I can say that to my hon. Friend.
I anticipate that at least two of the EFTA countries will place their applications before the Community shortly and that it will be possible to begin examining them in early 1993.
Mr. Terry Davis (Birmingham, Hodge Hill)
Is not the Prime Minister saying that he has used all the influence that he can muster to ensure that working people in Britain have fewer rights and less protection against bad employers than the rest of Europe?
The Prime Minister
No, Sir.
I have used all the influence that I can muster to ensure that working people do not lose their jobs as a result of a lack of competitiveness and costs on employers that could not be met without shedding labour.
I note that the hon. Gentleman wishes to introduce measures that would cost jobs in Britain.
We have noticed that in other Opposition policies in the past.
Sir Jim Spicer (Dorset, West)
Will my right hon. Friend accept that the outcome of Maastricht, both for the people of this country and for the Community, is a treaty based on common sense and realism?
Will he accept the gratitude of every Conservative Member and of the people of this country, because the treaty bears the imprint not only of my right hon. Friend but of the Foreign Secretary and of the Treasury?
We are grateful to them.
My right hon. Friend spoke at length about EFTA applications.
He will not forget, particularly when we have the presidency next year, that Malta has applied for membership of the Community and that we owe a great debt of gratitude to the Maltese people.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his remarks.
As I said earlier, during our presidency we shall be looking particularly at the prospects for enlargement of the Community.
Mr. James Lamond (Oldham, Central and Royton)
But is not the Prime Minister's decision to opt out of the social charter ——’ opt out’were the words that he used — an admission that, after 12 years of Tory rule, the economy is not as sound, robust and healthy as the Government try to claim but is so fragile that it cannot support the most basic workers' rights that will be enjoyed in the rest of Europe?
Interruption
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is wrong in everything he says.
What I find so extraordinary is that Opposition Members are so keen to place with trade unions abroad so much of the authority on labour law matters that resides in this House.
Just as they are subordinate to trade unions at home, so they yearn to be subordinate to trade unions abroad.
Sir Trevor Skeet (Bedfordshire, North)
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister on his courageous stand against the 11 who opposed him, but may I ask him a simple question?
Compared with the European Communities Act 1972, what additional authority has now been conceded to Brussels from the United Kingdom Parliament?
The Prime Minister
Since the 1972 Act, there have been many additional authorities to Brussels through European Court judgments, individual directives and the implications and effects of the Single European Act, quite apart from the effect of the treaties which we have agreed in the past two days but which have yet to be ratified by Parliament.
The detailed information that my hon. Friend requires can be found in documentation that has been placed in the Library.
Mr. Joseph Ashton (Bassetlaw)
If legislation is needed to get the treaty through Parliament, if it is so popular with the country, and if it will be such a wonderful thing for unemployed people, for women, for the regions and for business, why does not the Prime Minister dissolve Parliament next week and have a general election in January?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman will get his election in due course.
Mr. Nigel Forman (Carshalton and Wallington)
Is it not clear that one of my right hon. Friend's most important achievements at Maastricht was to get a clear definition of subsidiarity written into the treaty as a bulwark against creeping competence by the Commission and other Community institutions?
Will he confirm that, once that definition is lawful, it will be possible to ensure that the Community will be able to act on appropriate areas such as trans-border environmental pollution, but on areas where there is no need or justification for action, such as national and fiscal policies, the House will retain its rights?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
The provisions that he refers to are in the agreement that we have signed, which provides greater safeguards than before to ensure that the Community deals with those matters that are most appropriately dealt with by the Community and that other matters are left to national Parliaments.
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
Will the Prime Minister confirm that the Secretary of State for Employment will no longer be able to participate in the Social Affairs Council — I am sure that many of our partners will not miss him — and, if that is so, will he consider demoting him and reducing his salary?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Lady is mistaken.
The social dimension of the Community has been there for a long time.
As I said in answer to an earlier question, over recent years we have agreed 19 directives on the social dimension — more than anyone else in the Community — and we have implemented them.
All of them have been agreed and discussed with my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment and his predecessor.
Dame Elaine Kellet-Bowman (Lancaster)
My right hon. Friend said that Labour would have signed in full.
They would indeed.
Yesterday, the shadow Chancellor said on the early morning news that Britain should fall into line with its partners — in other words, that we should give in to them without bothering to do anything to secure the best deal for this country.
Is my right hon. Friend aware that my constituents, whether farmers, industrialists or citizens, who obey the law will be delighted that those who do not do so will in future be fined for that failure?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right.
The Opposition's position is even more incredible than she sets out.
The Leader of the Opposition previously expressed three conditions for joining a single currency.
None of them has been met, yet today he says that he would have signed up to a single currency without any opt-out clause.
Mr. Bruce Grocott (The Wrekin)
Did the Prime Minister feel no sense of humiliation at having to meet the other 11 Heads of Government and having to explain to them in the most public way why the British economy was so uniquely vulnerable and fragile that we alone were unable to provide the basic minimum provisions of the social charter?
If he thinks that he can come back to the House, whatever the supine press may say, and present it as a triumph for Britain that he has managed to prevent those provisions from being applied in this country, although they are being applied everywhere else, he shows that the Government are not only economically bankrupt but bankrupt of values.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is an ungracious loser.
This country has done very well in the negotiations and we have got an agreement that is right for this country.
The reason for not accepting what people call the social chapter, which is in reality the imposition of labour laws that would damage our competitiveness, is that we intend to keep our competitiveness and we are not prepared to lose our competitiveness against Japan and the United States, even though that is the express policy of the Labour party.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that we in Britain will retain complete freedom to run our own monetary and economic policy, that we have transferred no significant powers from Westminster to the European Parliament, and that, in securing the deletion of the word’ federal’, he has secured the deletion of the whole federal agenda?
Is my right hon. Friend aware that, in securing all his aims at Maastricht, he will have the gratitude and admiration of the entire nation?
The Prime Minister
I am most grateful to my hon. and learned Friend.
He is clear about our management of our own economy in the future in the way in which he sets it out.
If at some stage we entered into a single currency, we should have to deal with a different matter.
That is a matter for the House to decide at a later stage.
The words’ federal vocation’were unacceptable to the majority of hon. Members.
They have been removed from the chapeau and replaced by the words that were in the original treaty of Rome —’ an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe’.
Mr. D. N. Campbell-Savours (Workington)
Why is it that German competitiveness can stand the social chapter and British competitiveness cannot?
What is the distinction?
The Prime Minister
The Germans have had a different structure of labour laws for many years.
Mr. Anthony Nelson (Chichester)
May I join in congratulating my right hon. Friend on negotiating an agreement that meets all our aspirations and protects our national interest?
As the way is now open, with the agreement of the House, for us to join a single currency in just over five years, will my right hon. Friend spell out clearly to the House and to the people of this country what benefits will or may derive to them from a single currency?
The Prime Minister
If the House were to decide at a later stage to enter a single currency, it would be, first, because it had decided that the economic convergence conditions in Europe were right for a single currency to be beneficial to this country.
A primary benefit that, if successful, a single currency would be likely to deliver for Europe would be low inflation across the whole of Europe.
That would be a significant benefit for all the peoples of Europe.
Economic conditions in Europe at the time when the decision is taken will be crucial in determining whether that will be achievable.
Because no one can know at this stage what those conditions might be, it would be unwise for anyone now to decide irrevocably to take that decision at a future date.
Mr. Doug Hoyle (Warrington, North)
May I remind the Prime Minister that the predecessors of his Back-Bench colleagues waved their Order Papers for a Prime Minister who promised’ peace in our time’, just as he has promised’no single currency in our time’.
Wrath turned on that Prime Minister when it was realised that he was not right, just as it will turn on the present Prime Minister.
As one who has never thought that we have got much benefit from the European Community, I say that the right hon. Gentleman is following the path of his predecessor, which is,’ Negotiate nothing but accept everything.’
May I add —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is enough.
The hon. Gentleman should ask only one question.
The Prime Minister
I notice that another strongly anti-European Labour Back-Bench Member is giving the lie yet again to the newly found Europeanism of the Labour Front Bench.
The hon. Gentleman has it precisely wrong on European policy.
The Labour party's policy is,’ If it has a European label on it, buy it, even if it is worthless; but if it is the British national interest, sell it, even if it is valuable.’
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I have to protect the business of the House.
We have two other important debates today.
I shall allow questions to continue until 4.45.
Then we shall move on.
May we have brief questions, please?
Mr. Ian Taylor (Esher)
Will my right hon. Friend note that, in comparison with the Labour party, which has changed its mind many times, the Conservative party has been consistent since the 1960s — a policy that has led to greater union among the peoples of Europe?
My right hon. Friend is to be congratulated on showing that that can happen, and that a further step can be taken towards’ ever closer union’on an intergovernmental basis, and not just on the basis of the treaty of Rome.
Will my right hon. Friend also confirm —
Mr. Speaker
No.
The Prime Minister
Labour Members have changed their minds and their policies on Europe at least seven times, but in that they still lag behind the changes of mind of their leader.
Mr. George Galloway (Glasgow, Hillhead)
Does the Prime Minister accept that for many people of my age and younger in this country the British leaders' performance at Maastricht was rather embarrassing?
Pasty-faced Englishmen waving their union jacks and shouting boo at Johnnie Foreigner are never an edifying sight — whether on the football terraces or in intergovernmental relations.
Is it not time that the older Members of the House realised that the empire has gone, that the idea of Britain as east America — Athens to America's Rome — is a phantom of their imagination, and that our future lies in Europe?
It lies at the heart of Europe, which means that we must be not in a minority of one but right there where the decisions are made.
The Prime Minister
That is precisely where we have been, which is why so many of the decisions reached in the past two days have been on British initiatives that have been accepted across the whole of Europe.
The hon. Gentleman is not a very convincing advocate of the policies of youth.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton (Macclesfield)
Although I remain strongly opposed to any closer political or economic union with Europe, will my right hon. Friend accept that the leadership that he has shown at the Maastricht conference and his toughness in the negotiations clearly display that he is the only party leader competent to govern this country during the next few years?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to agree with my hon. Friend.
I am grateful for his remarks.
Mr. David Alton (Liverpool, Mossley Hill)
Instead of erroneously portraying the social charter as a formula for increased unemployment and as a dangerous capitulation to the trade unions, should we not realise that a policy of co-determination that gives employees a say and a stake in the running of their firms is the very reason why the economies of so many western European countries have been so successful?
Even though the Prime Minister has not incorporated the provision into the agreement at Maastricht, does he not agree that it is high time that we in this country also took those steps for ourselves?
The Prime Minister
I have great sympathy with the premise on which the hon. Gentleman bases his question, but such matters are best determined by individual employers and their work forces and not by the imposition of general blanket rules that may not be appropriate to individual countries or companies.
Sir Anthony Durant (Reading, West)
May I congratulate my right hon. Friend on what he has done at Maastricht in limiting the powers of the Commission, about which my constituents have been concerned for a long time?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
I think that that view was held widely across Europe, and I was delighted that our European partners were content with the proposals that we advanced.
Mr. Dennis Canavan (Falkirk, West)
Did I hear the Prime Minister correctly?
Did he refer to the high standards of social protection in this country?
What, if anything, will the Maastricht agreement do to eradicate the real inequalities throughout Europe, which mean, for example, that pensioners in this country receive about 43 per cent .
of average net earnings compared with the European Community average of 73 per cent.?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman did indeed hear me correctly.
He may recall that it was his party and not mine that cut health and welfare expenditure in the 1970s.
On the pensions point, he does not compare like with like.
He is comparing the state pension in this country with the cumulative state and private pensions abroad.
Mr. Jonathan Sayeed (Bristol, East)
It has been estimated that signing up to the social charter would have cost Britain a minimum of £5,000 million a year, decreased competitiveness and increased unemployment.
Is my right hon. Friend aware of any Opposition party — it is the Opposition parties that are so keen for the social charter — ever having contested those figures, and, if not, why are they so keen to go into something that would disadvantage Britain?
Or are they just keen for a pat on the back from M. Delors?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is quite right about the costs.
He will, of course, know that the Leader of the Opposition has said in the past that’ Sweden is certainly a model for us’.
If the right hon. Gentleman does not accept what I say about industrial matters, he will perhaps listen to the head of the Swedish employers federation, who said that the Community should learn from Sweden:’ It could above all avoid mistakes when it comes to regulations based on the social charter.
The ideas behind the proposal for the working time directive have been proved wrong in Sweden.’
Mr. Austin Mitchell (Great Grimsby)
Has not the Prime Minister managed to get the worst of all worlds by vetoing what he should have accepted — the social upgrading that we all want — and by half accepting what he should have vetoed — economic and monetary union, which will be deeply damaging and which will lock both this country and Europe into a decade of deflation?
Has he not ignored the main problem of Europe, which is to get a realignment of currencies so that the deutschmark goes up and sterling down and we can get out of the present debilitating recession?
The Prime Minister
We have heard yet another consistently anti-European Labour Member.
The hon. Gentleman has been consistent in his opposition to the Community and, if he stands his ground — as I have no doubt he will — in due course those on his Front Bench will agree with him once again.
Mr. Anthony Steen (South Hams)
May I congratulate the Prime Minister both on his performance at Maastricht and on his performance here today?
Does he agree, however, that what we need to pursue now is cross-nation inspection of the implementation of rules and regulations emanating from Brussels to ensure enforcement in other nations and not just in Britain?
Will he ensure that the Italians and French do not get away with a failure to put into practice the rules and regulations that this country puts into practice immediately?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend touches on a serious problem.
A certain amount of cross-border examination to ensure that European Community rules are met already exists and, as my hon. Friend knows from what I said earlier, in future we shall have much tighter enforcement rules to ensure that those countries — all of them — that sign up to European directives will have to obey those directives or face fines for not doing so.
I think that that will ensure two things: first, greater equality of action across the Community; and, secondly, to a greater degree than ever before that every nation that signs up to a directive considers in detail the implications and costs of that directive before it becomes law.
Mr. John Evans (St. Helens, North)
The Prime Minister alleges that the social charter will cost jobs, but will he confirm that nearly three quarters of a million British citizens have lost their jobs since he became Prime Minister?
Is he aware that the best of British companies, such as ICI and Pilkingtons, which already provide their employees with far better conditions than anything that is in the social charter, are increasingly concerned about unfair competition from their sweatshop competitors?
Is not his rejection of the social charter a kick in the teeth to the best employers and a massive boost to sweatshop, anti-union employers in Britain?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman has been more than usually maladroit in his choice of example.
He referred to ICI, whose chairman, Sir Denys Henderson, has this morning warmly welcomed the agreement that I reached.
Mr. Anthony Beaumont-Dark (Birmingham, Selly Oak)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the one existing example of convergence in Europe is the convergence of west Germany and east Germany, which has resulted in the highest inflation and interest rates that Germany has ever had, and which is costing Britain at least 1.5 per cent.
more in terms of our interest rate than would have been the case had the two countries remained separate?
What guarantee do we have that, when we have to converge with, for example, the Greeks, Portuguese and Italians, the money transferred from our pockets to theirs will not merely impoverish us and give money to those who have not earned it while we have to work harder for less and pay higher interest rates?
The Prime Minister
It is, of course, largely for that economic reason that convergence of the economies before a single currency becomes operative is absolutely essential.
If there were a single currency without convergence, it would have several serious effects on the smaller countries.
There would certainly be a collapse of asset values and large regional unemployment and, as a result of those two factors, there would undoubtedly be a demand for very large transfers of resources from northern states to southern states.
All that argues strongly for proper convergence conditions.
My hon. Friend referred to the merging of the economies of west Germany and the former German Democratic Republic — the merging of one large economy with one small economy.
The merging of 12 mature economies is a much bigger undertaking than that.
That is why it is essential, as a preliminary to any future action that the House has to consider, that there is a proper convergence of the economies.
Points of Order
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I am on my feet.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
Call Mr. Skinner.
Mr. Speaker
Sit down, please.
I shall bear in mind some — I emphasise’ some’— of those hon. Members who have not been called today when it comes to the debate next week.
Mrs. Maria Fyfe (Glasgow, Maryhill)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
There is no need to point out to you the extent to which women are under-represented in the House, and many women will be disappointed to note that, on an agreement affecting the female population — especially in relation to maternity rights and pay — we have not had a proper hearing today.
I hope that you will do something about it.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that the hon. Lady is complaining about the fact that she was not called.
She knows, as she is an Opposition Front-Bench spokesman
Mrs. Fyfe
No, I am not.
Mr. Speaker
If she is not, she should be.
I thought that she was a Front-Bench spokesman.
I will bear her very much in mind when we debate the matter next week.
Mr. Denis Howell (Birmingham, Small Heath)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Will you consider what you have just said?
Front-Bench spokemen also represent their constituents, and their constituents are as entitled to be heard on this matter as they are —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I entirely agree and I do not exclude them wholly.
However, I bear in mind the fact that Front-Bench spokemen have an automatic right to speak on their subject from the Front Bench — and sometimes at considerable length.
Mr. Robert N. Wareing (Liverpool, West Derby)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of what you have just said, are you likely to be more generous to members of the Whips Office who may wish to speak in a debate?
Mr. Speaker
I am very generous to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I know that the hon. Gentleman is going to be helpful.
Mr. Ewing
I raise a point of order in relation to Scottish questions.
In accordance with the procedures of the House, two weeks ago today I tabled a question asking the Secretary of State for Scotland to meet Scottish chief constables to discuss the need to inform the public about when nuclear waste material was passing through their areas.
The question appeared as No. 16 on the Order Paper.
The Scottish Office decided on Wednesday or Thursday of last week to transfer that question under the priority written procedure to the Secretary of State for Transport.
It is Wednesday today, and Scottish questions have been answered.
Obviously, I did not receive an answer to my question from the Scottish Office and, even under the priority written procedure, I have not yet received an answer from the Secretary of State for Transport.
Having tabled my question two weeks ago according to the procedures of the House, I have not yet received a reply.
That is unfair.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman has a legitimate complaint.
I notice that the Government Whip is making a note.
I am sure that he has recorded what the hon. Gentleman said.
The hon. Gentleman should have received an answer by now.
Social Security
Mr. Speaker
We now come to the Social Security orders and the Opposition prayers.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You will notice that in relation to the Opposition prayers, the three instruments concerned have not yet been considered by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments.
When it was announced that the orders were to be considered this week, the instruments were not in the hands of our clerk and our counsel.
If our Committee can consider an instrument and make a report — as we are obliged to under Standing Orders — in time for a debate, we use our best endeavours.
It is a matter of deep regret that the Department of Social Security failed to provide copies of the instruments in time for the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments to consider them and report to the House.
The House has not had the opportunity to consider the instruments in detail or subject them to detailed technical examination.
Your Counsel, with his expert advice, has not been able to run a fine-toothed comb over them.
My Committee has an important job to do.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman has made an important point.
The House should be grateful to him and for what his Committee does in examining statutory instruments.
The Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Tony Newton)
I beg to move, That the draft Social Security Benefits Up-rating (No. 2) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 4 December, be approved.
I understand that it will be for the convenience of the House if we also discuss the following Government motions:
That the draft Social Security (Contributions)(Re-rating)(No. 2)
Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 4th December, be approved.
That the draft Guaranteed Minimum Pensions Increase (No. 2) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 4th December, be approved.
That the draft Statutory Sick Pay (Rate of Payment)(No. 2) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 4th December, be approved.
That the draft Social Security (Introduction of Disability Living Allowance) Regulations 1991, which were laid before this House on 26th November, be approved.
That this draft Disability Working Allowance (General) Regulations 1991, which were laid before this House on 26th November, be approved.
That the draft Social Security (Disability Living Allowance)
Regulations 1991, which were laid before this House on 26th November, be approved.
That the draft Social Security (Adjudication) Amendment (No. 3)
Regulations 1991, which were laid before this House on 26th November, be approved.
Perhaps we can also consider the three Opposition prayers:
That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that the Social Security (Attendance Allowance) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 2740), dated 5th December 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 5th December, be annulled.
That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that the Social Security (Claims and Payments) Amendment Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 2741), dated 5th December 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 5th December, be annulled.
That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that the Disability Living Allowance and Disability Working Allowance (Consequential Provisions) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 2742), dated 5th December 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 5th December, be annulled.
In view of the plethora of material for debate and the fact that the debate is starting rather late for reasons that the House understands, I think that it will be sensible if I curtail my remarks to some degree.
I will not therefore take the time of the House with the conventional lengthy explanation of the detail of what are in fact relatively routine pieces of annual business, such as the guaranteed minimum pensions order and the draft contributions rerating order, which are very much in line with their predecessors over a number of years.
The detail of the proposals on contributions was, of course, fully set out in the very full statement that I made to the House by way of a written answer at the same time as my right hon. Friend the Chancellor's autumn statement on 6 November.
Similarly, I will refer only briefly to the statutory sick pay order, which gives effect to the SSP proposals announced in my uprating statement to the House on 21 October.
The order increases the lower rate of SSP by the full retail prices index increase of 4.1 per cent., from £43.50 to £45.30 a week, while leaving the higher rate unchanged at £52.50.
At the same time, the earnings threshold which forms the boundary between the two rates, which is now aligned with the earnings threshold for payment of full-rate employers' class I contributions, will go up from £185 per week to £190 per week.
In no other respect does the order make changes in arrangements put in place last year which were extensively debated at the time and which, as I said to the House in October, appear to be working well.
My speech is therefore directed principally to what will no doubt be the two main areas of interest to the House: that is to say, the benefits uprating generally and the voluminous regulations that provide or pave the way for the introduction of disability living allowance and disability working allowance in April 1992, to the advantage of tens of thousands of disabled people.
First, I deal with the general uprating order.
As the House knows, for those benefits which are not income-related, the basis for the uprating is the full increase in the RPI for the 12 months from September 1990 to September 1991, which was 4.1 per cent.
With the exception of the higher rate of SSP to which I have already referred, this has been applied to all the relevant main benefits rates — notably retirement pensions, war pensions, widows' pensions, invalidity benefit, severe disablement allowance, the disability living allowance rates equivalent to the present mobility and attendance allowances, invalid care allowance, industrial injuries benefits, and the national insurance benefits for unemployment, sickness and maternity.
It has also been applied to the special Ministry of Defence payment to the pre-1973 war widows.
In particular, we have thus once again honoured in full our commitment to increase in line with prices the basic retirement pension, which will thus rise from £52 to £54.15 a week for a single person and from £83.25 to £86.70 for a couple, entailing additional expenditure of about £1 billion.
Just over a year ago, I told the House that child benefit is, and will remain, a strong element in our policies for family support.
It is fair to claim that those words have been amply borne out in the intervening period and are confirmed again in this order.
Following the increase for the eldest eligible child last April, we have made a further increase for all children in October, with corresponding increases in income-related benefit rates to make sure that the less well-off families also gained to the same extent.
This order now provides for the full year's 4.1 per cent increase to be applied from April to the October rates, even though they will have been in place for only six months.
Thus the rate for the eldest eligible child will rise in April by 40p to £9.65 a week and the rate for other children by 30p to £7.80.
If I may anticipate a point which, I know from experience, the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) may in due course seek to make, those increases mean that, when looked at alongside the extra help that we have made available in the past four years through income-related benefits for the less well-off families with children, which will amount to some £600 million next year, total expenditure on help to families next year will be higher than if we had simply increased child benefit each year since 1987-88.
Turning now to the income-related benefits, as the House knows, the uprating is, in this respect, based not on the full retail prices index, but on what is known as the Rossi index, which, in essence, is the RPI less housing costs but which we have this year brought more exactly into line with what the benefits are intended to cover by including in the calculation 20 per cent.
of community charge, certain miscellaneous housing costs previously excluded and — perhaps most importantly — water and sewerage charges.
That more exact calculation has, I think, met with general approval and as I said in my statement about our proposal for council tax benefit in a written answer on 28 November, we intend to maintain that closer alignment in the wake of the changes in local taxation that are intended to take effect in April 1993.
That is to say, the Rossi index would then need to reflect that there will be no minimum contribution to the new council tax, but water rates and the other miscellaneous items that I have mentioned would, of course , continue to be taken into account.
The House will also recall — I know that hon. Members of all parties will welcome this — that I have also made it clear that there will be no downward adjustment in 1993 in income-related benefit rates to correspond to the nearly £700 million which, in terms of 1992-93 benefit rates, is included in them in respect of the 20 per cent.
contribution to the community charge.
The Rossi calculation on the basis that I have described produces this year an uprating index of 7 per cent.
Thus, those on income-related benefits, who are the least well-off, will have their benefits uprated next April, under this order, by nearly 3 per cent.
more than the rise in prices generally over the relevant period.
Again, with one exception to which I will come in a moment, all the main rates of income support and the related applicable amounts for housing benefit and community charge benefit, together with the credits in family credit, will rise by the full 7 per cent.
— producing, for example, an increase in income support for a couple with two children aged 10 and 12 from £104.55 to £111.85, and for a pensioner couple aged under 75 from £83.15 to £88.95.
The exception, of course, is those less well-off pensioners who are disabled or over 80, where the order provides for additional increases of £1 a week for a single pensioner and £1.50 for a couple, over and above the 7 per cent .
Thus, the benefit for a pensioner couple over 80 will rise from £88.45 a week to £96.15 a week — an increase of 8.7 per cent., which is more than double the increase in the retail prices index.
I remind the House that this is the third year running in which, using the new pensioner premium structure introduced by the 1988 reforms, we have directed real extra support to those over pension age who are least well-off.
Overall, by next April — when nearly 1 million people will gain from this year's real increase, either directly through income support or through increased entitlement to housing or community charge benefit — we shall in three years have steered an extra one third of a billion pounds in real extra benefit to less well-off pensioners, in a way which I believe the whole House will welcome and support.
Before leaving the uprating order, there are three other points on the income-related benefits on which I should touch.
The first, which is, of course, also a point of particular although not exclusive concern to large numbers of less well-off people over pension age, is the further large increase in the special income support limits for those in residential care and nursing homes.
Following the very important increase last year, which focused especially on the needs of those in nursing homes in the light of the survey information that we had received, the increase next April will give an additional £15 a week across virtually all the main categories and with an even larger increase, of £20 a week for two residential care categories — the very dependent elderly and the mentally handicapped — which together account for nearly two fifths of all residential care cases on income support.
The only increase smaller than the £15 is in what is known as the terminal illness category for nursing homes, for reasons that I explained to the House in my uprating statement, where we have instead thought it more appropriate to make, through the Department of Health, an additional grant of £1 million specifically directed to the funding of hospices.
I am, of course, aware that these increases have not removed all controversy from this area of the benefit system.
Indeed, if I had thought that, I would no doubt have been disabused of it by last night's debate, to which my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Maidstone (Miss Widdecombe) so ably replied.
Mr. Kirkwood
I entirely take the Minister's point.
I was confusing those regulations with some others, because I happened to be dealing with the lack of adequate time for the disability working regulations.
As the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) said, dangers and difficulties arise as a result of the shortage of time that is available to consider the regulations.
The Minister is right.
Scrutiny by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments applies to other affirmative regulations.
Mr. Allen rose
Mr. Kirkwood
I am obviously considered to be in need of some help.
Mr. Allen
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will not accept the Minister's explanation too readily.
In Committee, an Under-Secretary of State agreed to a debate on the Floor of the House under the affirmative procedure.
It was not the Committee's understanding, nor, I am sure, was it in the Under-Secretary of State's heart, that those crucial regulations would be bodged together with the uprating statement so that there would be insufficient time to discuss them.
Mr. Kirkwood
That is helpful.
I do not want to make a meal of this, but the point has obviously been well made.
If Ministers were tempted to give undertakings to the Committee, on which unfortunately I could not serve because I was dealing with other orders such as the Scottish seed potato order at the time, what has happened is a bit below the belt.
I hope that the Minister will reassure us that the fact that some of these orders have not been considered by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments will not happen again.
Mr. Scott
The hon. Gentleman knows, as I do, that these arrangements are not made by Ministers.
The intense interest displayed on the Opposition Benches tonight about these matters hardly suggests that their desire to debate them is being frustrated.
Mr. Kirkwood
The Minister may be surprised to learn that I am not responsible for what is said by Her Majesty's official Opposition.
However, if hon. Members had been given more time to study these complicated regulations, more of them might have realised how adversely they affect some of their constituents and would have made it their business to be here.
This complex system of social security is beginning to get out of hand.
Mr. Allen
Conservative Members say that this is a stupid procedural diversion.
The Disability Alliance, Mencap and other disability groups are outraged at the way in which these four affirmative orders have been spatchcocked on to the normal debate.
Although Conservative Members have had a lot to say on the subject, in Standing Committee E the hon. Member for Maidstone (Miss Widdecombe) said:’ The effect of the amendments’— in other words, an amendment to the Bill in order to make these affirmative orders —’would be that all regulations under the Bill would be subject to the affirmative procedure.’
Opposition Members and all the organisations which were present at the proceedings were under the clear impression that all affirmative orders would be the subject of a separate debate so that these very important matters could be gone through line by line, if necessary.
That is not the case when they are added on to the normal uprating statement, as has happened today.
Mr. Kirkwood
I am grateful for that helpful clarification.
I had not originally intended to make a great issue of the fact, but it is true to say that the pressure groups that study these matters in great detail are incensed at the way in which the orders have been introduced.
In his comprehensive speech, the hon. Member for Oldham,
West was able to touch on only some of the detailed and complicated matters that may receive scant attention tonight.
Mr. Haynes
I am a bit surprised at the Minister.
Social Security Ministers are ducking about all over the place.
They are not accepting their responsibilities.
My hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) has being doing a first-class job on the Committee.
When I have been in the Chamber, he has raised the matter regularly with Mr. Speaker.
He is appalled at what is going on; the orders have not been considered by the Committee.
My hon. Friend does not raise the matter just for the fun of it; he raises it because of its serious nature.
Ministers make excuses in their own interests, but they are responsible for these matters and they should do their job properly.
Incidentally, the Minister of State knows that he has got a real pressure group round his neck when it comes to disability and the disabled.
He knows what I am talking about.
Mr. Kirkwood
These are difficult interventions to deal with.
I am not responsible for what is said by Her Majesty's official Opposition.
Even less am I responsible for what is said by the Minister of State.
Nevertheless, I subscribe entirely to the hon. Gentleman's helpful intervention.
Self-assessment may lead to difficulties.
To the extent that it avoids medical bureaucracy and so on, it is an improvement, but self-assessment is a radical change.
The pressure groups want a clear assurance that they will be able to ask, as of right, for a visit from the visiting officer — at least in the initial stages so that the new self-assessment procedure can be carried through correctly.
By 3 February 1992, we know that all fresh claims for attendance allowance and mobility allowance will be treated as claims for disability living allowance.
One can imagine, in such a relatively short period, the delay and uncertainty that will be caused if the transitional arrangements are not properly set out.
Even with the help of highly motivated and expert Benefits Agency staff, I cannot see how, with the best will in the world, that can be achieved in an ordered way.
Correct information must be made available to people who claim the new allowances.
If it is not provided, it may prejudice some of the other benefits to which they are now entitled.
I am told that the Under-Secretary of State gave an undertaking in the House of Commons that steps would be taken to warn claimants about the possible loss of benefits.
Failure to do so now would be a breach of promise.
I hope, therefore, that appropriate information packs will be made available so that benefits are not inadvertently lost.
A number of the regulations have given rise to concern.
They omit some of the qualifying disabilities.
The pressure groups consider the omissions to be flagrant discrimination.
The hon. Member for Oldham, West referred to respiratory problems and incontinence.
The Minister of State must reassure the pressure groups.
He would go some way to doing so if he told the House tonight that he intends to monitor carefully what is happening and to initiate independent research into the strengths and weaknesses of the new system in its initial stages.
I am the secretary/treasurer of the all-party pension group.
I have followed the pension changes and difficulties that have been experienced by my constituents and the work that has been undertaken by the all-party pension group.
The 1992 pension increases are welcome, as far as they go.
The Government's pledge on price protection has also been honoured, so far as it goes.
Nobody, however, would deny that there is a growing gap between those who rely for the majority of their income on state benefits and the average working population.
That disparity causes me great concern.
The increases of £2.15 or £3.45 that have been announced for next April are not enough in terms of the basic state pension, which supplies most of the income for the majority of our pensioners.
Those who sit on the Treasury Bench make claims about average net income increases.
I do not doubt the figures and I welcome the fact that, on average, there has been a 33 per cent.
increase in income over the period 1979 to 1988.
To a certain extent that was inevitable as a result of the changes that have occurred over the past three or four Governments and I am certain that it will continue to improve.
I hope that I shall not be retiring too soon, but if I see out the rest of my working life as a Member of the House, I shall retire with a pension that should look after me comfortably.
I am concerned about the people who are retired and over 70 between now and then.
The Government can say that increased amounts have been devoted to pensions and that their pledges have been kept.
However, Age Concern has done some research and found that the percentage increase in the average income of the lowest quintile of pensioners over the period 1978 to 1988 is 15 per cent.
and for the second lowest quintile it is 19 per cent.
I see the hon. Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith) looking puzzled.
If those figures are right — they bear out the experience of some of my casework — there is a group of pensioners in deep financial trouble.
I understand that the Government's policy is to target pensioners and, as I said, the increase in premiums is welcome as far as it goes.
I hope that, in his discussions with the Treasury, the Minister will not just look at the statistics that he quotes with monotonous regularity, and I guess with some justification, about average incomes, but that he will say that some people below that average have real problems.
The only way in which that can be addressed sensibly is by putting extra money into the basic state pension.
Current average adult earnings are about £263 per week.
The disparity between that and even the increased pension rates of £54 and £86 for a single person and married couple is enormous and it is getting worse every year.
It is unacceptable.
The Minister should tell the House that he is prepared to go to the Treasury and argue not just for increases that provide price protection, but that he will start to look at the experience of those in the bottom two fifths of the pensioner population and make arrangements to do something significantly better for them.
The Minister could use all sorts of devices to achieve improvements.
He could make substantial increases in the severe weather payments scheme.
I know that there have been improvements, but as I represent part of the country where the climate is meteorologically colder, I know that there is a great deal of scope of increases in the support that we provide for heating allowances for our elderly population.
Also, the 20 per cent.
community charge payment should have been abolished completely this year.
I welcome the Secretary of State's announcement that the poll tax compensation of £700 million will not be clawed back.
However, the Government should have done something this year to mitigate the costs of that 20 per cent.
contribution.
That, taken together with water charges, is driving pensioners into real poverty and will wipe out any increase that the uprating orders will bring in April.
I receive more complaints from retired people about standing charges than anything else.
The reason for that is obvious.
The recent announcements of salaries and profits being made by the new privatised energy companies whether gas or electricity, are galling in the extreme.
The same is true of British Telecom and the BBC television licence increase that has been announced recently.
Older people are incensed that those companies are making huge profits and that their chief executives are receiving huge increases in their salaries to bring them up to the so-called market rate, while they are paying high standing charges.
It is indefensible.
The Christmas bonus has also been neglected for too long.
The Minister should make a statement of intent about that.
It should have been substantially increased, as it is a useful contribution to the income of retired households at this time of year.
The Government should index it or come clean and abolish it.
It is unforgivable to leave it to wither on the vine.
Increases in the costs of transport, housing and health charges and other costs for food, heating and clothing, are becoming unbearable for retired people in my part of the world.
I have given the Minister credit for what has been achieved, and I am disappointed that he has not been able to go further.
There is now an overwhelming case for the Government to undertake an urgent investigation into simplifying the structure of the benefits system.
Their public excuse was that they attempted to do so in the Social Security Act 1986, but it has clearly been a failure.
We have been discussing the DLA scheme, which is good in principle.
However, when the regulations are published, even good schemes become a nightmare of complexity for those of us who are supposed to make sensible policy and for those to whom the schemes are supposed to apply.
I make a plea for the Government to consider a matter of urgency, either through independent research or their own officers, finding a long-term method of achieving a much more comprehensible system that is easy to use and that can be understood by ordinary people.
Mr. Tim Smith (Beaconsfield)
Like the hon. Member for Roxburgh and Berwickshire (Mr. Kirkwood), I was concerned when I first saw the complexity of the disability regulations.
I do not like complex subordinate legislation.
As far as possible, it should be included in primary legislation; otherwise it makes it difficult for the House to consider the issues.
However, if we choose, we can continue the debate for nearly an hour and a half.
I am struck by the paucity of hon. Members in the Chamber.
I do not think that it will be difficult for all those present to make a contribution to the debate.
That is why I described what happened earlier as a stupid procedural diversion.
It is better if we consider the merits of the orders before us.
I do not want to be predictable, because the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) does not like people to be predictable.
He was fairly predictable except in one important respect.
I congratulate the hon. Gentleman on his speech — I am sure that he would not have predicted that — because he attempted to deal with the question of who would pay for increased benefits by quoting a statement apparently made by the permanent secretary to the Department of Social Security, Sir Michael Partridge.
I listened to that with great interest.
There is something in what he said about a prospective demographic change over the next 10 or 20 years.
However, I do not think that one could increase pensions in line with earnings each year if one did not address oneself, not to the rate at which contributions are made, but to the income on which contributions are assessed.
Under the present arrangements, the minimum and maximum limits are increased each year in line with prices.
If we were to move to an earnings-linked set-up, we should have to make changes accordingly.
Working people, especially those at the top of the range, would have to understand that they would be paying more.
Of course, under a Labour Government they would be paying more anyway, because the Labour party proposes to undermine the contributory principle further by extending the 9 per cent .
contribution rate with no maximum limit.
The point is rather academic for the Labour party.
It is all very well for the Labour party to say that it will increase pensions in line with earnings, but that presupposes that earnings will rise faster than prices.
Of course, that has been the case over the past 12 years — the record is remarkable.
Over the past 12 years, the take-home pay of a married man with two children has increased by more than 30 per cent.
Take-home pay hardly increased under the Labour Government of 1974-79.
Indeed, in some years, prices increased faster than earnings and people's standard of living fell.
Therefore, the fact that pensions were to be increased by earnings rather than prices was academic; it meant nothing to pensioners.
The previous Labour Government not only robbed pensioners of the Christmas bonus but, in one year, failed to uprate pensions for eight months — there was a gap when no improvement was made.
Unlike some young people, pensioners can remember exactly what happened under the previous Labour Government.
They will want to place the promises that Labour is now making to them in that historical context.
Mr. Meacher
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will confirm, if he is aware, that under the previous Labour Government the pension increased by 20 per cent.
in real terms, whereas in the past 12 years the 2 million pensioners who are dependent entirely on the basic pension or on income support have had a zilch increase in their standard of living.
Mr. Smith
The hon. Gentleman may be right — I am not in a position to argue with him — and I am prepared to concede the point for those 2 million pensioners; but millions of other pensioners have benefited enormously under this Government, not only from increases in the standard pension but from rising income from the state earnings-related pension scheme, rising occupational pensions and increased income from savings.
That fact must be put in the wider context.
If I may be predictable for a moment, I should like to welcome the benefit increases.
The Government have a fine record on increasing benefits in line with prices every year, but I have a particular point to raise with my right hon. Friend, although it is principally a matter for the Treasury.
Pensions are increased each year in line with the retail prices index.
Some pensioner constituents have written to me to say that they think that their cost of living is rising by more than 4.1 per cent.
I think that they are right.
I have had to try to explain a rather sophisticated argument: last year their pensions were increased by more than 10 per cent., when the increase in the cost of living was lower.
The RPI is a broad-brush measure of inflation, especially for pensioners.
Housing costs account for a large proportion of the RPI, and mortgage interest rates play a significant part in housing costs.
That is relevant to people who are in work, as those of us who have mortgages know, but, generally speaking, it is not very relevant to pensioners, who, if they had a mortgage, have usually paid it off.
What has happened is a swings-and-roundabouts operation, whereby last year pensioners received more than the cost of living that they had incurred, whereas this year they will receive less.
It is rather difficult to explain that.
A different index, the Rossi index, omits housing costs.
It was not surprising to learn that that was rather higher — 7 per cent.
— as it takes into account the point that I have just made.
There is no simple solution to the problem, which was examined recently by the Public Accounts Committee.
Therefore, although the RPI is a widely followed and widely understood index, it is not entirely satisfactory for the indexation of pensions.
My next point is on a relatively minor announcement that was made on the same day that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State announced the changes in benefits and contributions.
It dealt with something about which I had been writing to Social Security Ministers for about six months — abuse of the benefit-in-kind regulations, whereby highly paid people were paying themselves in gilt unit trusts.
The loss of revenue amounted to about £1 million a week.
I was concerned about that and very much welcomed the change that was made.
It is wrong that people should be able to abuse the social security contribution system, and I hope that Ministers will keep a close eye on the matter because the smart people who offer advice may be looking for further ways of getting around the regulations.
Quite rightly, social security contributions are applied to benefits in kind, but it creates an extra burden for employers if the system of assessing the benefit that will be subject to contributions is out of line with income tax.
I hope that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will keep closely in touch with the Chancellor of the Exchequer so that the system for taxing benefits in kind runs parallel with the system that he operates in his Department.
Most people do not think of the Department of Social Security as a great taxing Department, but it raises enormous sums that go into the national insurance fund to pay benefits.
That is welcome, but I should like that element of the contributions to be kept in line with income tax to minimise compliance costs for employers.
Mr. Paul Flynn (Newport, West)
In the spirit of affability, may I congratulate the Government on one of the changes that they made some time ago, in which they followed fairly accurately the views expressed in early-day motion 488, which noted that when’ the Social Fund cold weather payments scheme trigger mechanism was put to a serious test it collapsed three times under the weight of its own absurdity the scheme is inadequate, inefficiently targeted and wasteful as the cost of advertising and administration are unjustifiably high; and urges a new saving limit of £3,000 that would create a fully automatic scheme’.
The Government followed that early-day motion, except in the principal respect of the claim about the inadequacy of a payment.
I say that to show that the payments are ludicrously inadequate — £6 last year, £6 this year and presumably the same next year.
The other matter with which I wish to deal is the false feeling among Conservative Members that the Government have acted correctly on child benefit.
That was said by the Secretary of State and by the Prime Minister, who said that the Government’ attach particular significance to support for families through the provision of increased child benefit’.
It is worth noting what has happened.
The Prime Minister could not have said that between 1987 and April 1991 — the four years when child benefit was frozen.
Nor could he have said it in 1985, when the uprating was 35p per child below inflation.
Can he honestly say it now?
After next year's uprating, child benefit will still be worth substantially less than in 1984, the last year before the process of erosion began.
Even for the first child in a family, despite the fact that this year's uprating mainly benefited first children, there is still a shortfall of 75p a week.
For other children, the losses are much higher — £2.60p a week for every child from the second onwards.
For instance, if child benefit had been uprated fully in line with prices since 1984, a three-child family would receive £31.20 a week from next April, whereas they will receive only £25.25p — £5.95p a week less than in 1984, or a loss per child of £100 a year.
That is little for the Government to congratulate themselves on.
The logical basis for uprating child benefit is not prices but average earnings, as the main purpose of the benefit is to reduce inequalities in living standards due to family size.
A similar comparison of 1984 and 1992 child benefit rates, taking into account the increase in earnings, shows that the benefit from next April should be £12.55p per child; instead it will be £9.65p for the first child and only £7.80p for each subsequent child.
For a three-child family, child benefit has fallen below earnings by £12.40 a week or £645 a year.
The value of child benefit for a three-child family relative to average earnings has fallen by 33 per cent.
over a mere eight years.
Yet the Secretary of State says that child benefit is one of the main elements in support for the family, and the Prime Minister says that he attaches’ particular significance’to it.
I shall continue to pursue another matter on which I touched in an Adjournment debate, although it is difficult to arouse great interest in it among Conservative Members or among anyone else.
It is a matter of great importance, on which the Government are at it again.
As there were signs of some useful action by the Government on cold weather payments, I believe that the struggle may avail something, so it may be worth pursuing the point.
The Government's commitment to child benefit has been shown to be only lukewarm, and they regard the benefit as a politically necessary extravagance.
We have heard the argument time and again because the benefit is paid to all families, whether rich or poor.
However, dependency additions are paid to people who have suffered greater losses and who are the most deserving, whom the Government claim to target.
The additions are paid to people such as widowed mothers, retirement pensioners with children — surprisingly, there are many — invalidity pensioners, guardians and other carers who receive invalidity care allowance.
There are 200,000 such families, and more than half of them include a sick or disabled parent.
Those families have lost in two ways.
First, like other families, the value of their child benefit has fallen since 1984.
Secondly, there has been a dramatic erosion in the value of the children's allowance which they receive as part of their national insurance benefit — the child dependency addition.
Since 1979, with one exception, every increase in child benefit has been deducted from the additions.
If the increase in child benefit had been a real increase, there might have been some logic in that.
However, child benefit has fallen in real value, so there was no justification for reducing the dependency additions.
The Government have offered the excuse that that happened under a Labour Government in 1977, as if it was right to continue to do something that was done once before for a short time.
There is no justification for the policy to continue.
The cumulative effect has been dramatic.
When the Government took office in 1979, child benefit was £4 per child and the child dependency addition was £5.35 — a total of £9.35 per child.
The 1992 equivalent, simply adjusting for inflation, would be £25.50 per child.
Instead, the combined amount payable from next April will be £19.40 for the first child and £18.65 for the second onwards.
Those most deserving families have lost more than £6 a week for each child.
For a widow or for a chronically sick parent with three children, the total loss is almost £20 or £1,030 per annum.
The one occasion on which the Government did not cheat on the payments was earlier this year and we hoped that it had something to do with the Adjournment debate.
Under attack from hon. Members of all parties, the Government decided that the increase in child benefit in October would not be deducted from other benefits.
The conversion was short-lived.
I understand that next April's increase will be deducted from the national insurance dependency addition, just as all previous increases have been.
The Secretary of State has argued today that at least part of the money saved has been spent on other benefits and he has implied that on balance, people are no worse off — a familiar argument.
The fact is that the people who have lost out from the erosion of children's allowances have also lost in other ways.
Widows and the long-term sick, for example, have suffered big losses in the breaking of the link between benefits and earnings from 1980 onwards.
Widows have suffered an additional loss from the freezing of the £1,000 widow's payment, a matter on which the Government are curiously shy.
I hope that I can catch the attention of the Secretary of State.
The widow's payment was introduced at the level of £1,000 in 1988.
Like so many other worthwhile benefits, it seems destined to wither away year by year, even though the benefit that it replaced, the widow's allowance, would have been uprated annually if it had continued.
Cold weather payments, child benefit and the dependency allowances are important matters on which the Government have cheated in the uprating statement.
They affect the poorest and most vulnerable families in the land.
When will the Government start to do the proper thing and uprate the benefits as they should?
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
There is certainly no room for complacency when we debate pensions and the other provisions in the orders.
There are far too many pensioner households in which the total income is very small.
The obvious reason for that is that the state pension is low.
I listened carefully to what the Secretary of State said about the reasons for the 1980 decision whereby the pension was no longer increased in line with earnings.
Whatever the Government say, there can be no doubt from the answers given to parliamentary questions that, if the pension had been increased in line with earnings, a married couple would now receive more than £20 a week extra.
That extra sum is very much needed by people who rely on the state pension or on income support and by those who rely on the state pension and a small occupational pension which disqualifies them from receiving income support.
Many people live in poverty through no fault of their own.
Some pensioner constituents who come to see me ask why they are penalised and punished.
The hon. Member for Derby, North (Mr. Knight) seems to consider it a matter of amusement.
I do not know whether he, although a Whip, wants to intervene.
If he does, I shall give way.
Do those of his constituents who have to live on the margin, as many of mine do, consider the subject to be a matter of amusement?
The hon. Gentleman continues to be amused.
He is a Whip who receives about £35,000 a year or more and he does not have to worry about the daily necessities of life.
He should consider pensioners who have to rely simply on the state pension and income support or a small occupational pension.
We all know how bitterly cold it is now outside; it is not very cold here, of course.
How many of our constituents cannot keep their homes adequately heated?
They simply have not got the money, and they are frightened to put the heating on and to keep their homes warm because of the bills which they know they will not be able to pay.
We should be concerned about that.
The main reason why pensioners are in this plight is the Tory Government's decision in 1980.
Another reason is the drastic reduction in housing benefit in 1988.
Local authorities no longer have the discretion to decide on rebates, and the rebates are very limited.
What shocks me and should shock every hon. Member is that those whose total income is so small have to pay out of that income far too much in rent and poll tax.
I hope that a Labour Government will change that system.
We debate the orders against the scene that my hon. Friends and I have described.
Literally millions of elderly people live in poverty or in near-poverty through no fault of their own.
It is understandable when pensioners who come to see me ask,’ Who won the war?
What crime have we committed that we should have to live in this way?’
They have to struggle desperately every day to make ends meet.
I welcome the changes affecting cold weather payments.
I understand that the payments will be triggered automatically so that people on income support will not have to apply for them.
Anything along those lines is welcome, however modest, but let us understand clearly that those payments are triggered only when the temperature reaches zero or below for seven consecutive days.
It is bitterly cold outside today, but probably not cold enough to trigger the payments.
Help should be given to pensioners — certainly to those on income support, and if possible to those whose income is just above that level.
In winter, they face many difficulties in trying to keep their accommodation warm.
How shocking that must be.
When we go home, we put the heating on.
We may worry a little about how much it will cost, but we know that, by and large, we shall be able to meet the bill.
That is not true of the people about whom I am talking.
I see that the Under-Secretary is nodding in agreement.
I wish that she would use whatever influence she, as a junior Minister, may have to bring about a more generous cold weather payments scheme.
I began by describing the position as Labour Members see it.
While my hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) was speaking, I said that I challenged any Conservative Member of Parliament to spend just one week — I do not ask for longer — living on the money that so many of our constituents who are pensioners have to rely on — the state pension and income support.
Conservative Members should try that for a week.
When Matthew Parris and another Tory MP who has since lost his seat tried to live on income support for a week, they both found it virtually impossible.
By the fifth or sixth day — certainly by the end of the week — their money was exhausted.
Would any Conservative Member here tonight accept my challenge to try to live on the state pension and income support?
They know the answer.
They know that it would be almost impossible for them, even though it would be for only a week, after which they could return to their comfortable lives.
Much has been said about what a Labour Government could and could not do, but I am certain that a Labour Government would set out with the best of intentions to improve the situation.
Between 1974 and 1979, we kept the pension in line with the increase in earnings or prices, whichever was the greater.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West has already said, during those years the pension increased by 20 per cent.
in real terms.
That is far better than anything achieved for pensioners during the past 11 years.
I welcome the fact that, when we are returned to government at the next election, pensions will go up by £8 and £5; those are steps in the right direction.
If we can do more — if we can do what I have described — so be it.
The basic difference between us and the Conservatives is that Conservative Members do not want that to happen.
They believe that the miserly increases being made now are enough for pensioners.
We take a different attitude.
We believe that retired people who have worked all their lives are entitled to a decent standard of living.
There is no reason why they should have to live in poverty and near-poverty.
We want that to end as quickly as possible, and an effective way to achieve that would be the election of a Labour Government.
Mr. Graham Allen (Nottingham, North)
This is the last uprating debate before the general election.
We are thankful that we have also had the last uprating statement that will be issued in the name of the Conservative party for many years to come.
This is a suitable time to examine the record of this Administration, of the Secretary of State and of the Prime Minister.
It is also a suitable time to look forward to a new Government which will use the Department of Social Security to defend the interests of pensioners, the disabled and others in need, rather than the interests of the Treasury, the wealthy and the political constituencies of the Conservative party.
Sadly, this uprating, like all the others announced by the Secretary of State, is a civil servants' uprating — a shuffling of the pack.
It is an uprating after the Treasury officials have filleted it.
It is the first draft — one which the officials probably expected Ministers to beef up and argue about.
Instead, the civil servants have had a walkover.
This is not so much’ Yes, Minister’as’Yes, Permanent Secretary’.
The uprating, like its predecessors, betrays a Department on autopilot — a Department and a Secretary of State both suffering from advanced anaemia.
They can do whatever they like provided that it is what the Treasury has already agreed.
Those terms of reference seem to suit the Secretary of State down to the ground.
If a pre-election bribe is needed, the Government can knock a penny in the pound off income tax, and social security will probably deliver the cost.
I can tell our friends in the Box that after next May that will not happen any longer.
They might now begin to turn their minds to the new opportunities that will arise for them, as well as for the people whom we shall seek to represent.
The uprating deals with the expenditure of the largest Government Department — it spent some £60 billion this year.
When the history is written, for what positive things will the Secretary of State's tenure be remembered?
I shall be glad to give way to any Conservative Member who can think of any.
Sadly, there do not appear to be any takers.
Unfortunately, many people will have cause to remember the Secretary of State and the Government — for all the wrong reasons.
The pensioner couple, who even after the uprating will still be £25 a week worse off, will remember him.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick) said, that is not this week or next week but every week.
Pensioners will be worse off every week because the Government broke the link with earnings.
Single pensioners, too, will be worse off by £16 every week.
What an indictment it is that people wholly dependent on the state pension, with no other source of income, are now almost automatically eligible for income support.
The compression of the state pension down to income support levels has gone so far that it has superseded the income support level, so that every pensioner, as of right, should be on income support.
What a pass we have come to when state pensions have been screwed down so far.
Other people who may remember the Secretary of State and write his epitaph are the mothers whose child benefit is still worth £2.15 a week less than it was worth in 1987 for second and subsequent children.
There is a whole litany of people.
There are the unemployed who, as my hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) told the hon. Member for Torridge and Devon, West (Miss Nicholson), have suffered 11 separate cuts in benefit.
A total of £1.5 billion a year has been taken away from the unemployed.
That is a record of shame.
Those cuts apply not only to the group of people whom the Conservatives would like to have us believe are claimants — the little group of scroungers whom Labour Members wish to prosecute at least as much as Conservative Members do, because of the vast number of people in need who are tarred with the’ scroungers’brush that the Government choose to use.
In fact, the biggest section of people involved in the social security system are ordinary working people — the 20 million or so people who contribute every week to the national insurance fund, those mugs who pay in every week in the mistaken belief that at the end of their working days, or if a crisis should arise, they will have benefits to fall back on when times get tough.
There is a long catalogue of people who will queue up to write the Secretary of State's epitaph.
Sadly, his tenure has been characterised, too, by an affront to the House and to our democracy.
Even during my brief tenure at the Dispatch Box, the Secretary of State has been party to several actions to which parliamentarians and democrats should not be party.
First, the Government made law when Parliament was not even sitting.
In the summer, the statutory instruments arrangements were abused when certain backdated benefits were effectively eliminated in instruments moved after Parliament had risen.
That law came into being when we were not even here.
Secondly, the Government have evaded parliamentary questions by placing the Benefits Agency and other agencies beyond our reach: we could not find out the answers without going through ever more tortuous procedures.
Today, despite assurances given by the Under-Secretary of State for Social Security in Committee, crucial regulations on disability have been botched together with the uprating measures so that they cannot be effectively and properly considered by Parliament.
Hon. Members
Not true.
Mr. Graham Allen (Nottingham, North)
Disability organisations and their members may dispute Conservative Members' sedentary interventions.
They know very well from their reading of Hansard, and because they were present during the Committee stage, the assurances given and the spirit in which they were made.
They are aware of the fraud, and my hon. Friends and I will make them even more aware of it.
Like everyone else, they will be able to pass judgment by means of the ballot box.
The very principle of social insurance lies not merely threatened but broken by 12 years of abuse by the Government.
Its restoration will be one of our first and continuing tasks at the Department.
The violation of the state pension fund by the Secretary of State and his predecessors makes Robert Maxwell's activities look like those of a dabbling amateur.
They have ripped off £6.7 billion from our state pension fund — a process that started when the current Prime Minister was a Minister at the then Department of Health and Social Security.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West said, by the end of the decade, they will unilaterally have slashed £12 billion from the value of SERPS, transferring funds paid in by all of us for the future into private funds run solely for the benefit of the few.
Even those few are now being bled dry by charges and commissions just when they thought that they had entered the land of milk and honey.
The Government have given themselves a permanent contributions holiday by no longer making an Exchequer contribution to the national insurance fund.
As was said earlier, before 1979 18 per cent.
of that fund was paid in by the Government, but now the Government have taken a holiday.
It is little wonder that the private sector mimics the Government in its disrespect for pensions.
It is not so much a case of Captain Bob as of Major John and Petty Officer Newton.
I hope that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will impound the Secretary of State's passport because it may well be needed when the full inquiry gets under way.
Mr. Flynn
My hon. Friend caused some agitation on the Government Front Bench when he quite fairly referred to the Government's policy of denying information by diverting answers through the agencies.
He will be aware that only the most diligent of hon. Members and outside organisations used to go to the Table Office or the Library to get those replies.
Perhaps my hon. Friend does not know that the Government have just announced that they intend to nationalise the private enterprise operation that I am running, which entails my sending those replies to all Opposition Members — as I have been doing for the past three months — and, this month, to Conservative Members, following an offer made to their Whips some time ago.
My hon. Friend will be glad to know that the denial of information will shortly come to an end.
Mr. Allen
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his intervention — although anything that the Government nationalise they may flog off at a profit at a later date, so I ask him to keep an eye on the situation.
As a member of the Procedure Committee, I was one of those who urged — not least at my hon. Friend's insistence — that the House should once again be able to see the answers to parliamentary questions on social security matters.
I can promise him and you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we shall examine the new arrangements.
I can say fairly confidently that those arrangements are inadequate and will be reviewed by my hon. Friend and his team when we come into office next May.
The Conservatives' strategy of holding back the state pension on the ground that the deficit could be made good by additional private sector pensions has been blown out of the water, not least by the vulnerability of occupational pensions which we have witnessed recently and by the under-performance and the milking of private pension schemes themselves.
Labour will put that right.
We will legislate to ensure that the Maxwells, Hansons and Lucases cannot raid our occupational pension funds.
We will also need to restore an honest state pension fund that can be kept at arm's length from the rip-offs of future Conservative Governments if necessary.
No doubt, as the election approaches, the Conservatives will seek to blame everything on the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher)— a close friend of the Chancellor, whom I am glad to see in the Chamber.
How very convenient to have the right hon. Lady to blame.
One is reminded of how those huddled in the dock at Nuremberg pointed towards the bunker.
We shall see ever more frantic gesticulating in the direction of Finchley, Dulwich or the American lecture circuit as the election approaches.
We must remember, however, that today's uprating comes more than a year after the Conservative leadership coup and that there can be no excuse for the provisions.
In the intervening year, nothing has been done to right the wrongs of the decade, so what profit has been gleaned in the first year of the new leadership of the Conservative party?
What has been the harvest?
More than 300,000 more families are on income support as a result of the economic mismanagement and incompetence for which the Government and the Chancellor are responsible.
Thanks to the Prime Minister's ban on benefit for unemployed 16 and 17-year-olds, another 21,000 youngsters have been sucked into a black hole where there is no job, no school, no training and no benefit.
This year, 25,000 pensioners, sick and disabled and others have received no increase whatever in their weekly benefit, which was frozen in 1987 when the Prime Minister was pushing through the Fowler cuts.
The right hon. Gentleman was the grinning accomplice of those who reduced benefits for people injured at work.
He was the accomplice of those who pushed for the 20 per cent.
poll tax contribution required from the poorest.
His fingerprints are also to be found on the introduction of the hated social fund.
He was at the Department when it abolished the maternity grant.
He was Minister at the Department when the Government halved help with mortgage interest repayments for the newly unemployed.
That is the Prime Minister's social charter for Britain.
That is the way in which he devised his social charter when he had the ability to make policy at the Department.
That is the right hon. Gentleman's pedigree.
Little wonder, then, that the Tory party is laughed at even by its continental sister parties for being so backward and Victorian.
The present uprating puts none of that right.
The Conservative Government are content with their decade of work on the jobless, the disabled, mothers, pensioners and others who deserve better.
I am sorry to say that there is no joy here, only despair.
The only cause for celebration tonight is that is that this uprating will be the Secretary of State's and the Government's last.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
Whatever that was, it was not a winding-up speech.
It is said of some speeches that they smell of the lamp.
The speech of the hon. Member for Nottingham, North (Mr. Allen) smelt of a weekend with the thesaurus and a few reference books, and was made without reference to what had preceded it.
I am not one to accuse the hon. Gentleman of misrepresenting the position; I know and like him too much for that.
Nevertheless, he betrayed a total and absolute misunderstanding of the public expenditure survey process and the part that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State played in it.
I am not one who crawls, but I feel bound to respond to such attacks on my right hon. Friend.
Anyone who has served with him at the Department — and I am talking not just about his present ministerial team — knows that he not only brings a greater degree of expertise to his job than anyone I can remember but does it with great inventiveness in terms of improving benefits and with an exceptional degree of compassion and, above all, integrity.
I say that with absolute passion about a man who is my boss and my friend and with whom I am proud to serve in this Government.
The hon. Member for Roxburgh and Berwickshire (Mr. Kirkwood) takes a close interest in these matters.
He wanted to know whether we would monitor the introduction of the new disability benefits and their impact in policy terms and with regard to their administration.
I give him that absolute assurance.
All Ministers in the Department of Social Security are conscious of the fact that in social security very little is for ever.
Society changes and the social security system must change to reflect those changes.
We will monitor the matter very carefully.
I must apologise for returning somewhat dryly to the procedural point that has been raised during the debate.
I am puzzled by the widespread misunderstanding and the suggestion in certain quarters that the Government have tried to do something underhand.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
We are debating seven sets of disability orders.
Four sets, which come under the affirmative procedure, have been considered by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments and have all been declared intra vires.
The three sets which have not been to the Joint Committee come under the negative procedure and are consequential upon the main affirmative orders.
We would not have considered the orders today if the Opposition had not prayed against them and agreed that they should be debated with the main affirmative orders.
Had the Opposition wished to debate the issues, they should have delayed their prayers until after today's debate and that debate could have been arranged through the usual channels.
The Government have done nothing underhand.
For the convenience of the House, we are discussing the motions together, and I understand that that has the agreement of the Opposition.
The hon. Member for Roxburgh and Berwickshire made a plea for a comprehensive disability scheme.
My hon. Friend the Member for Torridge and Devon, West (Miss Nicholson) responded to that.
I share many of the reservations expressed by my hon. Friend about the wisdom of that course of action — certainly in the short term.
However, the practice of incremental change under this Government has led to a much more comprehensive coverage of meeting the needs of disabled people.
When we came to office, 300,000 people received help with the costs of their disabilities.
The figure will now be 2 million.
In that regard, the hon. Member for Roxburgh and Berwickshire will be aware that since we took office in 1979 the expenditure has risen from £4.5 billion to more than £12 billion.
We are moving to more comprehensive coverage.
However, as we are using incremental change instead of wiping the slate clean and trying to move to a new system, we are avoiding huge extra costs at one fell swoop and also avoiding creating a system in which there would be many losers as well as gainers at the point of change.
Mr. Kirkwood
The Minister will acknowledge that I paid credit to the Government's work in respect of disability.
However, does the Minister of State accept the principle that a comprehensive disability benefit is the goal, or is he going to operate on a piecemeal basis in the short term?
Mr. Scott
I can simply call in aid the Government's record so far.
We have steadily improved the coverage and generosity of the benefits system.
I cannot commit myself or anyone else to what may happen in future.
That will depend on the available resources and the needs that become evident.
However, we have a first-class record of incremental change.
Indeed, we have a much better record than that of any Labour Government.
We can build on that in future.
The hon. Member for Roxburgh and Berwickshire also referred to cold weather payments.
I wonder whether the news has reached him that the system has been triggered in one station in Scotland today.
We will for the first time be able to see the new system work.
It will be automatic and payable in advance.
People will not need to make a claim.
As we have made the choice of stations more sensitive, particularly in Scotland, the system itself will be more sensitive.
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
How many people will benefit from what the Minister has just announced?
Mr. Scott
That depends on the weather.
It is impossible to say how many until we know what the winter will be like.
If we have the same amount of cold weather this winter as we had last winter, we will more or less double the coverage of the benefit as a result of the changes that I announced earlier this year.
Mr. Winnick
What would the Minister say to the pensioners outside that one area in Scotland who are suffering as a result of the bitterly cold weather and who cannot receive payment if they are on income support?
Why should it be zero or below before they receive the small amount of assistance of £6 a week?
Mr. Scott
If the hon. Gentleman followed that matter with any care, he would know that over the past four or five years we have steadily improved and made more generous the cold weather payments.
Indeed, we have very substantially improved them this year.
My statement was widely welcomed by hon. Members on both sides of the House.
We will have to wait to see how the new system works.
We increased the amount and introduced the automaticity principle — the lack of need to make a claim — and the ability to forecast cold weather in advance and the ability to pay in advance.
My hon. Friend the Member for Torridge and Devon, West asked about the housing benefit transitional payments.
She will recall that last year we eroded those transitional payments by £3.
We have decided that in April 1992 there will be a flat rate reduction of £2 rather than the £3 of last year.
As a result, the majority of transitional payments recipients will gain overall in cash terms from next April's uprating.
Mr. David Porter (Waveney)
Although things change in fishing, as in any other industry, I feel that we are travelling familiar waters tonight.
We are gathered here a little before Christmas to perform our annual fishing industry pre-ministerial Council season's service — that litany of woe from every corner of the kingdom — telling of sad tidings of discomfort and no joy in the industry.
In fact, the position is not as bad as in the recent past, but we are still not there yet, because there is no question but that any extra cuts in quotas must mean hardship.
I suspect that we all know our lines — we have heard several of them repeated tonight — and, like a pantomime by a well-loved local drama group, we fishing industry Members of Parliament will perform well in this packed House.
I am sorry that that old favourite, the very nauseating tie usually worn by the hon. Member for Great Grimsby (Mr. Mitchell), is not with us, although the hon. Gentleman has just arrived.
The band of bleating chorus from Scotland is present, with its regular melody, played on the strings of our hearts, about how bad things are north of the border.
It gives Conservative Members the occasional chance to shout a seasonal’ humbug’or two.
All may be well in the Chamber because we are on familiar ground, but outside in the real world of fish markets and the North sea, all is not fully well.
For the past year or so, all hon. Members except my hon. Friends on the Front Bench have sung from the same hymn book about decommissioning.
This year, I am delighted that my hon. Friends have at least found the same page of the hymn book.
In Lowestoft and elsewhere, the industry wants a voluntary decommissioning scheme.
Those who choose to risk their lives earning a living at sea do not want to be forced to give up, but they are realists and they do not want to go bankrupt either.
They want an effective, properly policed scheme for the whole industry which compensates enough to pay off debts and is still worth while.
Equally, nobody to whom I have spoken thinks that decommissioning is a magic wand.
We have all mouthed the phrase,’ It must be part of a package of conservation measures.’
Let us remember that everything for which we legislate is for worse cases and blanket rules.
There are enormous regional differences in the fishing industry and they must be recognised.
So we should extend licensing and do all that is necessary to reduce the fleet enough to start to modernise it before it is too late.
There have been some welcome additions to the Lowestoft fleet.
It is a supreme act of faith by Colne Shipping of Lowestoft, but the additional boats are secondhand rather than new-built.
The safety implications of an aging English fleet are frightening.
A 200 day tie-up, even when fishermen can take the days when they want, totally ignores the issue of how they are supposed to live and make all that investment worth while.
Therefore, I wish my hon. Friend well in reducing the 200-day period.
The horse trading, or rather fish trading, that takes place at the Council meetings and other times — the talks with EFTA and the quota swaps — are all very well and sometimes seem to work to our advantage.
The EFTA deal, which includes extra tonnage of north-east arctic cod, seems to do so, but there is a fear that, when the common fisheries policy comes up for review and renewal, the wheeling and dealing over fish then will make Maastricht this week look like a teddy bears' picnic.
The fear is that we as a country in general, and Lowestoft in particular , will lose on quota swaps, as my hon. Friend the Minister acknowledged.
The package that the Fisheries Ministers will hammer out next week is just one more step on the way to that review.
Perhaps next year or the year after we shall consider abandoning minimum sizes, landing everything and taking everything off catch quotas for each boat in order to abolish discards.
Each boat would then be licensed by horsepower for a set number of days at sea based on a three-year track record.
Perhaps next year we shall discuss flagship problems and decide that each boat must belong to a producers' or other organisation, which is then allocated a quota from the United Kingdom TAC.
That would mean, to quote one of my fishermen who suggested the proposal,’ Johnny foreigner cannot get any more of our British quota.’
Perhaps we shall be saying that Brussels should operate a scrapping scheme, with Her Majesty's Government as local agents.
We cannot know what we shall be discussing next year or the year after at this time.
However, we know that tonight's motion, which has produced some disappointingly negative amendments from the Opposition, should be approved to give my hon. Friend the Minister a good send-off to Brussels, with the motion ringing in his ears.
Whether we should send him off with a shove in his rear and a pair of boxed ears does not matter.
He knows that he has to return with a deal, a scheme, a package that treats the scientific advice seriously but can also be swallowed by the industry.
It must be even-handed in the way in which it reduces effort, understandable, believeable and flexible enough to be realistic.
Mr. Andrew MacKay (Berkshire, East)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that a significant number of my right hon. and hon. Friends are bitterly disappointed that during today's Consolidated Fund Bill debate only one and a half hours have been allocated to discussing pension funds?
We would wish to pursue further the criminal frauds committed by Robert Maxwell and others associated with the Daily Mirror.
In particular, I ask my right hon. Friend to find time next week to allow us to pursue the role played by Mr. Joe Haines, sometime press officer of a Labour Prime Minister, an executive director of Mirror Group Newspapers —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that he is also a peer — No, he is not a peer.
Interruption
Mr. MacKay
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that he never will be.
In addition to being an executive director of Mirror Group Newspapers, Mr. Haines cringingly wrote the authorised biography of the late Robert Maxwell, in which he threw out of the window what little journalistic integrity he ever had.
Mr. MacGregor
It is clear that there is considerable interest and concern in the House about that matter.
I know that the Consolidated Fund Bill allows for only a short debate, but there will be other opportunities for raising the matter, including tomorrow.
Ms. Joyce Quin (Gateshead, East)
Is the Leader of the House aware that decisions will be taken in Brussels on 18 December about the permitted level of support for the shipbuilding industry in Europe?
Has any consideration been given to allowing right hon. and hon. Members to express an opinion on that matter, either on the Floor of the House or in European Standing Committee B?
If not, can the Leader of the House at least persuade the silent Department of Trade and Industry to say something on the subject?
Mr. MacGregor
I will look into the point and will write to the hon. Lady.
Sir J. Wheeler
The Home Secretary is not bound to act on the advice of the inspectorate of constabulary, but he must take into account a large number of other factors.
For example, he may want to see whether the chief constable has been making use of civilian resources as well as he should, and he might be saying to the inspectorate of constabulary,’ If you can demonstrate a better use of money and resources through civilianisation, that might have a bearing on the availability of uniformed police officers.’
The Home Affairs Select Committee report, when the Committee looked at sick leave, for example, found that some progress could be made in improving on the sick absence record of police officers.
The equivalent of the entire strength of the West Yorkshire constabulary is absent on an annual basis through sick leave, if we use that as a means of illustrating the depth of the problem, and, by improving on that, more police officers, who are expensive, would be available.
My right hon. Friend must also take into account the fact that, by one means or another, 90 per cent.
of the cost of the police service comes from the Exchequer, the taxpayer, and only 10 per cent.
is raised through local government tax.
I was very interested in the right hon. and learned Gentleman's remarks about crime figures and the extent of crime in Britain today.
It is widely believed that the United Kingdom has a rising crime wave, and crime is thought to be more widespread in the United Kingdom than in other western countries.
That is simply not the case.
Crime levels have been rising throughout the western industrialised world since the 1950s, on average by about 6 per cent.
per annum.
They have risen everywhere, under Governments of every political complexion, so it has nothing to do with the nature of the politics of a country.
It is widely believed that the United Kingdom has one of the highest rates of crime, whereas it has one of the lowest in the western world.
Our society is much less violent than that of north America or of the Commonwealth of Australia, as the 1989 international crime survey showed in the report published in March 1990.
The United Kingdom and Germany have the lowest overall crime rates of all the industrialised countries.
Crime statistics, to which the right hon. and learned Gentleman referred, are the most commonly used indicators of the level of crime, but they refer to notifiable offences reported to the police.
That measure does not show the total crime, only the incidents reported to the police.
When these figures show a substantial increase, it is usually assumed that crime, in particular violent crime, has risen dramatically, but, particularly in recent years, other factors have influenced those statistics.
Women have been encouraged to report rape and domestic violence.
I was delighted to hear the right hon. and learned Gentleman refer to the work of his own police force in setting up a unit to receive that kind of report from women.
That is a very desirable objective.
Because this is being done, crime statistics are increased and their nature is changed.
This is particularly true in this country, where the insurance industry requests that thefts and burglaries are reported so that a claim may be proved.
The increasing ownership of telephones has created a greater inclination to get in touch with the police.
Five million more motor cars on the roads since 1980 mean that there is bound to be more damage to, theft from and taking of motor vehicles.
Also, of course, 15,500 more police officers are likely to detect and record more crime and, indeed, to be available to receive reports.
So a whole host of factors influence the collection of statistics.
Mr. Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield)
Will the hon. Gentleman give way on that point?
Sir John Wheeler
I was going on to give an explanation, which may help the hon. Gentleman.
May I do so and see whether he is still of the same mind?
Since 1980, the Home Office has collected its own crime figures through the British crime survey, which attempts to gauge the total number of crimes committed rather than those notified to the police.
The survey shows that crime is not rising anywhere near as fast as police figures suggest.
For example, the 1988 British crime survey reported a 12 per cent .
rise in wounding, the most common form of assault, between 1981 and 1987, whereas police statistics showed a 40 per cent.
rise.
The increase in robbery was 9 per cent., compared with a police total of 62 per cent .
The fear of violent crime has risen out of all proportion to the actual risk.
I am not saying that that is not worrying, and we must address that problem; I shall seek to suggest how in a moment.
Interviews with 10,000 people for the survey showed that one in five women felt very unsafe when out walking at night; yet fewer than one in 70 claimed to have been attacked in the past year.
It is very important to get the facts if we are to contemplate what the police should be for controlling and preventing crime.
Mr. Sheerman
The hon. Gentleman must also know that it depends how one selects one's facts and which surveys one looks at.
Referring to the point at which I first tried to intervene, he will know that there is under-reporting of crime.
At a time when there is more sympathetic treatment of rape cases and domestic violence, there is greater reporting, thank goodness, but all the evidence shows that there is under-reporting of burglary as people become worried about making claims against their insurance policies.
We know also that police screening encourages people not to report.
Can I direct the hon. Gentleman's attention to the Islington crime survey, which gives rather different evidence about how much crime is being committed and how much it is rising?
Sir John Wheeler
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman, because I suspect that we are not really disagreeing.
I am suggesting that the British crime survey is very important.
It is independent of Government and is formulated by researchers who are anxious to establish the truth, because without those facts we cannot deploy the resources effectively.
I know about the Islington survey, and I also share his concern about under-reporting in some areas of the country of some types of crime in particular, but let me continue with the facts before we begin to look at the solutions.
It is very important to know that less than 6 per cent.
of all recorded crime is violent; 94 per cent.
of the crime about which most members of the public are concerned relates to property.
Rape, for example, accounts for less than 1.5 per cent .
of violent crime.
In 61 per cent.
of cases, rape is by someone known to the victim, so women are not at risk from every man they happen to encounter when they go for a walk on a dark night.
Over half the assaults on women are domestic, according to the crime survey of 1986, and, as the right hon. and learned Gentleman said, are now being reported and investigated.
Although women, elderly women in particular, feel at greater risk from violence, it is young men who are by far the main victims of assaults, which occur principally in the middle of the afternoon, not late at night.
Let us begin to look at what is being done to remedy these problems.
The Government's initiatives are many and varied and of very great importance.
The safer cities programme, for example, has resulted in reductions in burglary on a housing estate in Wolverhampton to the tune of 40 per cent .
These are surely the solutions for which the right hon. and learned Gentleman is looking.
There has been a drop of 35 per cent.
in car crime in a central Nottingham car park through the safer cities programme.
Crime in central Birmingham is showing a 16 per cent.
decrease after the introduction of new security measures.
So there are ways forward in difficult inner-city areas which bring real solutions to the lives of ordinary people, which is what we want to see.
Perhaps I can deal now with car crime.
Seventy-five per cent.
of people are prepared to pay for built-in car security features.
At long last, the motor manufacturers are waking up to the reality that they ought to do more and that they too can assist in the reduction of car crime.
I am delighted that the Association of British Insurers, an organisation committed to a reduction in car crime, has recently issued a video aimed at young males, particularly in the 12-to-16 age group.
Those are the people who commit most car crime and who take away and drive away most motor vehicles.
The video will try to help them understand the misery they cause and what they should do to avoid being tempted down that road.
That is an example of an institution joining the Government to try to provide a solution to a serious problem.
The majority of known car crime offenders are males aged 15 to 16.
The evidence is overwhelming; we must address crime prevention far more successfully if we are to achieve the reductions referred to by the right hon. and learned Member for Warley, West.
The other important statistic is that 94 per cent.
of crime relates to property, much of it to burglary and breaking into people's homes.
Here again, more could be done by ordinary people.
A large number of homes lack basic security measures.
About half those surveyed said that they had no locks on their windows, and one in four were without mortice locks or deadlocks.
People have taken very few sensible precautions to stop young male burglars breaking in.
Of those surveyed, 73 per cent.
felt that they could do more to protect themselves.
Part of the crime prevention initiative which many police forces are following is to assist the public to take more precautions to help themselves.
One other initiative was announced in a written answer to me only today, so it is topical and relevant.
I refer to the 16 local drugs prevention teams which are being brought into action to assist in dealing with the problem of drug addiction among the young.
Again the emphasis is on primary prevention of the misuse of drugs and on preventing young people from being drawn in.
As to serious and organised crime, in the 1990s we must address the subject of police structure with greater enthusiasm.
The common police services must be combined in a central police agency so that we can deal with serious and organised crime, not necessarily crime which immediately affects the lives of constituents but crime which can affect them through the stealing of their pension funds or the misappropriation of their assets and savings.
As we examine the structure of the police in the 1990s, I hope that we shall see the need for a national police agency to deal with national and international crime, while preserving the important links through the local constabularies, because it is through the local police links with the public that crime is prevented.
Mr. Alun Michael (Cardiff, South and Penarth)
I congratulate my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Warley, West (Mr. Archer) on initiating the debate.
He reflected the view of my constituents when he said that crime and how to reduce it are matters for the Government.
The Government have failed to tackle or prevent crime.
I want to touch briefly on four areas in which the Government could and must do better, in addition to the initiatives mentioned by my right hon. and learned Friend and the preventive programmes, such as that mentioned by the hon. Member for Westminster, North (Sir J.
Wheeler) in relation to drug addiction.
I shall rely not just on statistics but on the position in communities which I have known well over many years.
The Government's record is not as good as the hon. Member for Westminster, North suggested.
For instance, the safer cities campaign has minimal resources and ignores Wales completely.
Other worthwhile initiatives do not go to the root of the problem.
I compare the Government's record to the experience I once had of helping to redecorate a pensioner's home to brighten up the dingy gloom.
As we tried to attach fresh wallpaper to the wall, we found that the damp had so undermined the structure that the wall fell down.
That was not a criticism of the redecoration scheme, any more than my remarks are a criticism of some of the Government initiatives.
Rather the criticism is that the basic and structural problems are not being tackled with the vigour that is required.
The Government are not giving the police the tools they need to do the job, certainly in south Wales.
Here I reflect very much the comments of my right hon. and learned Friend.
In Wales, the Home Secretary cannot distinguish a rural community from an urban community, much less appreciate the different policing needs of each.
Let me spell that out.
When the Home Secretary announced the additional numbers for police forces throughout England and Wales, I was shocked to find that Gwent merited only one extra officer and was astounded to find that the South Wales police force was not to have a single extra officer, especially as the chief constable has undertaken a major review to ensure the best use of available manpower, a process which must continue.
In the South Wales police area, the crime level this year will be up some 22 per cent.
on last year.
I spent a Saturday night recently on patrol with the police in central Cardiff and saw just how thin is the blue line which looks after law and order in the city at night.
Weekend availability was frightening, even before the Home Secretary's failure to tackle the issues within Cardiff prison, and other areas put enormous pressure on police time and cells.
My constituency includes part of four divisions, so I have had a unique opportunity to see the problems which the police face in diverse communities.
Right hon. and hon. Friends could replicate that experience and express the same concern about urban and rural areas throughout Wales and England.
The Home Secretary and the Minister of State must face up to two facts: first, that their party is guilty of creating the conditions for crime and failing to tackle the root causes of crime; and, secondly, that the police do not have the tools for the job.
I set out to find out why no extra police were coming to help our communities.
It is not enough for the Minister to pass the buck to the chief inspector of constabulary.
I found that part of the reason lay in the formula used to decide the police needs of each area, by which the Home Secretary gives greater weighting per thousand of urban population.
Hon. Members might say that that was fair enough, but the Government have gone on to use a bizarre and irrelevant definition of urban and rural.
According to the definition, Cwmbran is not an urban area, nor is Aberdare, Rhondda, Abertillery, Neath, Barry, Penarth, Merthyr, Pontypool or Port Talbot, that well-known steel town; nor is Newport, the third city in south Wales.
According to the bizarre method of calculation, the urban population of Gwent is nil.
Only Swansea and Cardiff fall into the urban category.
It is no wonder the Home Secretary came up with a derisory response to the heartfelt plea for more police to restore a sense of security to our communities.
How, a week after that crazy decision, are we to place confidence in Ministers who talk about policing and crime prevention in our urban and rural communities when they cannot tell one from t'other?
It is not as if the Home Secretary had not been warned.
If present trends continue, reported crime will have risen by 113 per cent.
between 1981 and 1991 in the South Wales police area.
Incidents requiring attendance by police officers are up by nearly 80 per cent.
since 1984, and 999 calls are up by over 20 per cent.
in the same period.
I am not sure who is more demoralised by that — the local people, who frequently complain that they do not get a quick response when they need help, or the local police, who attend the crime in an attempt to do the good job that they intended when they entered the police force, knowing that they are likely to be pulled in all directions to answer calls on a blue line that has been pulled far too thin by the Government's demands.
In 1990, the number of crime calls per officer in south Wales was more than 42, compared with 29 in Cheshire and 39 in Leicester, to take just two examples.
Where is the sense or comparability of that?
In his response to the Home Secretary's manpower announcement, the chief constable of south Wales, Mr. Lawrence, said:
’ I must repeat my warning that the South Wales Constabulary cannot be treated like a sponge and continually expected to absorb an ever-increasing workload without an inevitable decline in the quality of the service we provide’.
In the light of the facts that I have set out, his conclusion that the Home Office decision is’ ill-conceived’is a masterpiece of restrained understatement.
In a number of ways, the police are making positive responses to suggestions of working together to tackle problem areas and undertake inter-agency approaches to the many problems that need a co-operative approach.
But they need help from the Home Secretary both to do their basic job properly and to take their share in such initiatives, and I greatly regret that help has not been forthcoming.
I understand that the Home Secretary still has some flexibility within this year's resource allocation, and I appeal to the Minister of State who is present for this debate, the right hon. Member for Oxford, West and Abingdon (Mr. Patten), to undertake to reconsider the needs of the South Wales and Gwent police forces.
I wish that I had time to go more deeply into the Government's failure to tackle the root causes of crime in our communities, but suffice it to say that neither unemployment nor lack of a decent home is an excuse for crime.
On that, I agree with my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Warley, West (Mr. Archer).
However, failure to tackle the economy, provide relevant training and create long-term prosperity all help to create a second and third generation of young people growing up with despair ever present in their communities.
That is not healthy, and it nurtures the likelihood of crime, which damages victim and delinquent alike, as well as their families and the community in which they live.
I worked in the communities that experienced the most painful impact of the first of the Government's recessions in the 1980s.
At that time — at least to start with — we could pick up some of those who had been the least successful in their school careers, often because they had turned their backs on the opportunities open to them, and provide the first steps towards training and employment.
They often responded positively to being given a chance, but as time went on, the same families ended up with the father on the dole and older brothers and sisters unable to find work.
Younger brothers, sisters and cousins approaching working age did so in an atmosphere of discouragement and despair.
That experience angered and frustrated me sufficiently to consider coming to this place to try to change the evil which the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) was letting loose on decent families in decent communities.
Sadly, largely the same communities felt the burden of crime.
Most of the delinquent youngsters with whom I worked — I stress most, not all — did not need to be involved in delinquent activity.
There remains truth in the adage,’ The devil makes work for idle hands’; and I assert that lack of hope is the greatest recruiting officer for all criminal activity.
The assertion,’ If it isn't hurting, it isn't working,’shows callous disregard and ignorance of the effects of social problems on individuals, families and communities at the sharp end.
As for the economy, when it hurts in this recession, the pain is felt most — in a way that is most unfair — by the same families and communities who felt the worst pain in every other recession.
It is felt by the same people who experience the pain of all the other inequalities in our unequal society.
It encourages the conditions for crime in communities that already feel more impact from crime because they contain more victims of crime, as well as more offenders.
For many hon. Members, unemployment and criminal activity are one-off experiences.
It is often a matter of history repeating itself from generation to generation and, under this Government, even within a single generation.
That is the real failure of the Government's approach.
They cannot wash their hands of social problems and the incidence of crime by saying,’ Let the markets take care of it all’.
That will not work; it is not responsible, and future generations will pay for the Government's failure.
The Government must recognise that there needs to be a positive approach to young offenders if we are not to encourage them to grow into hardened and repetitive offenders.
I served on the Committee which dealt with what is now the Criminal Justice Act 1991, in the hope that I could draw on my own experience as chairman of the Cardiff juvenile bench, and as someone who had worked with young offenders.
I found that amendments that sought to divert young people from criminal activity would not fit into the Bill because of what an Officer of the House described as’ the curious geography of the Bill’.
Whatever the Bill was about, it was certainly not about preventing crime and diverting young people from it.
Since well before I was elected to this House, I have pressed for the provision of secure accommodation to end the scandal of young offenders and remand prisoners in particular being held in prison accommodation.
Others, particularly my right hon. Friend the Member for Swansea, West (Mr. Williams), have pursued the matter vigorously in the House in recent years.
The Home Office has now decided that places should be provided but that the Department of Health and the Welsh Office must find the money.
But it gets worse: the Home Office has now decided that those Departments must find the money to build the places but that local authorities must find the running costs.
If the Prime Minister really believed in the principle of subsidiarity, as he said yesterday, that would certainly not be allowed to happen.
Magistrates and others who have called for more secure places want them to be used to contain the activities of young offenders who are not currently kept in prison accommodation, like so-called joyriders and repetitive burglars.
The current proposals do not meet that requirement.
Indeed, they contain the seed of a massive oak tree of nonsense.
At present, if there is an objection to bail on the ground that the young offender may commit another crime while on bail, there are two alternatives.
Either the magistrate refuses bail and says, effectively, that the court orders that the weekly equivalent of £20,000 a year is spent on the offender until his case is heard, or the court grants bail and orders that nothing is spent on the offender until the case is heard.
There are many cheaper and constructive ways to contain young offenders, but they ware not being funded by the Government.
Custodial sentences and remands prevent immediate offending but increase the likelihood of later and more serious reoffending.
That is an area for immediate consideration and actions by the Government if they have the slightest interest in protecting society from the growth in criminal activity over which the Home Secretary and the Government continue to preside.
The Government's actions regarding observance of the law do not escape attention by ordinary people.
My constituents are outraged by the fact that Ministers seem to regard themselves as above the law.
I shall not refer to wider policy matters, or to matters that are currently subject to argument in the courts or on appeal, but I condemn the Government for running away from their responsibilities on Sunday trading.
Ordinary citizens cannot understand why they do that.
In their squalid and cowardly decisions announced last week, they spelled out in large letters the message that, in Conservative Britain, there is one law for powerful corporations that have a voice at the heart of the Tory party, and another for ordinary individuals in urban and rural communities of Wales and England.
Sir John Wheeler
The hon. Gentleman is being most unfair.
The senior Law Officer of the Crown, the Attorney-General, explained to the House that, on the question of the Shops Act 1950, he had to make a decision based not on party politics but on the law.
Mr. Michael
The hon. Gentleman rightly describes the responsibilities of the senior Law Officer.
I bow to the knowledge of people like my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Warley, West on the technicalities of the law, but the Attorney-General's comments satisfied neither me nor my constituents.
My constituents saw him as a responsible Government officer who came to the House to say that the Government washed their hands of the matter and would leave it alone.
I repeat my view, which is shared by my constituents, that a squalid and cowardly decision was announced last week, spelling out the fact that there is one law for those with a voice in the Tory party and another for the ordinary individual in the urban and rural communities of Wales and England.
Commercial organisations like the Co-operative Retail Society, the Co-operative Wholesale Society, Marks & Spencer and Iceland have expressed their horror that the Government should so abdicate their responsibility as to say,’ We shall do nothing if you break the law,’and weakly add the unconvincing refrain, as the Home Office Minister did,’But we'd rather like it if you didn't.’
Organisations that want to keep the law are effectively being invited to watch their competitors steal their trade, which is not on.
As chairman of the Co-operative parliamentary group, I was delighted to see Sir Dennis Landau's comments on behalf of the CWS.
As he said, such a retailer must recognise that each family in such hard times will buy only one turkey, one tin of biscuits, and one Christmas pudding, and the retailer which is not open will lose that custom.
However, he went on to say that the CWS’ remains wholly opposed to unrestricted Sunday trading and will continue to seek a sensible reform of the law on the basis of the REST proposals put forward by Keep Sunday Special Campaign.’
That must be the way forward.
My hon. Friend the Member for Ogmore (Mr. Powell) will tackle that issue later if we reach his subject for debate.
The point that I am making is that the argument is not one of Sunday trading, but one of law and order, with the Conservative party ranged firmly among the enemies of law and order.
We should not be surprised by that.
I saw £3 million stolen from my local authorities of Cardiff and South Glamorgan when the Government introduced retrospective legislation to change the rules that they had set and which those councils had followed carefully and obediently.
From 1979 to 1987, six Conservative Ministers were found guilty of breaking the law — in their official capacity, I hasten to add; I hate to think what the tally is now.
The Conservative party has never been the party of law and order, and during this Parliament it has thrown away the last vestiges of any claim to such a title.
To restore law and order in a way that makes sense to, and works to the benefit of, ordinary people — we have an obligation to ensure that Government actions make sense — we need action to tackle the four issues that I have mentioned.
We must address the social ills that are at the root of much crime; we must take action to divert young people into more positive ways of using their time and lives; we need the sort of common-sense and long-term commitment shown by my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) and his team.
In short, we need a Labour Government as quickly as possible.
Mr. Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield)
This has been a most interesting debate, and I congratulate my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Warley, West (Mr. Archer) on introducing it.
I have enjoyed all the contributions, particularly those that touched on the way that crime affects constituents who live in districts such as Cardiff and Sandwell.
I have been to many of those areas and seen the problems.
I sympathise with the views expressed.
I do not want to cover the whole subject, this evening; I shall focus on what I understand to be the thrust of the debate — tackling the causes of crime.
The speech of the hon. Member for Westminster, North (Sir J.
Wheeler) disappointed me, as usual.
He is extremely knowledgeable on the subject, and I am still something of an idealist at heart.
I have an ideal picture of a Chairman of a Select Committee who is knowledgeable, takes an overview of the subject and does not hold a strongly party political view, but weighs the evidence in a dispassionate way.
In such a debate, he should both praise and criticise the Government.
That would give the House the impression of a Chairman of a Select Committee of some stature.
However, every time I hear the hon. Member for Westminster, North, I am disappointed, because he is such an awful Government apologist, and is renowned as such.
For example, he reels out evidence that the Government are doing a wonderful job.
He mentions Home Office research suggesting that crime is not as bad as everyone thinks, but he does not mention any of the other analyses and carefully toes the party line.
He avoids mentioning Home Office research that suggests that there is a relationship between deprivation and crime.
That causes me deep disappointment.
I hope that, before a Labour Government come to power early next year, the hon. Member will give one speech in the mould of a great Select Committee Chairman.
One of the aspects we should consider in this debate is the necessity of taking a pragmatic rather than an ideological approach.
My remarks will follow that line.
There is a tidal wave of crime in this country, and it does no good to the people of Cardiff, Sandwell and Westminster to say there is not as much crime there as in Chicago or Sydney.
That does not wash.
Crime has doubled since 1979 under the so-called party of law and order.
The one sphere of crime that the Government will not consider is its underlying causes.
Crime is a complex social phenomenon with no single cause or solution.
Research has identified some key factors that affect crime rates.
There is a critical link between crime, recession and employment opportunities.
Last year, Home Office research showed a clear correlation between recession and levels of property crime.
Other research has shown a critical link between crime and employment opportunities.
Only last week, the National Association of Probation Officers issued a report showing that up to 80 per cent.
of probation clients are now out of work.
The Apex Trust work shows that ex-offenders in employment are three times less likely to offend than those who are unemployed, which is remarkable.
I wish that the Minister would respond to a point that I made in a debate last week when I spoke of the tragedy that the employment advisory service — available to prisoners both before and after their release — had been withdrawn by the Government.
I wish that it could be restored.
The link between recession, deprivation and crime hardly comes as a surprise — it is a common-sense notion.
Moreover, it has been obvious for more than 50 years.
As long ago as 1940, Mannheim produced a report on the social aspects of crime in England in the inter-war years.
His work showed that crime more than doubled during those years.
The idea that the 1930s was a crime-free era is a myth.
The same disastrous pattern of crime rising in the wake of recession was seen then as now.
In 1940, Mannheim concluded:’ Where unemployment and crime both stand at a high water mark, it can safely be assumed that the latter is largely due to the former.’
The second critical factor is the treatment of youth.
Anyone wishing to tackle crime rates must pay enormous attention to youth crime because of its sheer scale.
The hon. Member for Westminster, North touched on that, but he was not convincing when he spoke of the underlying causes of that crime.
Is it not astounding that half of all crime in Britain is committed by people under the age of 21?
Some 73 per cent.
of all auto crime is committed by those under 21.
Some two thirds to three quarters of all solved burglaries are committed by young men under the age of 21.
There is a tidal wave of youth crime, and the Government have not begun to answer it.
Mr. John Patten
Is the hon. Gentleman suggesting that there is something new about a substantial majority of crime being committed by young people — that it is a phenomenon of the 1980s and 1990s?
If he looks at the statistics, he will see that it has always been like that.
Right up to the head waters of time, young men have always been those most inclined to commit crime.
Mr. Sheerman
The right hon. Gentleman is right about the significance of that age group, but I am trying to point out that the age for offending has become very young.
The enormous crime rate and the fact that the average age of a young person who takes a car is 15 are new and frightening phenomena.
Mr. Patten
I shall attempt not to intervene again, but I thank the hon. Gentleman for giving way with his characteristic courtesy.
As a student of these matters, surely the hon. Gentleman recognises that in, for example, the past five years, the peak age for offending for a young male has not gone down but gone up.
The average peak age for offending was 15 but is now 18.
Mr. Sheerman
We can pick over whether the peak age is 15 or 18, but I am saying that crime has doubled.
The youth component of that crime is much more substantial than it was, according to all the figures.
Whether or not the peak age has gone from 15 to 18 — and specific categories of crime move either way — the average age is 18.
That is worrying enough, but we are talking about a category of young criminals up to the age of 21.
Research has shown clear links between the level of crime and number of children brought up in poverty in families in difficulty.
I quote from Professor Irving's introductory report to this month's international conference on urban safety, drugs and crime prevention in Paris.
I hope that the Minister has read this — it should be engraved on the hearts of the Home Secretary and his Ministers.
The report states that rates of child poverty’ remained constant in the 1980's for most countries, but doubled in the United Kingdom The results of longitudinal studies suggest that countries that have more child poverty and do not provide universal child care or other programmes to reduce inequalities before the child goes into the school system will have more crime.
This is indeed the case.
Moreover the rapid increase in child poverty in England, some of which is mitigated’— admittedly —’ by income transfers, is likely to result in further acceleration in the crime rate in the 1990's’.
That is a chilling thought.
The Government are pursuing policies that are directly linked to the rise in crime.
There is increasing child poverty in our country.
The level of unemployment is rising — especially among the young — and we are seeing the creation of what some commentators call an underclass'.
We see alienated young people with no stake in society and, increasingly, without even a bed.
Is not that what we would have expected when the Government take on the 16 to 18-year-olds and perpetuate the myth that that age group is in full-time employment, in full-time training or in full-time education?
We all know that that is a myth or a lie.
Many 16 to 18-year olds are living off their wits and on the streets.
That is a sad comment on our society.
Only a bone-headed Government would not accept that, by taking away young people's ability to claim benefit and housing benefit and the opportunity to receive a decent reward for a training scheme, and by halving the value of the training allowance in the past 12 years, they are picking on young people who, at the same time, are being pushed ever further towards the consumer society.
Television advertising tells them that they must have designer trainers, designer clothes and good stereos.
It is a sad comment on our society that the Government cannot see what they have done to young people and cannot see the relationship between what they have done and the crime rate.
The Minister said that the peak age for offending has risen to 18 from 15, but he chose the end of the two-year period that I would describe as covering the most vulnerable young people on whom the Government have picked in the past 12 years.
If, with the help of all the civil servants who advise Ministers and who sit under the Gallery and elsewhere, one worked on a policy to create crime, one could not come up with anything better than what the Government have created in the past 12 years.
They have done a wonderful job of creating crime, but they will still not recognise the link to which I have referred.
Any Government who are seriously concerned about dealing with the escalating crime rate must begin to tackle crime at its roots.
That means a concerted attack on poverty and it means attaching far more importance to early crime prevention measures, such as the development of pre-school provision.
How can the Minister be complacent about pre-school provision?
Why do not the Government set up — as the Labour party will when it takes office in a few months — a national crime prevention council to co-ordinate the work of all the Departments of state in crime prevention?
I return for a moment to the link between pre-school education and the later propensity towards crime.
It has been shown that the development of pre-school provision has a very marked effect on later offending.
As I have said, we lag behind our European counterparts.
Ninety-five per cent.
of pre-school children in France and Belgium receive state-funded education.
Furthermore, each child has access to eight hours daily nursery provision in France and five to six hours in Belgium.
In Britain, only 44 per cent.
of three to five-year-olds receive pre-school education, and a substantial proportion of them have a school day of only two and a half hours.
The knock-on effect is unacceptable to the Government, because it means having a properly resourced training programme, a properly resourced pre-school education programme, proper training opportunities and the development of measures to counter unemployment.
It also means providing a range of creative leisure opportunities for young people.
They are Labour party policies, which are desperately needed in their own right but which have a vital knock-on effect on offending rates generally.
Other countries saw the need for such policies years ago.
Again, the French have been at the forefront.
In 1983, the Bonnemaison report brought the issues to the fore.
The result was a network of municipal crime prevention councils which co-ordinate social and criminal justice agencies to deal with the circumstances that breed crime and which focus on youth in particular.
Our Conservative Government reject that, as they do so many other aspects of the European social programme.
Indeed, one of the most disgraceful things that we have seen in the Chamber this week was the Maastricht agreement which, in terms of social policy, means that the opportunity to do so much to support the family, children and working mothers has been lost.
The knock-on effect will be seen in the crime rate and in other aspects of our social life.
The Government have lead the country into the second division in Europe in this aspect as in many others.
Their record on crime is a disaster, and it is time they gave way to a Government who have the imagination and policies to tackle crime fundamentally, not at the periphery.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
I congratulate the right hon. and learned Member for Warley, West (Mr. Archer), with whom I have debated closely during the past three or four years, on his good fortune in getting this debate at a rather fashionable hour — earlier than the watches of the night — during the Consolidated Fund debate.
I think that the hon. Member for Huddersfield (Mr. Sheerman) is as pleased as I that the debate started at 7.15 pm rather than at 4.15 am.
I also congratulate the right hon. and learned Gentleman on the style and content of his speech.
It is a sad loss to this House that the right hon. and learned Gentleman should have decided to lay down the burden of representing the electors of Warley, West.
He looks, sounds and acts youthful, and it is a great shame when someone like him decides to retire absurdly early.
Doubtless he will spend a certain amount of his time enjoying himself.
After his retirement, I might try to persuade him to enjoy himself by accompanying me to whatever seaside resort the Conservative party attends for its conference next October — I will ensure his safety of passage into the hall — so that he can see how few pinstripe suits there are, let alone the mythical hats of which he spoke.
I hope that the right hon. and learned Gentleman will forgive me if I answer first the points made by my hon. Friend the Member for Westminster, North (Sir J. Wheeler), who supported the Government's position, before answering the remarks made by Opposition Members, who took a rather different line.
My hon. Friend the Member for Westminster, North characteristically set the record straight about manpower allocations in the police force and about the critical role of Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary in objectively advising the Home Secretary on correct force levels and on the identification of posts suitable for civilianisation — for that releases policemen and women from desk jobs and puts them back on the beat, which is what the right hon. and learned Member for Warley, West wants.
He rightly paid tribute to the West Midlands police for what they have done in this process.
Would that other forces had briskly followed the excellent example of the West Midlands force —
Mr. Archer
Perhaps it is churlish of me, after the kind remarks of the Minister, to venture to comment on what he has just said, but at the risk of being tiresome, may I point out that what I said before was that it does not follow that a decision made by the Home Secretary corresponds with the advice that he receives from the chief inspector.
Lest anyone be misled, I should be grateful if he would confirm that.
Mr. Patten
I can confirm that the ultimate decision is ministerial.
Ministers must accept our responsibility for decisions.
But the Home Secretary benefits from the objective advice of HMCIC, a distinguished policeman, and of his colleagues, who are all serving policemen and who can therefore speak from both sides of the fence.
The other important point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Westminster, North concerned looking at English and Welsh crime in the context of the international scene.
I agree with Opposition Members that what matters to our electorate is crime in this country.
The people in my constituency are concerned about what happens there, not in America or France.
Still, it is important to point out that Britain is not a violent country compared with almost every other western European country.
Opposition Members like to make great play of comparing our unemployment rates with those in certain west European countries, of course.
I do not suggest that, just because Britain is less violent and less prone to crime than most other west European countries, that diminishes the necessity to concentrate on the picture at home, but let us not frighten people unnecessarily by comparisons with the rest of Europe and the United States.
My hon. Friend the Member for Westminster, North also mentioned car crime in his short but excellent speech.
I agree with what he said about the Association of British Insurers, the insurance industry and the motor car industry, here, in western Europe and increasingly in central Europe — not to mention Japan and Korea.
Those industries are scrutinising much more what they can do to make cars more secure and less easily stolen.
Yesterday, the Home Secretary and I saw representatives of car manufacturers and car importers in the United Kingdom for the second in a series of meetings.
Considerable progress is being made, and we have agreed a three-point agenda for improvements in car manufacture, not just in this country but in western Europe.
Happily, the message is also being carried back to Japanese manufacturers.
The first significant area for improvement concerns visible vehicle identification numbers, which are critical in stopping the international trade in car crime.
Secondly, we must continue to work on introducing deadlocking for all cars.
Thirdly, we must introduce effective and efficient immobilising devices.
We were delighted yesterday to obtain the agreement of the manufacturers to concentrate on these three key areas.
I pay tribute to the increasing attention that the industry is giving to these aspects.
The right hon. and learned Member for Warley, West first discussed the causes of crime.
Any sensible policy concerned with reducing crime — crime can never be abolished — needs three components.
First, we need a tough and hard-edged law and order service.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman sits in court and passes sentence himself, so he has seen the issue both from these Benches and from the Bench he adorns when he sits as a recorder.
Mrs. Llin Golding (Newcastle-under-Lyme)
I wish to congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Tooting (Mr. Cox) on choosing this subject for debate tonight, when the cold weather is with us again and the misery of the homeless increases.
About three weeks ago, I was told by a voluntary worker for the homeless how she had found a 15-year-old girl, five months pregnant, sleeping on the concrete steps of a doorway in Charing Cross.
She did not even have a blanket, she had no money for food, and no idea of where to go for help.
She had been sleeping on the same step for three nights.
Despite all the publicity that the homeless receive and the many organisations set up to help them, there are still desperate people who do not know how to get help.
There are many people who suffer due to lack of affordable housing to rent and inability to cope with mortgage repayments.
However, as the bitter winter weather approaches, I should like to concentrate my speech on the basic problem of enabling people to find shelter so that hon. Members do not again have to face the awful reality of stepping around people huddled under snow-covered tarpaulins, lying in shop doorways in the streets of our city.
The Minister announced the setting up of a helpline for the homeless.
What use is that if people have no money to telephone?
If they are fortunate to have enough money, where are they to find out that that helpline exists and obtain the numbers?
Mr. Yeo
It is important for the House to know that the telephone line is free to the users.
Mr. Golding
I repeat: where do people find out that the helpline exists and obtain the number?
I understand that the Minister is talking to London Transport about advertising the campaign, but it needs much more than that.
The Government have spent hundreds of thousands of pounds on imaginative advertising for selling off the country's nationalised industries.
I am sure that they did not consider just talking to London Transport about that.
Many of our people have become homeless as the result of the Government's policies.
Is it too much to ask the Government to spend some of the money raised by privatisation on giving much more help to homeless people throughout the country, not just in London?
The homeless are suffering just as much in my constituency of Newcastle-under-Lyme and other districts throughout the country, as in London.
Why cannot money be spent on advertising the help available in places where the homeless gather?
Could there not be in every tube station, railway station and bus station, and on bus shelters — especially in rural regions — specially prepared posters with information to tell people where day and night shelters exist for the homeless?
I know that the organisations that help the homeless would be more than willing to co-operate with the Minister to help to identify the many places throughout the country where posters would be of greatest benefit to the homeless.
I know that the Government have not found it in their hearts to extend the cold-weather provision for shelters for the homeless outside London and the many districts of need throughout the country.
That is no reason not to provide an advertising campaign to cover the whole of the country.
Will the Minister put himself in the place of that 15-year-old girl, too frightened to ask anyone for help, alone, desperate and penniless?
Will he please help her and others like her to come in out of the cold?
Mr. Clive Soley (Hammersmith)
I congratulate my hon. Friends the Members for Tooting (Mr. Cox) and for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Mrs.
Golding) on their speeches.
I think that my hon. Friend the Member for Tooting displayed the facts well, and it was perverse of Conservative Members to pick him up for a slip of the tongue when he gave an incorrect figure, which it is relatively easy to do.
The hon. Member for Epping Forest (Mr. Norris), although well intentioned, made many mistakes.
If he had read the Duke of Edinburgh's report or the reports of the Conservative-controlled London Boroughs Association and Association of District Councils he would know that some of his arguments were invalid — I put it no stronger than that.
I believe that he cares, and I beg him to read those reports and read his speech.
My charge against the Government and most of the Conservative Back Bench Members is that the majority of them do not care, and those who do — I include the Minister for Housing and Planning — are too wedded to, too unable to break away from, the principles of the Government who during the past 12 years, have created the crisis.
Consequently, they are still driving the figures up.
They are not my arguments — they are based on the Government's own figures.
The Government yesterday released figures showing a 30 per cent.
increase in the number of homeless.
The Minister for Housing and Planning (Sir George Young)
No.
Mr. Soley
Yes they did, or they appeared in that light in the newspapers.
Perhaps the Minister should issue a correction.
Sir George Young
As the hon. Gentleman has accused my hon. Friend the Member for Epping Forest (Mr. Norris) of making a mistake, he should not make one himself.
The figure of 30 per cent.
was not an increase in the number of homelessness acceptances.
It was the increase in the number of those in temporary accommodation.
Even in London, the numbers in bed and breakfast fell.
The figures published yesterday did not show a 30 per cent.
increase in the number of the homeless.
Mr. Soley
I am happy to refine that, and say that the figures revealed a 30 per cent.
increase in the number of those in temporary accommodation, but is the Minister suggesting that they are not homeless?
If not, is he saying that there has been a decline in other forms of homelessness?
He knows that, in his borough of Ealing, the figures for acceptances have dropped by 25 per cent.
because the council has taken a very hard line on the interpretation of legislation and is turning people away.
Even more important, the number of those on the street is going up.
The money that the Minister has provided has been recycled more times than I can count — although he talks about it as if it were new money — and it will run out in April, but there is still no commitment to replace it.
The figure of 30 per cent.
to which I referred was an overestimate compared to the figure that I suggested, which was based on the same information.
I rang a sample of local authorities, but, because I prefer not to err on the side of scaremongering, I gave a figure of 20 to 25 per cent.
In fact, the Government's figures were 5 per cent.
higher than mine, and they got those figures from a much wider survey based on all council returns.
The figures alone are not enough.
The hon. Member for Epping Forest must take on board the fact that the case to which my hon. Friend the Member for Newcastle-under-Lyne referred — that of the 15-year-old girl — is all too common.
I have said hundreds of times — in the House and outside — that, in 1979, that girl would not have been homeless.
The big turnaround came in the mid-1980s.
Never since the first world war have we had homeless teenage children begging in the streets.
Mr. Norris rose
Mr. Soley
Before the hon. Gentleman gets up, let me say that I worked as a probation officer in the King's Cross area, which was one of the most difficult areas for homelessness in the 1970s.
Homeless people got off trains at Euston, King's Cross and Paddington and came to that area.
At that time, I could have got that girl a bed straight away in a decent place — I am not talking about a mattress on a floor.
She would have been eligible for and would have got local authority accommodation.
That has changed precisely because of the figure of which the Government were boasting — the 1.3 million sales of council houses which were not replaced.
The right to buy with a duty to replace is a good housing policy, but the right to buy without a duty to replace is a housing disaster.
We have lost 2 million homes from the rented sector.
Ministers should argue the figures with the Duke of Edinburgh — I am quoting figures from the Rowntree report.
Interruption
Mr. Yeo
They cannot bear it.
Mr. Soley
The Minister says that they cannot bear it, but perhaps the Duke of Edinburgh has more feeling.
I was using a figure of 1.5 million homes, but his figure is 1.9 million, half of which have gone from the council sector and the other half from the Government's much-loved private rented sector.
The hon. Member for Epping Forest should take enough interest to consider the arguments about the decline in the private rented sector, which started before the Rent Acts were invented.
When the Rent Acts were abolished in Northern Ireland in 1957, 25 per cent.
of the rented market was private.
No party even hinted at reintroducing the Acts, and that sector is now 5 per cent.
of the market.
There has been a slight increase recently due to the depression in house prices and, to a limited extent, to the 1988 legislation.
When house prices begin to rise again, all the assured shorthold tenancies in properties whose prices have risen will suddenly look unattractive.
People who sell will want to sell with vacant possession, and that means asking people to leave.
The hon. Member for Epping Forest does not understand that.
The argument is about housing finance.
As long as we go on subsidising house purchase to make buying and selling so enormously profitable, and to make renting unprofitable for landlords and for tenants, so long will the rented sector continue to decline.
Mr. Norris
There is an argument about whether 2 million homes have disappeared or are still there, occupied, thus contributing to the housing stock.
But when the hon. Gentleman referred to the constituent of the hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Mrs.
Golding), he was, I agree, referring to a new phenomenon of which he has personal experience.
That problem is not a function only of Government or their housing policy — it is much more deep-seated and complex than that.
It is a function of family breakdown, which takes place over generations and whose consequences the Government will have to tackle.
We are only beginning to come to terms with it.
Mr. Soley
Conservative Members desperately want to believe that family breakdown is the cause, but the increase in family breakdowns is much smaller than the dramatic increase in homelessness.
By removing 2 million homes from the rented sector at a time when families are becoming smaller, the Government have left young people with nowhere to go.
Local authorities that could have taken them before cannot now do so.
As a Social Security Minister, the Prime Minister devastatingly took away from young people the right to income support.
That was removed from 16 to 18-year-olds who were not on a Government course or in full-time education.
They are the people begging in our streets.
Almost overnight, they arrived in our streets.
That is a function of Government, not of family breakdown.
Families were breaking down when I was a probation officer in King's Cross, but then I could get these kids rent money for private accommodation up front.
I would not be able to do that now.
They are turned away from River Point and Centre Point — by 7 pm or 8 pm, they are closed or full up.
There are beds in warehouses, but many young people will not use them because they do not want to sleep next to someone who is mentally ill or loused up or alcoholic.
It is no good the hon. Member for Epping Forest showing concern if he does not understand this, because it will be empty concern.
When he expressed anxiety about people who cannot pay their mortgages, he sounded like the Walrus and the Carpenter — weeping tears as he ate the oysters.
There is an answer to the mortgage problem.
The Government should never have used high interest rates alone.
For a long time, I have been advocating a mortgage rescue scheme that would allow people to stay on in their properties on a short let tenancy.
One in eight mortgage payers are in arrears because the Government have launched a drive towards home ownership so powerful that mobility of labour has suffered.
They are screwing up the whole economy, not just housing.
I have often spelt out the long-term answer.
We need to invest in housing, to set up a national housing bank, to use all sectors.
When we go out into the freezing temperatures tonight, we know that we should be doing something.
Capital receipts are important, but they are not enough.
Local authorities must be allowed to buy selectively in the private sector.
We must relax or remove some of the rules on private sector leasing.
We must change the income support rules for 16 to 18-year-olds and under-25-year-olds.
The Government must discontinue their stupid propaganda about empty properties and do something about them.
I shall say it again: local authority stock is 2.5 per cent.
void; 3 per cent.
of housing association stock is empty; 5 or 6 per cent.
is empty in the private sector — and 16 per cent.
of Government properties are empty.
Today in Swindon, I saw 24 houses in a main street — they were attractive properties — all of which had been empty for 20 years.
I correct that.
Some of them have been empty for the 20 years since they were built, others have been empty for just a few years.
There are 35,000 empty houses, not just those in Swindon.
One in five police houses in London are still empty.
The Wormwood Scrubs prison houses are still empty after 10 or 12 years — I have lost count.
I challenged the Minister to pick up the telephone and ask the Secretary of State for Defence to say that those houses in Naylor road, Swindon, must now be transferred to the ownership or management of a housing association or the local authority.
Families who would otherwise spend Christmas in bed-and-breakfast accommodation would then have a house to live in.
That is what I call housing the homeless.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary for the Environment (Mr. Tim Yeo)
If the hon. Member for Hammersmith (Mr. Soley) and his Labour colleagues around the country, who control far more houses than the Government, showed even a tiny percentage of the indignation that he is now attempting to express about empty houses in Swindon in relation to the 5,000 empty houses in Labour-controlled Liverpool, the 2,800 in Labour-controlled Salford, the 2,000 in Labour-controlled Newham, the 5,500 in Labour-controlled Manchester, the 2,000 in Labour-controlled Newcastle, the 1,000 in Labour-controlled Knowsley, and so on—
Mrs. Llin Golding
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Yeo
No.
Conservative Members have had only a fraction of the time in this debate.
If the hon. Gentleman had showed even a tiny amount of the indignation that he expresses about empty houses in Swindon in relation to all those in areas under Labour control, there would be scarcely any problems of homelessness in Britain.
I regret to say that this has been a breathtakingly disappointing debate, even by the standards of those initiated by Labour Members, redeemed only by an excellent constructive contribution by my hon. Friend the Member for Epping Forest (Mr. Norris), who made an outstanding speech.
The debate began with a 40-minute speech from the hon. Member for Tooting (Mr. Cox) which was nothing but a litany of unsupported assertions.
In a spirit of friendship across the Floor of the House, I have to say that if the hon. Gentleman really thinks that he advances the cause of housing by denigrating my hon. Friend the Minister for Housing and Planning, he displays an ignorance that is staggering even by Labour party standards.
I was glad to hear the hon. Member for Hammersmith in effect repudiate his disgraceful slurs against my hon. Friend.
Mr. Cox
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
For the record, I make it clear that I cast no smear or slur on the Minister for Housing and Planning, I simply commented on what has been widely publicised.
If the Minister is saying that hon. Members are not allowed to do that without running the risk of being accused of slurs, he is abusing parliamentary procedure.
Mr. Yeo
When it comes to abusing parliamentary procedure, I fail to see what point of order the hon. Gentleman was seeking to make.
But I am glad that I provoked him into an unqualified withdrawal of his disgraceful unjustified comments.
They will have done him no good in the housing movement, which recognises that my hon. Friend stands for a real commitment, typical of this Government, to the needs of homeless people.
I am sorry to say that the hon. Gentleman did not just stoop to the gutter in terms of smearing my hon. Friend: he used a series of inaccurate figures.
To my surprise, many of them were echoed by the hon. Member for Hammersmith.
We have had several exchanges in the House in the past year or so on the number of people sleeping rough.
I remember arguments at the beginning of 1991 about the precise number.
But we knew, because we were closely in touch with the voluntary organisations which are in the front line, of the efforts that we were making to tackle the problem of rough sleepers.
I pay the warmest possible tribute to those organisations, which have made a magnificent contribution.
At the beginning of this year, they estimated that the number of rough sleepers was in the order of 1,000.
That was borne out by the census that was taken in April, in rather warmer weather.
I am glad, but not surprised, that, after another 10 or 11 months of Government efforts to provide suitable hostels and move-on accommodation for rough sleepers, the voluntary organisations now estimate that the number sleeping rough as of this month is down to about 430.
The hon. Member for Tooting was as wrong about the number of homeless as he was about the number of rough sleepers.
He said that there are 40,000 homeless in London.
If he had troubled to study figures published a couple of days ago, he would know that was wrong.
More importantly, the hon. Gentleman tried to imply that a substantial proportion of homeless are in bed-and-breakfast accommodation, whereas the number is only 7,900 — which in London represents a decrease of 5 per cent.
over the previous quarter.
The number in bed-and-breakfast accommodation in London is falling.
That is a result of the Government's £300 million special homeless initiative in London and the south-east last year and this year.
The hon. Member for Hammersmith, who usually knows better, tried to suggest that there had been a 30 per cent.
increase in the number of homeless.
Again, the statistics published this week — not by the Department of the Environment, but based on figures provided by local authorities throughout the country — show that the figure is not 30 per cent.
but 2 per cent.
The hon. Member for Hammersmith can flick through his papers, but I have those statistics before me, and they present a very different picture.
Of course the Government are not satisfied with that, but at least it is clear that our efforts are having an impact and are bringing to an end the unsatisfactory increase in the number of homeless in bed-and-breakfast accommodation — which is falling in London, and is virtually stable across the rest of the country.
The Government are keen to have a constructive debate on housing policy when they can, but it is a pity when it cannot be based on proper acknowledgement of the facts.
Reference was made to the need for affordable housing.
I was deeply disappointed that neither the hon. Member for Tooting, in a 40-minute speech, nor the hon. Member for Hammersmith, except in an intervention, found it possible to acknowledge the contribution made by housing associations.
That is, by any standards, a profound insult to the housing association movement, which is supported by people of all political persuasions.
Next year, such associations will house more than 20,000 homeless families, but the hon. Member for Tooting chose totally to ignore that in his lengthy speech.
He ignored also the growing contribution made by the private sector, to which my hon. Friend the Member for Epping Forest rightly drew attention.
I was glad that, his skilful speech, he teased out of the Opposition an admission that the Government's policies on the private rented sector are right.
The hon. Member for Hammersmith was at pains to point out, in an intervention in my hon. Friend's speech, how much he supports the Government's policy.
Of course I welcome that, but it is a belated conversion.
If a similar statement of support for the Government's deregulation of the private sector had been made in 1979, there would have been no decline — but there was, because that sector continued to feel under threat from the Opposition.
Even today, private landlords within a mile of this building would say that they are nervous of letting their properties to homeless families because, and only because, of the whiff — albeit faint — of the risk of a Labour Government.
If, in 1979, the then Labour Minister responsible for housing had given the assurance offered this evening by the hon. Member for Hammersmith, the decline in private rented accommodation might have been arrested.
As a result of the Housing Act 1988 and the introduction of shorthold tenancies, we are witnessing rapid growth in the number of shorthold and assured tenancies being let by private landlords — so much so, that at last they are taking up the slack created by the number of secure tenancies.
That is welcome news, and I look forward to further endorsements from the Opposition.
The Opposition bitterly opposed the right to buy council houses when it was first introduced; now they are in favour of it — or, perhaps, not quite in favour, for they become very cross when I point out what a huge success it has been.
The hon. Member for Tooting was not reading his brief properly; not 130,000 but 1.3 million houses and flats have been sold under the arrangement.
The Opposition do not like to draw attention to that, but the Government are very proud of having created so many new owner-occupiers.
Opposition Members are also changing their minds about housing action trusts.
In a Committee debate, they have completely reversed their previous position.
No doubt, in due course they will completely reverse their position on the private rented sector, large-scale voluntary transfers and a raft of other Government initiatives.
The only speech that mentioned the enormous opportunities that we now offer tenants for participation in management systems was that of my hon. Friend the Member for Epping Forest.
He was the only speaker who thought it worthy of mention.
The Government have doubled the resources available to housing associations, from just over £1 billion last year to more than £2 billion in 1993-94.
That amount is topped up by a substantial contribution from the private sector in the form of loans.
Under today's construction industry conditions, those resources will buy a much-increased level of output.
In an intervention, the hon. Member for Hammersmith tried to suggest that housing association output had not increased greatly since the 1970s.
He will be surprised — I fear that he may even be disappointed — by the figures that we shall announce next week, which specify the output that we expect from housing associations in 1992-93.
They are able to combine increased contributions from the taxpayer with an element of private sector funding to take advantage of the exceptionally keen prices now being quoted by the construction industry for new output.
We have two private sector initiatives.
We are now operating pilot schemes in five different places, allowing owners of empty property which we wish to be returned to productive use to let that property to homeless families, using a housing association as an intermediary or managing agent.
That will give the landlord a degree of confidence about his ability to regain his property when he wants it; it will also give the homeless family a degree of confidence about the quality of their landlord.
We are optimistic about the prospects of the scheme, and I hope that, in due course, the hon. Member for Hammersmith will be able to bring himself to give it an unqualified endorsement.
It is difficult to see how even the Labour party, with all its promises to the trade unions and others, can find any possible ground for objection to such a scheme.
Our other private sector initiative involves flats over shops.
We believe that there are nearly 100,000 empty flats over shops, and we have therefore embarked on a three-year campaign to try to change attitudes in the commercial sector.
We have made £25 million available to local authorities for schemes involving housing associations and private owners; we believe that they have considerable potential in regard to dealing with homelessness.
Even Roof magazine — not a magazine normally associated with the Tory party — has acknowledged that the Government's £96 million three-year initiative to deal with rough sleeping is the most determined and comprehensive programme ever introduced to tackle the problem.
It is making substantial progress in reducing the number of people sleeping rough in London, and we are optimistic about its continued progress.
More places are being made available all the time: last night, a 25-bed hostel was opened in the constituency of the hon. Member for Tooting, to be run by the English Churches Housing Group.
Mrs. Golding
Places are closing.
Mr. Yeo
In view of the continuing cold weather, we have asked Single Homeless in London to see whether other emergency hostels can be opened at short notice.
Moreover, despite what the hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Mrs. Golding) has said from a sedentary position, there is no question of places closing.
Since the rough sleepers initiative began, 900 places have been made available in houses and flats, 400 of which are permanent, and 700 more places have been made available in hostels and shelters.
There is an important distinction between the shelter to which the hon. Member for Tooting referred and the rather higher quality provision in hostels and in permanent accommodation.
Almost 200 places, in addition to those in shelters which I have mentioned, have opened this month, and we expect a further 120 places in winter shelters to open very shortly.
All that is on top of the emergency accommodation to which I have just referred and about which we are talking to Single Homeless in London.
The hon. Member for Tooting spoke about mortgage repossessions.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Epping Forest pointed out, 39 mortgage payers out of 40 are not in arrears with their mortgages, and that is after a period of unprecedented expansion of owner-occupation.
There have been 7 million first-time buyers since 1979.
Even after a period when interest rates were higher than we would have liked, 39 mortgage payers are still up to date.
That is the measure of the success story of the Government's expansion of owner-occupation.
There are other success stories.
We have a range of initiatives which are designed to promote owner-occupation and to widen choice for tenants.
All we have from the Opposition is unsupported assertions, uncosted commitments and empty rhetoric.
Their policy is confined to giving more money to local authorities — the one group who have proved unable to discharge an adequate housing policy.
Territorial Army
Mr. Neil Thorne (Ilford, South)
We shall now debate the reserve forces and especially the future of the Territorial Army.
We have every reason to be proud of the service of the Territorial Army over the years, because we can trace the history of volunteer and reserve commitment back to the Norman conquest.
We have a special position in that the oldest regiment in the British Army is the Honourable Artillery Company, which traces its history back to 1537, whereas the oldest regular units go back only to the middle of the 17th century.
For that reason, the Territorial Army does not consider itself in any way a second-class alternative.
In the middle ages, all men over the age of 18 were required on Sunday, after attending church, to participate in archery practice; it was from those roots that the Territorial Army grew.
The 19th century was an especially important period, for it was then that many of today's Territorial Army units were formed.
I commanded an officers training corps.
Those corps came into existence in the early 20th century, when it was discovered that attendance at university did not necessarily mean an ability to lead troops.
That was discovered especially during the South African war, when a number of university graduates were commissioned and sent out to South Africa, and it was found that they singularly lacked an ability to act in an officer capacity.
It was decided that training was necessary, so the officer training corps were introduced at several universities.
I am delighted that they have done so well that it is now proposed, even in these difficult times, to increase their establishment.
At the start of the second world war, there was an enormous expansion in the Territorial Army, as there was in the first world war.
It was the custom then to double the size of most infantry battalions and of many gunner and other units.
That was done quite simply by creating a new unit alongside the original.
The commanding officer, the adjutant and the regimental sergeant major were required to form a parallel unit, while the second in command, the regimental quartermaster sergeant and the assistant adjutant took command of the original unit.
In that way we were able to double our Territorial Army forces very quickly.
In two or three months in 1939, territorial units were brought close to the standard of regular infantry battalions and gunner regiments.
That was an extraordinarily fine achievement in such a short space of time.
It was achieved only because the senior ranks were there and able to provide the infrastructure and necessary training.
Things are more technical today.
Equipment is more sophisticated, and more experience is required.
However, many jobs require similar skills, and in respect of engineering and signals, the forces can take advantage of the skills that people acquire in their civilian jobs.
The same is true in medicine: the TA played a spendid role in the Gulf, where a complete field hospital was made available from Glasgow.
That provided support for the regulars in a vital role.
I believe that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Defence is aware of the situation.
He promised in the Chamber that he did not want any volunteers to be turned away from offering their service, and I am sure that he will do his best to keep that promise.
He has given me and many of my colleagues the firm impression that he has listened to our recommendations and suggestions, and that he will continue to do that in the years to come.
This exercise cannot be completed overnight; it will take many years to accomplish.
We must ensure that we get it right and that the alterations that are required take advantage of all the volunteers on offer.
Mr. William Ross (Londonderry, East)
It is all very well for the hon. Gentleman to say that the Government have given an undertaking not to turn away volunteers, but 102 Royal Artillery in Northern Ireland is at a strength of 103 per cent.
I understand that it is to be merged with 105 Royal Artillery Scotland.
How on earth is 103
Royal Artillery to be reduced from 103 per cent.
to 50 per cent.
to comprise one artillery regiment?
Mr. Thorne
As the hon. Gentleman knows, Northern Ireland is a special case.
There are already a large number of troops in the Ulster Defence Regiment.
I believe that a substantial proportion of the population of Northern Ireland already serve in a reserve capacity with the UDR.
The TA there is well recruited, but there are other opportunities for people to serve in Northern Ireland, and I hope that they will use elsewhere the skills that they have acquired in the TA.
We need their help.
Over recent years, the TA's establishment has been 91,000.
However, the paper strength is only 74,000, of which a smaller number train regularly.
The latter figure is thought to be between 63,000 and 65,000.
It was originally suggested that the establishment might be reduced to as low as 50,000 to 55,000.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has ensured that that is not the case, and that we will have an establishment of 63,500, because that figure is more in line with the actual number of people available, willing and able to serve.
We must acknowledge that honorary colonels of regiments play an important part.
In the middle ages, it was discovered that many regiments were not getting their fair share.
When they were asked to turn out and fight on behalf of king or queen and country, some regiments performed much better than others.
When an inquiry was carried out, it was discovered that the regiments that had the most influence, either through royal or noble connections, were doing much better in respect of ammunition and supplies than some others.
Therefore, a system was introduced which enabled regiments to appoint honorary colonels of their own choosing so that they could speak on their behalf and as a last resort have a direct right to apply to the sovereign in order to make representations on behalf of their unit.
The honorary colonel system therefore has an important role to play in the British Army.
It is important that, whenever there is a reorganisation, honorary colonels should be fully and properly consulted.
I fear that this has not necessarily taken place in every case.
Therefore, I ask my right hon. Friend the Minister to examine the matter, in particular in relation to 151 Royal Corps of Transport Regiment.
I am not certain that the honorary colonel of the regiment was given the notice that he could expect.
He was apparently told in June that there was nothing to report, and in September, he was told that the proposals were a fait accompli.
Clearly, that could not be construed as proper consultation.
Perhaps that was the only case that fell through the net, and I hope that it was an isolated case, but I should be grateful if my right hon. Friend would examine the matter and if necessary ensure that such a thing is not allowed to happen again.
Honorary colonels, as I have said, have an important role if we are to maintain our fighting troops at the standard that we have come to expect.
It is essential to have a proper press campaign to explain to the general public — particularly those who are interested in serving in the Territorial Army — that the Territorial Army has a bright and promising future.
Traditionally, every spring, a campaign is launched, but this year we must hold a special campaign to ensure that everybody knows what the way ahead will be.
I fear that, if we do not do that, we will not put the Territorial Army on a proper basis.
People will feel that it is threatened, and we shall not get the recruits we need.
Those who do not wish the Territorial Army well will point to reduced recruiting figures and make claims for further reductions.
That would be most unfair and unfortunate, and I am sure would not be what my right hon. Friend wishes.
We must ensure that, in any future mobilisation of the armed forces, such as occurred in the Gulf and in the Falklands, formed TA units shall be used.
We had disagreements in the House about the number of Territorial Army personnel that were serving in the Gulf.
At one time, my right hon. Friend thought that there were only 500, whereas I believed that there were 1,000.
We eventually managed to reconcile the figures, when we took into account the large number of people who had volunteered to serve on regular engagements in order to participate, but who had been trained as territorial soldiers.
The Territorial Army was therefore entitled to the credit for having trained those people, because there is no way in which, having volunteered off the street, they could have gone out to serve effectively in the Gulf.
We must ensure that the territorials have a much more satisfactory and satisfying role in the future and that those who wish to make themselves available in such an emergency have that offer taken up and that they are readily called upon in such times of emergency.
I hope that we will not have a two-tier regular and TA system, in future emergencies.
The Territorial Army should provide a basis for the expansion of our forces and as a general reserve.
As I have said, it performed extraordinarily well at the outbreak of both world wars, when it provided the bedrock upon which we were able to build.
I am not alone in believing that the result of both world wars could have been very different if we had not had those effective territorial forces in place in 1914 and 1939.
I should also like my right hon. Friend to look carefully at what extra help the Territorial Army can give the civilian population in civil disasters.
Extensive use is made of reserve forces elsewhere in the world.
We could learn from the American experience of using the National Guard not only to help with civil disasters but also with drug enforcement, which are both areas in which we cannot have too much help, provided that it is properly directed and properly trained.
I hope that red tape will not prevent the use of the enormous reservoir of skill and good will that is held in our reserve forces from being available for use at such times purely and simply because Departments might haggle over who will be billed for the cost.
Admittedly, this is a Treasury matter, but it cannot possibly be beyond the ability of Treasury Ministers to work out an effective formula to ensure that the Ministry of Defence is properly rewarded for any help that it gives.
Such help is certainly required, so I hope that this facility of the Territorial Army will not be wasted.
The Territorial Army provides a reassuring military presence throughout the country.
It does so effectively in much the same way as the presence of police on the beat reinforces a sense of law and order.
In times of national emergency, it is reassuring to see the Territorial Army around.
The Territorial Army also provides important social functions, discipline, comradeship, leadership training, both mental and physical fitness, and a great sense of patriotism, all of which are important and should be encouraged.
One of the Territorial Army's biggest problems in recent years has been the substantial turnover of recruits, which has amounted to as much as 30 per cent.
per annum in some units.
It is important not only to make the training interesting, stimulating and exciting, but also for the Territorial Army to provide the best possible club in any area.
We rely upon the support of the families to retain personnel within the forces.
If the families believe that they can enjoy their social hours with the territorials, they will support their men and womenfolk and encourage them to maintain their membership of the Territorial Army.
That would considerably reduce the turnover of personnel, encourage people to serve in the force and enable us to use their expertise in it for much longer, so that less time will be spent on training.
It is extremely important to keep the senior ranks.
I explained how, at the beginning of each world war, it was possible quickly to double the number of infantry battalions, gunner and other regiments.
That depended on the skill and expertise of those senior ranks.
In recent years, we have found that, throughout the Territorial Army, most regiments were undermanned on average by 15 per cent.
The 15 per cent.
was largely accounted for in the lower ranks.
The more senior ranks, such as sergeants, warrant officers, captains and majors, were all in post.
Of course, the more junior members of the TA have so many other pressures on their time.
They change their jobs more frequently than older people.
They get married and move, and may have young children to care for.
Those and many other pressures may distract them from remaining for a long period in the Territorial Army.
The more senior ranks are usually more settled.
It is very important to keep them, and we would be silly not to provide sufficient places for those more senior ranks to occupy.
If we do not provide sufficient places, the necessary skill will not be in the right place at the right time.
Moreover, if only a limited number of more senior places are available, very able corporals and subalterns will get tired of waiting for promotion to sergeant and captain respectively, and will be inclined to leave at that stage.
We would therefore lose many capable people who have a lot to offer.
The 63,500 places now available should not be allowed to reduce to 54,000 over the next five years, as would be the case if the 15 per cent.
rule came into effect.
That is why it is so important that we provide challenging and interesting roles to make those senior people keen to remain.
I was encouraged by the Secretary of State's answer to my question on Tuesday that he would be flexible with the extra numbers that were available.
I hope that he will find it possible to allow extra ranks to be recruited all the way along the line — not only at the most junior level — to ensure that we do not lose those very able people.
If we are to have a leaner, meaner, keener regular Army, inevitably we shall need a good Territorial Army to support it.
After six years of the second world war and 45 years of the cold war, the taxpayer is entitled to a peace dividend.
However, if the dividend is to be effectively delivered, it cannot leave us vulnerable to the many other surprises hiding around the corner.
Two years ago, few people could have accurately forecast the possibility of the Gulf conflict.
Certainly the trouble in Yugoslavia has been a great surprise to many.
Today, we hear that Mr. Gorbachev thinks that his time of public service is near its end.
That will raise a number of new question marks throughout what was the Soviet Union.
Therefore, we must expect some major changes in that region in the coming years and be prepared for anything that might arise as a result.
Much has been done in recent months to draw those matters to the attention of the Department and, as I said, I believe that Ministers have been listening.
I am extremely grateful to the chairman of the Greater London Territorial, Auxiliary and Volunteer Association, Sir Greville Spratt, and to Brigadier Peter Bowser, the secretary, for all that they have done to lead the way in ensuring that the Government have been properly informed that the Territorial Army is adequately provided for in the future.
My hon. Friend the Member for Norwich, North (Mr. Thompson) is grateful for what has been done to help him with the preservation of his local Anglian Regiment.
Many other hon. Members are equally grateful for what has been done to ensure the future of the TA in their areas.
I believe that the Secretary of State agrees with us about the importance of the future role of the Territorial Army, and I am sure that he will do all in his power to help us achieve that objective.
Mr. Allan Rogers (Rhondda)
I thank the hon. Member for Ilford, South (Mr. Thorne) for having initiated the debate and for giving us an opportunity to discuss some of the implications of the Secretary of State's announcement earlier in the week.
I thank him also for the history lesson on the Territorial Army, although my recollection is somewhat different.
My stint in the TA was as a conscript, and those of us who did our national service in the TA made many friendships that have lasted to this day.
That has been the cornerstone of the TA concept, and many people have protested about the changes because activities in and around the TA and the drill hall created a culture of its own, certainly in many working class communities.
That may not be so evident in larger towns, but in smaller towns and villages — for example, in the mining valleys of South Wales — the TA is held in high esteem.
Hon. Members in all parts of the House recognise the valuable role that all arms of the reserve forces have played in defending Britain, and the hon. Member for Ilford, South reminded us that, in the two world wars, it was possible quickly to enrol sufficient numbers to save Britain.
More recently, they were deployed in the Gulf, and more than 1,700 reserve personnel, including the hon. Member for Wimbledon (Dr. Goodson-Wickes), served with the British forces in Operation Granby.
We should put on record our tribute to those reservists and members of the TA who served in the Gulf.
I know that, in saying that, I reflect the sentiments of all hon. Members.
My hon. Friends and I were interested to note that the NATO summit declaration in London on 6 July 1990 called for the alliance to place more reliance on reserve forces, and the Government have emphasised the importance of part-time soldiers.
As the hon. Member for Ilford, South said, their skills are extremely high, although the army has become more technical.
I think back to the more rigid skills studied by foot-sloggers such as myself.
The height of my military skill was the ability to strip a Bren gun blindfold and put it back together in 30 seconds.
The fact that it sometimes did not work after that operation was incidental.
The reserve forces were mentioned by the Secretary of State in his’ Options for Change’announcement on 25 July 1990.
It seems to be a very sensible move by the Ministry of Defence to alter the structure of our forces in the way in which it is at present proceeding.
We are concerned, however, to learn from various Territorial Army representatives that the Ministry of Defence is considering cutting TA and other reserves by a disproportionate amount compared with the regulars.
There were at one time, as the hon. Member for Ilford, South said, rumours that the TA could be cut to almost 55,000 or 50,000.
I am sure it was the pressure from the warrior class and the impending general election that led to a final figure of 63,500, which is a cut of about 17 per cent.
We are not quarrelling with this decision in any way, because I believe that our full-time forces are already overstretched for the roles and tasks that the Government have outlined for them both in and out of area, and that the territorial forces play a vital support role.
As I mentioned earlier, we recognise that, besides the vital role in defending the United Kingdom which the Territorial Army plays, it also provides very positive outlets for the energies of young men and women, many of whom unfortunately are unemployed.
That is why, in the defence estimates debate on 14 October 1991, my hon. Friend the Member for Clackmannan (Mr. O'Neill) said:’ We should be careful to preserve the opportunity for as many of our civilians as possible to serve in the volunteer forces.’
—[Official Report, 14 October 1991; Vol. 196, c. 72.]
I was very glad to hear that the Secretary of State, in his announcement on Tuesday, accepted this view when he said:’ we would not wish to turn away willing and suitable volunteers’.
—[Official Report, 10 December 1991; Vol. 200, c. 734.]
I congratulate the Government on the recognition of the need to keep this doorway open.
My hon. Friend the Member for Clackmannan asked a number of questions on Tuesday regarding the reserves, and perhaps the Minister could provide some of the answers this evening.
I do not know whether it would be proper to extend it a little beyond the army, but I am very concerned in particular about the ex-pilots in the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the RAF Volunteer Reserve, because, according to a parliamentary answer on 14 June 1991, only 10 ex-RAF pilots are in these organisations.
It seems to me that, if we are spending £3 million on training someone to fly a fast jet and if, when he leaves the force — there are a lot of people leaving before their time is up — he is not being used in the reserve forces, that is a tremendous waste of a national resource.
I hope that the Minister agrees with us and his colleague the hon. Member for Ruislip-Northwood (Mr. Wilkinson), who raised this point on Tuesday.
I ask the Minister if he will undertake to develop proposals to encourage greater involvement by ex-RAF pilots in the reserves.
The same applies, of course, to ex-regular soldiers going into the TA.
I am not attempting to compare the quality of the Territorial Army now and following national service, but the TA then consisted almost entirely of people who had served for two years on a full-time basis, and the level of skill and general martial ability was very high.
Very many men of that vintage had served in action areas such as Malaya and Korea, so it was a reserve of tremendous value, as well as containing the numbers that were required.
Another question that I want to return to is the problem of employment protection.
The Secretary of State said that he would note my hon. Friend the Member for Clackmannan's suggestion that the employment protection aspects of the Reserve Forces Act 1980 be extended to cover those TA members have less than two years' continuous employment.
I wonder if he could tell us whether he is prepared to amend the legislation in this fashion, and perhaps tell the House exactly what other amendments he needs to make in order to take account of changing circumstances.
Perhaps the Minister could also go into a little more detail about the criteria that are being used when making his decisions.
In the White Paper on the Army a number of criteria were listed.
It would be interesting to know whether the same criteria were used in the restructuring of the reserves.
On occasion, the Minister has criticised the lack of detail in our overall defence expenditure proposals and what we propose for the Territorial Army and the reserve forces.
We suffer a great handicap in dealing with a Government who are obsessed with secrecy.
Whenever we put down questions, it is impossible to get answers.
That is sometimes the case with the Select Committee on Defence as well.
In its recent report, it said that the White Paper’ contains no hint of the Government's financial strategy for defence over the coming decade.’
The Minister has also criticised our lack of proposals for individual units, but when we table questions to get information on which to base proposals, which perhaps we will be implementing in six months' time, we cannot get proper answers from the Government.
The stock answer to defence procurement questions is that the information is commercially confidential or that the Department does not normally give the information.
When it comes to operational issues and manpower, the stock answer is that information on the running costs of individual units is not held centrally and could be provided only by the use of disproportionate time and effort, yet the Minister criticises us for not being more specific.
We cannot be more specific unless we get the information.
I assure the Minister that in six months' time, when he is in opposition, we will be kinder to him and much more open with information.
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
I am sure my hon. Friend well remembers the Committee stage of the Atomic Weapons Establishment Act 1991 when we had great difficulty in discussing the measure properly because the Department would not release the necessary information.
He will remember that we also had difficulty over the Tombs report when again we could not get the necessary information.
The Department can be very awkward at times.
That makes it difficult not only for Opposition Members but for hon. Members on the Government Benches to discuss matters properly.
The Minister is mumbling — I hope that he will get up and clear the air.
Interruption
Mr. Rogers
My hon. Friend is right.
We had great difficulty getting information on the atomic energy privatisation measure.
I understand that, because the proposals were so ludicrous, there was no rationale to justify them.
As to the Tombs report, that was the correct name for it because the information was buried very deep.
If I may put on my nationalistic hat for a moment, one issue which concerns us greatly in Wales is the disproportionate cut in regular and volunteer troops.
The decision to close 217 Air Defence Battery in Cwmbran, leaving only one gunner battery in Wales, concerns people very much.
The battery was formed in 1987, and its purpose-built barracks, costing over £2 million, was opened by my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition and General Sir Peter de la Billiere.
It is noted for its very high calibre loyalty and involvement in the local community.
My hon. Friend the Member for Torfaen (Mr. Murphy) has emphasised those points to me.
It provides much-needed jobs and good training for many young people.
There has been a great outcry in Cwmbran about its possible closure.
The Secretary of State talked on Tuesday in terms of people moving from one unit to another, and said that it would not be a problem if a unit was closed, because people could simply go to the next one along the road.
But that will not happen, because members of the Territorial Army are not so mobile or nomadic in that sense as regular forces.
They live at home with their families and, if they should have to travel from Cwmbran to Newport, for example, or from Pontypool further on to Newport, many people would be deterred from getting involved in the voluntary forces.
As a result, the loss of trained people and the expense in recruiting and training new people at a new location would be considerable.
Many units would suffer a loss of morale and motivation, which may put the operational effectiveness of those units in jeopardy.
The other issue that concerns us in Wales is the future of the 4th Volunteer Battalion the Welsh Regiment.
It may be my wish upon them, but this is the second time this year that the two regiments in which I served, the Royal Welch Fusiliers and the Welsh Regiment, have been under pressure.
I thank the Minister very much for saving the Royal Welch Fusiliers.
May I implore him now, on behalf of my hon. Friend the Member for Neath (Mr. Hain), to save the 4th Volunteer Battalion?
My hon. Friend, together with my hon. Friend the Member for Swansea, East (Mr. Anderson), my right hon. Friend the Member for Swansea, West (Mr. Williams) and the hon. Member for Gower (Mr. Wardell) are extremely concerned.
Mr. Win Griffiths (Bridgend)
I thank the hon. Member for Londonderry, East (Mr. Ross) for taking us in some detail through the problems that he and many experts see in dealing with toxic and hazardous waste.
Naturally, the hon. Gentleman is particularly concerned about an incinerator that may be built in his constituency.
He pointed out that, when new products come on the market, they are often treated as great blessings, and it is only after a great deal of experience and use that we learn of their dangers and downsides.
It is essential, therefore, that we proceed with great caution when handling toxic and hazardous waste.
The hon. Gentleman also mentioned the environmental impact assessment.
I expect that the Minister can reassure him that an environmental impact assessment cannot have been made properly for that incinerator yet, because an application does not yet appear to have been made.
When an application is made, the incinerator will face a mandatory environmental impact assessment under the relevant EC directive.
In addition to a highly technical assessment document, there is a duty to produce a summary that the public can read.
Some of the important matters that the hon. Gentleman raises have been the concern of several Select Committees.
In 1988-89, the second report of the Environment Select Committee was on toxic and hazardous waste.
It was a savage indictment of both local and central Government for not taking their responsibilities seriously.
At this time in the morning, I shall not go into the details of the report but will simply say that the Committee was shocked by what it found.
It discovered that local government was rather lax and did not appreciate the problems of dealing with toxic and hazardous waste, and central Government were equally lax in ensuring that local government enforced laws under the Control of Pollution Act 1974.
We are now more aware of those problems, and there are possibilities under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 — some of which are already being followed and others which have yet to be taken up — to deal with past laxity.
In addition to the general comments and proposals that the Environment Select Committee made about tightening up the approach to dealing with toxic and hazardous waste, it said that an environmental protection agency should be set up.
The Government have belatedly agreed to do just that, and are currently in a consultation period on the matter.
The Welsh Affairs Select Committee considered toxic waste disposal in Wales.
Apart from the general problems that relate to the haphazard disposal of such waste, particularly into landfill sites where little effort is made to seal them off, in the United Kingdom as a whole the land around a third of the 100 sites studied by the Department of the Environment was contaminated.
The Select Committee on Welsh Affairs came across a similar problem in Wales, where, in addition to the general land contamination report — most of the toxic waste has been disposed of to land — a study was also made of incineration.
The infamous Rechem plant is located near Pontypool in Wales and there has been widespread concern at its operation.
The Welsh Office responded positively to the Select Committee report, and an expert group is currently considering possible contamination dangers to which the public, the land, the cattle and livestock around that plant may be exposed.
The result of those studies might have an impact on future incineration policy.
There is also widespread concern in many other districts.
Only a week or so ago, most, if not all, hon. Members received a Community Action Against Toxic Waste appeal from Walsall in the west midlands.
At Birch coppice, a firm which I think calls itself Leigh Environmental operates some large toxic and hazardous waste sites.
What is worse, beneath the landfill sites there were old mining workings.
It is estimated that Leigh Environmental deposited 400 million gallons of toxic liquids into the old workings.
I believe that, as the law currently stands, Leigh Environmental could surrender its site licences at Birch coppice and Stubbers green, and the residents could be forced to live with the devastation for many years.
Will the Minister say this evening whether the Government intend to implement, if not immediately, at least in the very near future, those sections of part II of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 that prevent the surrender of a disposal licence until a certificate of completion has been isssued by the relevant authority?
By coincidence, the British Medical Association was represented in the House this week to report on its study of hazardous waste in the west midlands in the very same district of Walsall to which I referred.
It said that its study had not discovered any conclusive evidence on the damage done to humans by low-level exposure, but it stated that the lack of information and knowledge of the effects of exposure to low doses of the chemicals over a long period had led the working party to adopt the precautionary principle that absence of evidence was not evidence of absence.
The report stated that a study had been made of an incinerator at Bonnybridge in Scotland that suggested an increased level of twinning in cattle, and possibly in humans, that may have been linked with the emission of PCHs and other substances from the plant.
The British Medical Association was sufficiently concerned about that evidence, and other evidence from the United States which showed that PCBs and other toxic and hazardous waste should be treated very seriously, to propose a national waste agency, because it claims that, at present, there is no central guidance and little consensus on the best form of industrial waste disposal, 90 per cent .
of which is contracted out to the private sector.
The BMA believes that there is an urgent need for a central waste policy to give guidance on the safest form of disposal.
It also believes strongly that there should be a ban on the import of hazardous waste into the United Kingdom.
In the report of the Select Committee on Welsh Affairs, the BMA quoted figures from 1981-88.
Those figures showed how the import of what is called’ special’wastes — toxic and hazardous waste — had gone up.
In 1981-82, 3,800 tonnes were imported, and by 1987-88 we were importing 80,000 tonnes, thereby almost becoming one of the major toxic dustbins of the world.
However, I believe — perhaps the Minister will confirm this — that, in the last year for which we have the figures, the import of such waste has gone down to 44,000 tonnes, although that is still 10 times higher than in 1981-82.
The Labour party believes that there are a number of essential approaches to toxic and hazardous waste.
The hon. Member for Londonderry, East quoted the experts waste recovery association and said that the first priority should be waste minimisation.
We should reduce the amount of hazardous waste that is produced when making products — often useful products — for the market.
It is possible, and companies are doing it.
If hazardous materials are left after minimisation, there are possibilities for recycling.
After recycling, we must find the safest way in which to dispose of the waste.
The first step is to ensure that the waste is disposed of as close to its source as possible.
If it is transported over long distances, it can be dangerous.
There have been accidents during transportation, which have caused serious pollution.
We should also end the commercial trade in waste, except in exceptional circumstances — for example, if there has been a crisis and there is a need for waste to be disposed of somewhere else.
By and large, however, we should try to ensure that waste is dealt with as close as possible to its source.
We do not believe that the United Kingdom should import any toxic and hazardous waste.
In the longt term, Labour would look to a steep reduction in toxic waste and to the elimination of some of the most dangerous types of waste.
It is clear that, as the world becomes wealthier and other countries start to want the things that we want, there is a danger that we shall produce more and more waste.
That means that the technologies of waste minimisation and alternative means of disposal are very important.
Towards the end of his speech, the hon. Member for Londonderry, East mentioned the possibility of neutralising toxic waste.
Before the products were brought together, they were not necessarily dangerous.
It just so happens that, before I came to this debate this morning, I was flicking through a pile of press cuttings when I came across one from The Journal (Newcastle upon Tyne), a north-eastern regional newspaper.
What caught my eye was the headline:’ Speedy Toxic Waste Eater’.
The story is about a new chemical process which eats toxic waste.
ICI has developed it at Billingham, and it will eliminate the need to dump waste from the manufacture of perspex into the River Tees and the North sea — one year ahead of schedule, too.
The project was supported with £300,000 of grant from the EC
Commission.
ICI has found a successful way of dealing with this waste without causing any harm to the public in the form of emissions from incineration, so perhaps there is good news to come.
Perhaps the incinerator will not go ahead as planned in Londonderry, East.
The Minister, who has access to more information than I have and who is ably supported by his civil servants, may be able to give us more news on that front this morning.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Tony Baldry)
The treatment and disposal of hazardous waste in the United Kingdom is an important subject, and the whole House must be grateful to the hon. Member for Londonderry, East (Mr. Ross) for raising it this evening.
He and the hon. Member for Bridgend (Mr. Griffiths) have made some interesting points and useful contributions on the matter.
We must put this important subject in its proper context.
There are not enormous amounts of hazardous waste either arising here or coming here from elsewhere to be disposed of in an uncontrolled manner.
Since the introduction of the Control of Pollution Act 1974, this country has had a system of strategic planning and site licensing for waste management.
The Act set controls in advance of much of Europe's, which were reflected in the Community's own waste management framework directive in 1975.
More recently, we have amended the legislation in the Environmental Protection Act 1990, which again places us in the vanguard of Europe, with additional provisions for integrated pollution control for those industrial processes with the most potential for pollution, and for a duty of care for all producers and handlers of waste.
It is estimated that about 80 million tonnes of industrial waste arise each year in the United Kingdom, all of which is dealt with in this country.
About 2 million tonnes of that is hazardous wastes.
Under the Control of Pollution (Special Wastes) Regulations 1980, movements of defined categories of difficult wastes in the United Kingdom are subject to at least three working days notification to local waste disposal authorities.
This system is designed to provide local authorities with opportunities to satisfy themselves that the planned disposal will be satisfactory, but with the delays to industrial operations kept to a reasonable minimum.
The Governments' primary aim is to see significant reductions in the amounts of waste requiring disposal.
We are doing all we can to encourage waste minimisation.
Indeed, this is built into the statutory requirements for consideration in the issue of IPC authorisations.
Under these controls, what emissions are then unavoidable have to be rendered harmless.
We therefore have cleaner technology as a main aim, and we see growing recognition by industry of the value of this for its economic well-being and international competitiveness.
Next come our policies for encouraging waste recycling.
This requires a comprehensive programme for the development of suitable collection systems and to ensure the creation of reliable and economically valid markets.
However, even with complete success in encouraging waste minimisation and recycling, society will still have a number of wastes to handle.
It has to be appreciated that, in a complex industrialised society such as ours, some wastes are unavoidable.
We want to see such wastes dealt with to the highest possible standards in ways that are consistent with industrial economics.
For any hazardous wastes, that means pre-treatment where necessary.
Industrial waste incinerators of significant size have, in the past, been subject to control by Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution, acting under air pollution control legislation, with plant being required to adopt the best practical means for dealing with the materials coming into the sites.
But those incinerators are now regulated under integrated pollution control procedures, and HMIP authorisations will be based upon guidelines reflecting the best available technology not entailing excessive costs.
Incineration is the most appropriate disposal method for many wastes which can be rendered harmless only by breaking them down through the controlled use of heat.
The methods used and the pollution control systems fitted are sophisticated and provide a safe and sound disposal option, subject to rigorous operational controls and inspection.
The hon. Member for Londonderry, East has raised the specific problems of hazardous waste disposal in Northern Ireland, with specific reference to proposals for an incinerator at Maydown in Londonderry.
There are currently two Northern Ireland public sector landfills suitable for the disposal of certain special wastes — Dargan road, Belfast and Culmore, Londonderry.
I understand that currently about 9,000 tonnes of those wastes are dealt with annually at those sites.
They consist of asbestos, vanadium grit, acids and alkalis, pharmaceutical wastes, miscellaneous chemicals and treated sludges.
However, some wastes arise in Northern Ireland which cannot be dealt with by landfill.
There are three chemical treatment plants in the Province, one of which is for in-house wastes only; so wastes required to be disposed of by high-temperature incineration have to be sent to disposal facilities outside the Province.
Approximately 1,600 tonnes of those wastes are transported from Northern Ireland each year.
Until this year, some of that waste went to Finland and the remainder to facilites elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
But there will be no renewal of contracts with the Finnish installation beyond this year, and all such waste will now go to United Kingdom facilities.
We expect that to continue as long as necessary.
In Northern Ireland, special wastes are subject to the Pollution Control (Special Waste) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1981, which impose the same requirements as in Britain regarding pre-notification of movement of waste to suitable licensed disposal facilities.
The hon. Gentleman has referred to studies by Du Pont (UK) Ltd regarding a possible hazardous waste incinerator.
I understand that the company has now completed a feasibility study on such an installation and is considering the appointment of consultants to prepare an environmental impact analysis, including consideration of alternative technology.
Those are essential steps in considering any such proposal.
As the hon. Gentleman made clear, the Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, my hon. Friend, the Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham), has already announced that any formal proposal from Du Pont would be put before a public inquiry.
As the hon. Member for Bridgend said, that would enable those with concerns, including the constituents of the hon. Member for Londonderry, East, to have them aired, investigated and adjudicated upon.
As the hon. Member for Londonderry, East has recognised, one of the constraints on private sector investment in high-temperature incineration in the Province must be the relatively small volume of such waste which may not be sufficient to warrant large-scale investment.
A guaranteed baseload tonnage is required for most waste treatment plants to make operations viable.
For that reason, there is a need to consider application of the European Community's proximity principle to the use of facilities by neighbouring countries.
That principle is designed to encourage waste to be disposed of at the nearest available facility.
We should look closely at its appropriateness to the possible situation with regard to an incinerator proposal in Northern Ireland.
The hon. Member also asked about alternative technology instead of incineration.
He referred specifically to a technique developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for rendering wastes into harmless salts, which I understand is in its infancy.
Apparently, the institute is considering building a pilot plant, but little is known about its proposals, and clearly we are a long way from that becoming a viable alternative to present-day technology.
Pyrolysis — the imposition of high temperatures upon material in the absence of oxygen — is often presented as an alternative to incineration.
That technique has been considered by many interested in waste management, because it achieves considerably higher volumes of reduction than incineration, and seems to offer good prospects for even better pollution control standards.
However, it represents a number of practical operating difficulties, mainly because the process converts material rather than destroys it.
That is particularly relevant when one is considering a diverse range of hazardous wastes.
Nevertheless, as I said earlier, Du Pont proposes to ask consultants to examine alternative technology in the impact analysis of the incinerator proposal.
The hon. Member for Londonderry, East asked about emissions from the chemical incinerator at the Coalite works.
I dealt with that matter in an oral answer on 6November.
I am confident that Government policies provide, and will continue to provide, an appropriate basis for meeting the high expectations that society has for the future.
We want waste management to play its part in the drive for sustainable development, with a high standard of environmental stewardship in the interests of future generations.
That will not be easy, and there will always be areas of difficulty — some of which were usefully debated tonight.
Of course I appreciate the concerns expressed by the hon. Member for Londonderry, East on behalf of his constituents.
I am certain that we are developing the correct framework for tackling important issues, and that we will be able to accommodate developments in new technology as they become available.
Croatia
Mr. Patrick Cormack (Staffordshire, South)
No one who contemplates the brutal war that has racked Croatia over the last few months can do so without a deep feeling of sorrow and shame: sorrow that such devastation and misery should disfigure our continent in 1991, and shame that we have been unable to do anything to halt the carnage and destruction.
It is not that the west has failed to make an attempt to do so, and I pay genuine tribute to the work done by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs and by my hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, who is to reply to this debate, and to the tireless efforts of Lord Carrington and, more recently, Mr. Cyrus Vance.
However, when no real progess is made, the time comes for reassessment, and it seems to me that that time is now.
Like many right hon. and hon. Members in all parts of the House, I followed with a mixture of admiration and exasperation Lord Carrington's attempts to negotiate a proper ceasefire, but watched with mounting anger the callous disregard for life and property cynically displayed by the federal forces.
For me, the moment of realisation that something more must be done to identify the aggressor and to hold him to account came last week, when I was invited to open an exhibition of photographs at the building centre in Store street, London, of some of the Croatian buildings destroyed over the past few months.
Some were great and glorious, some were humble and small — but together their destruction represents an awful catalogue of misery.
Those photographs brought home to me the abomination of desolation that is Croatia now.
In the Croatian conflict, as in any other, there is a background of distributed bitterness.
I am well aware of the atrocities that some Croatians perpetrated during the second world war, and of the tensions between Serb and Croat that go back long before that, which left a legacy of hatred and fear.
No one would ever suggest that President Tudjman should be awarded a Nobel prize for the tact and sensitivity with which he asserted Croatian independence.
I know, too, that, even during these last months of conflict, acts of unjustified violence have been committed by Croats against Serbs.
Only today I received a letter from Prince Tomislav of Yugoslavia listing the Orthodox churches that had been destroyed by Croats.
No one can defend such actions.
If we recognise that background, however, we must also recognise the reality, and the enormity, of what has happended in Croatia — and recognise that the great majority of acts of wanton wickedness have been perpetrated by the forces of a state that has, by all normal criteria, forfeited its right to be recognised as a sovereign independent nation.
Let me suggest to my hon. and learned Friend the Minister that perhaps the time has come to stop acting as an honest broker between victim and aggressor.
The evidence of responsibility for the carnage and destruction is too overwhelming to be ignored.
Many hon. Members will have received, in the past few days, a report from Amnesty International giving details of some of the atrocities that have occurred in Croatia in recent months.
I commend that report to all hon. Members: it is a terrible indictment of the impotence of the federal Government and their inability to control their army.
It is a horrifying catalogue of crime and of utter disregard for the Geneva convention.
In September, Unesco's Director General appealed for respect for Yugoslavia's cultural heritage.
He said:’ the cities of Split and Dubrovnik are on the World Heritage List and are protected under the World Heritage Convention’.
He also pointed out that Yugoslavia was a party to the convention on the protection of cultural property in the event of armed conflict, signed at The Hague in 1954.
That declaration was issued on 27 September; by the end of October, a document was coming out of Croatia from the Ministry of Education and Culture.
I have a translation.
It says that, in that short space of time, 317 historic settlements had been affected, 241 heavily or lightly, while 76 had been destroyed or burned down; 358 individual monuments registered or filed as cultural treasures, including 26 museums, seven archives and 13 library buildings, had been damaged.
We have all seen, with a sense of sickening horror, the graphic television pictures of the shelling of Dubrovnik, and we all saw the appalling scene of devastation when Vukovar fell.
I could go on, but I think that I can make my points simply and graphically by quoting from the documents that I have with me.
I am sure that my hon. and learned Friend the Minister and the hon. Member for Hamilton (Mr. Robertson) share my sense of horror and outrage.
I urge my hon. Friend to ensure that those feelings are translated into a more positive western attitude.
Maastricht is now over; let this be a test of the new Europe's resolve.
It is an important test, for impotence will not only be a poor recommendation of Community cohesion; it could make it all the more difficult to stem the tide of bloody anarchy that could so easily engulf large tracts of Europe which we recently rejoiced to see set free.
I know that there are no easy answers, but if we do not at least attempt to act decisively, Zagreb, Dubrovnik, Vukovar and Osijek could be just the first names on a ghastly roll call resembling those unending, poignant first world war memorials that are such a feature of life all over the continent of Europe.
I hope that my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary will seize the opportunity provided by his next meeting with his Community colleagues — which I believe will take place very shortly — to reappraise the position, and to see whether the Governments of the Community could now decide to recognise Croatia and to tell the Yugoslavian federal Government that they can no longer be recognised as the legitimate Government of former federal territory.
Everyone says — my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary has made the point several times — that Yugoslavia as we knew it is no more.
Whether that is to be lamented or not, it is a fact.
The federal Government do not exercise proper control.
We in the west should be prepared to act in concert to impose sanctions, and to patrol the coast and the skies while a full conference to determine the relationship between the former Yugoslav territories is convened.
It is important that the rights of all minorities within all the territories should be high on the agenda at the conference.
One knows of the concern of the 11.5 per cent.
Serbian minority within Croatia, but that is no excuse for what has happened and continues to happen.
It is a terrible indictment of 1991 to think that such events could happen today in Europe.
Any course of action such as I have suggested is fraught with difficulty, and everyone must recognise that.
However, it is as nothing compared with the difficulties that we shall face if the generals, who have effectively staged a coup against civil authority, are allowed ultimate success.
In August, the world rejoiced when the communist old guard failed in the attempted coup in Moscow.
Too few people seem to have realised that the communist old guard has succeeded in a coup in Belgrade.
There was an interesting article in The Sunday Telegraph on 1 December by Mr. Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, in which he speaks about the devastation in Vukovar and what has been happening in Croatia.
He ends the article with the words:’ The officer corps of the army is the last relic of the Tito era, divided against itelf, scared of the future, without loyal troops, without strategy, without a creed that anybody, even itself, can still believe in.
It is fighting to preserve its privileges and its pensions.
When it meets real resistance the army will recoil and break.’
I do not know whether it will break as easily as that.
Certainly it is an army that has run amok.
We must recognise that and we must recognise where the aggression lies.
When he answered questions in the House on 20November, my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary showed an understandable reluctance to move towards recognition of Croatia.
He made the point that that could lead to yet greater troubles in Bosnia and in Macedonia.
What would guarantee such trouble is allowing the federal army to succeed in extinguishing an entire small nation state with the brutality with which it has already destroyed so much.
I hope that a message will go out from my hon. and learned Friend the Minister when he replies for the Government.
This is the first time that we have debated the subject in the House, which is a pity.
I hope that a message can go out that there is a new resolve in the west and that we are determined to ensure that the killing, the destruction and the brutality stop, and that, as a new year dawns in a few days' time, it dawns with a new sense of hope for the battered, beleaguered people of Croatia.
Mr. George Robertson (Hamilton)
I naturally commend the hon. Member for Staffordshire, South (Mr.Cormack) on his choice of subject for debate.
It is a valid subject, and the hon. Gentleman is not to blame for the procedures that the House has foisted upon itself.
Having spent 13 years in this place, I still find it truly remarkable that, with regard to such important issues — Croatia is receiving perhaps its first real airing in the House since the tragedy began to unfold — we are having this debate at 3.35 am.
The House should not be proud of that, and I sincerely hope that this will be the last all-night Consolidated Fund debate that we will have to put up with.
What the hon. Member for Staffordshire, South said about the tragedy unfolding before us is right.
It is shocking and horrible, and it requires a sense of irony almost to reflect on the fact that this is 1991 — towards the end of the 20th century.
However, on our continent, on the doorstep of the most civilised part of the world, we are watching human beings killing each other for no other reason than the fact that they live next door to each other.
The waste, deaths, brutality and destruction of property beggar description.
All that is happening in a beautiful country which has been the holiday destination of thousands of British people over the years.
Many people who have spent their holidays in that country, as I have, shake their heads in disbelief as they watch what is happening.
I spent a family holiday in Dubrovnik last summer.
One of my memories of my holiday in that beautiful city in the Aegean is of attending a football match with my brother and our children.
The match involved Dubrovnik and a team from Belgrade.
Only 15 months later, the participants in that match, which, it must be said, was not full of passion, are now presumably heavily engaged in destroying each other simply because they come from two sides of a divide that dates back to the tragedies, miseries and horrors of the second world war, back to the first world war and into the deep recesses of history before that time.
The point at issue is that what is happening is not only a tragedy of today but a portent of tomorrow.
We are witnessing in Yugoslavia what happens when the cap of communism is lifted to reveal the suppressed anger that is contained.
That may happen in other countries where the same situation applies.
Because we are outraged by the conflict in Yugoslavia today, we should be ready for similar things to happen elsewhere in Europe unless we ensure that we set in place institutions to prevent them.
Despite having visited the country and despite a long interest in the area, even I was not fully aware of the complexities and the depth of feeling in the various component parts of Yugoslavia until I read the quite remarkable book that Chris Cviic wrote for the Royal Institute of International Affairs only a few months ago.
Despite the fact that modern history grows old within a week, I commend that book to people who want to understand what is happening in that part of the world.
The replaying of historical conflict, brought to our own living room firesides by the miracles of modern technology and displaying the brutality of past years, does not reflect well on our development in Europe.
The hon. Member for Staffordshire, South commented on the differences of view about who is to blame.
There are strong feelings on both sides, as my postbag bears witness.
It is now becoming clear even to those of a partisan view that the culpability of the federal army, which is no longer responsive to any of the organs of the previous state, must bear a heavy responsibility for what is happening.
I do not want to detain the House or myself for long, but I pay tribute to the role of the European Community and to the monitors who have served with considerable bravery and tenacity during the conflict.
Their presence has done much to inhibit some of the wilder excesses on both sides.
Their courage in entering into the conflict and their presence of mind in circumstances in which they have been in enormous danger are a great tribute to the individuals themselves and to the institution that sent them.
We must pay tribute also to the United Nations, which has been revitalised over the past 12 months and has started to play its part in trying to unravel and resolve the problems in Yugoslavia.
The Security Council took on board some of the challenges.
Mr. Cyrus Vance, who stepped into the breach, has made herculean efforts to establish a peace so that, eventually, a peacekeeping force might move into place.
Of course, the United Nations has been engaged in the exercise of sanctions against those who perpetrate excesses.
There are some who say that we should involve peacekeeping forces right away.
However, we in this country know more than most that, unless there is a peace to keep, putting in peacekeeping forces simply places troops in danger.
There are some who say that we should immediately recognise Croatia and Slovenia because they have passed a test in respect of self-standing and self-sustenance.
Of course, despite claims about elections — I recently met President Tudjman and Mr. Peterle, the Prime Minister of Slovenia — enormous questions have to be answered.
What borders would we recognise?
Would they be pre-conflict borders, the borders on the map, Yugoslav internal federal borders, or the borders that exist after the conflict and the damage that took place during the capture of towns such as Osijek and Vukovar?
What would be the implications for the other republics of Yugoslavia, or what used to be Yugoslavia?
What of the future of Bosnia, in particular, where there is a very complicated cocktail of ethnic mixes?
The problem cannot be solved by the recognition of any number of states.
There are some, including the former Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), who say,’ Arm one side.’
She said that we should send arms to the Croatians.
Nobody who is sensible or sane would say that we should export more arms to a country that is already awash with them, because it would do little more than increase the bloodshed that has already stained that country.
There are those who even dare to say that we should intervene militarily and hope that some form of peace will come about as a result.
With conflict going on inside our own borders, we cannot help the world in advising that course of action.
Yesterday, the EC observers in the conflict areas of Yugoslavia made it clear that they were not in favour of rapid diplomatic recognition of Croatia, which they say would wreck the prospects for negotiating a settlement of the war and increase the chance of hostilities spreading to other parts of the collapsed federation.
We would be wise to listen to those on the spot who have experience, because they are close to what is going on.
The spokeswoman for the mission said:’ Recognition not tied in to the negotiating process is not a sensible thing right now.’
Rinelde Steeghs said that that move’ would so infuriate Serbia and the Yugoslav army as to spell an end to the EC peace conference chaired by Lord Carrington.’
This House and the wider world should listen to that view.
In conclusion, I make this plea to countries such as Germany — a country for which I have the highest regard: they should be cautious about promising recognition for Croatia and Slovenia by any precise date, and about breaking ranks within the European Community.
A decision on the recognition of any of the republics may be on the agenda, but that decision should be made collectively and advisedly.
I hope that Germany, which has stood firmly in favour of a common foreign and security policy in the intergovernmental conferences that have just concluded and in the discussions on this week's Maastricht treaty, will listen to its own exhortations and ensure that, whenever the decision is taken on recognition, it is made collectively, not unilaterally.
This is a horrifying conflict on our own doorstep.
In many ways, it is a sad illustration of how little we have learnt from the past, despite the long history of our continent.
We must draw careful lessons from it — about the necessity for collective action and for creating new institutions in Europe to deal with the new conflicts that may spring up in our continent.
It is a sad warning, and we would be wise to recognise it as such.
Mr. Stuart Randall (Kingston upon Hull, West)
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Ogmore (Mr. Powell) on his success in the ballot.
I believe that it is a success because there has been an opportunity here to get the Sunday trading case debated in the House of Commons, although it is very early in the morning and we all have difficulty in stringing our sentences together.
I am glad that my hon. Friend has given us that opportunity.
He has been a consistent advocate of ensuring that the law of the land is adhered to.
I know that he feels great distress at what is happening as a result of Government inaction on this matter.
My hon. Friend referred to the opportunity that he had of presenting the result of the vote on the 1986 Bill.
I recall that occasion, too.
I remember in particular the huge smile that he had on his face when the Government were defeated in a way which can be described in parliamentary terms as nothing short of absolutely remarkable.
The Government were defeated despite their huge majority of 130 or 140 votes.
The reason why the Bill failed was that the Government were, I think, contemptuous of the House.
They had this very unhealthy large majority and they put before the House a Bill which offered total deregulation of shopping hours and to all intents and purposes stripped out nearly all the employment protection which has been a hallmark of Sunday trading legislation, certainly for the past century.
The essence of Sunday trading legislation has always been to protect shop workers, who traditionally have always been abused.
The House might recall the Auld report, which referred to our 2.2 million shop workers as people who have been generally abused in terms of their long working hours and poor wages.
Surely the House acted wisely when hon. Members on both sides of the Chamber threw out the Shops Bill, which I considered to be a disgraceful piece of legislation.
It deserved nothing short of the wastepaper basket.
In the meantime, the Government have attempted to pull together a solution to the dilemma that arises as a result of the different views that are held by various groups.
Some organisations stand for total deregulation while others emphasise the consumer.
There are others that wish to retain the feel, as it were, of Sunday, and there is the Christian element.
The Government's attempt to produce a solution has failed.
I regret the approach of the Minister of State, Home Office.
The right hon. Lady has seen the various groups to which I have referred, and I accept that the list is a long one, but she did not bring them together collectively to discuss a consensus.
I am convinced, having talked to the groups, that a consensus could have been reached.
A solution — The Government Whip, the hon. Member for Sheffield, Hallam (Mr. Patnick) is making comments from a sedentary position.
Is he asking me what the solution is?
Interruption
Mr. Irvine Patnick (Lords Commissioner of the Treasury)
No, I am not.
Mr. Randall
It is unusual for a Whip to comment.
Perhaps I should refrain from responding to the hon. Gentleman and continue with my speech.
I have had discussions with the various groups and I am convinced that a solution could have been arrived at if the Minister had arranged for collective discussions to take place.
Now that we have moved into what is essentially a total deregulation mode, I think that the opportunity has been lost for ever.
I am sure that the House is distressed that the Minister has failed to make a proper statement.
The right hon. Lady made an apology of a statement a week or so ago.
I believe that she did so because a private notice question had already been accepted by Mr. Speaker.
That statement told us nothing.
It was made to save the Government some embarrassment.
What the Attorney-General — not so much the Minister of State — had to say in response to the private notice question was tragic.
He decided to take no action.
I think that most of us recall the way in which the Attorney-General seemed to expect that no comments would be thrown at him.
It was disgraceful.
I think — I measure my words carefully — that the Attorney-Generally behaved politically, in party-political terms, before he carried out his responsibility of ensuring that the law of the land is enforced.
That is a disgraceful thing for an Attorney-General to have done.
The House and the country will have noted —
Mr. Patnick
The hon. Gentleman should withdraw that.
Mr. Randall
The Government Whip is again making comments.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold)
It is important that I should ask the hon. Gentleman carefully to consider what he has just said about my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General, who set out the legal position as a Law Officer.
As the Attorney-General — not as the Government — he took a stand and put his point to the House.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will make it clear that he has accepted that point.
Mr. Randall
I do not accept that point.
I hope, Madam Deputy Speaker, that my comments were not out of order or tasteless, but I shall rephrase them.
It is a matter of concern throughout the country that the Attorney-General has not used his powers to ensure that the law of the land — the Shops Act 1950 — is enforced.
He has the power to introduce an injunction on a company-by-company basis.
As the number of companies leading the law-breaking campaign is small, he has a viable means of enforcing the law but he refused to do so —
Interruption
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
Order.
Does the hon. Member for Sheffield, Hallam (Mr. Patnick) seek to intervene so that his interjections may be properly recorded?
Mr. Randall
I am prepared to give way to the hon. Gentleman, but he continues to interrupt from a sedentary position, irrespective of your ruling, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Hull city council, which Ministers accept is a good, efficiently run council, wanted to enforce the law, but, in practice, it cannot be enforced.
Two courses of action are open to a local authority.
First, it can take a company through the magistrates courts in the normal way with the aim of securing a prosecution.
These days, that cannot happen because the case is unlikely to be listed and, if it is listed, it will be adjourned, so a local authority has no means of carrying out its responsibilities.
Secondly, it can apply for an injunction.
My city council did that against B & Q and had to pay a cross-undertaking of £1.2 million.
That was for just one company.
I am not sure how the law-breaking campaign is working or whether other companies would have joined B & Q, but the chief executive of my council felt that he was not in a position to commit the poll tax payers of Hull to what could have amounted to several million pounds, and a deal was finally struck that Hull city council would refrain from taking out an injunction and the cross-undertaking was therefore withdrawn.
That is what councils are confronted with in practice.
My remarks about the Attorney-General were strong because he has not faced up to his responsibility to enforce the law.
He has copped out of his responsibilities.
How would the Minister advise Hull city council to go about enforcing the law, bearing in mind that it cannot go through the magistrates courts because of the cross-undertakings required?
She is bound to answer that there is no possible action and that the Shops Act 1950 is an unenforceable law.
That is what is causing so much distress on both sides of the House.
The Government do not support law and order.
There is a record level of chronic law breaking throughout the country and they are prepared to allow companies to break the law for profit.
That is nothing short of irresponsibility, and inflicts severe damage on our democracy.
The upshot is that —
Mr. Patnick
What is the hon. Gentleman's solution?
Mr. Randall
The Whip is interrupting and asking for my solution.
If he will be quiet I shall tell him what the Labour party proposes to do.
The Government have allowed law-breaking to continue.
They have not used their powers and there is now total deregulation in this country.
Any company can do whatever it wishes — it is easy.
The various lawyers acting for the pressure groups that advocate the law breaking are saying that the Shops Act 1950 is not extant and that the referral to the European Court of Justice implies that the 1950
Act is suspended.
That is nothing short of stupidity.
If that were to happen every time there were a referral to the European Court the laws, not just of this country but of all other members of the EC, would be in chaos.
A number of test cases on Sunday trading and the possible conflict with the treaty of Rome have already come before the European Court and all have been referred back to the various countries involved.
The defences that have been used to justify the campaign of law breaking are disgraceful.
At the general election we shall be justified in saying that the Conservative party cannot again claim to be the party of law and order.
Its credibility has been severely damaged and its attempts to find a solution to the problem have resulted in abject failure.
The fact that there is now total deregulation will have a serious effect on small shops.
The advice that I have received from those who understand the issue better than I is that it will drive many small convenience stores out of business.
Those little shops are loved by the British people because they are conveniently located just around the corner.
People can use them to buy their newspapers on Sunday morning and are often prepared to pay more to use those stores because they are convenient.
I know that the Minister likes small stores, because she referred to them.
in her speech on 14 October.
I agreed with her and thought that her comments were eminently sensible.
She said:’ They provide help to those who are unable always to go shopping on weekdays and Saturdays.
They are small corner shops.
We all acknoweldge that they provide an important service, especially for the elderly and those less able to get to the larger stores during the week.’
We all agree that small stores are important, but they can remain viable only if they can carry out their trading on Sundays.
One must recognise that Sunday business can account for about 25 per cent.
of the turnover of those small shops.
If one adds late-night opening, it can account for about 40 per cent.
of total trade.
The decision by Tesco and other groups campaigning to break the law to get their own way — which they have largely done as a result of the Government's co-operation and collaboration — has made a serious dent in the turnover and profit of the stores that are already struggling.
Mrs. Rumbold
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman acknowledges that the small corner shops which have been trading on Sundays — in many cases, outside the Shops Act 1950 — provide a useful service to some people in our communities.
However, I want to ask the hon. Gentleman a question.
He has asserted that the Government have been unable to find a solution and has alluded to one anomaly, but will he state categorically what legislation the Opposition would introduce to resolve the difficulty?
Mr. Randall
I shall certainly answer the question, because we have a policy to which I alluded as a result of an interruption made by the Government Whip.
One of the reasons for the Government's failure has been the fact that they did not bring together all the groups involved.
Until things collapsed, I had planned to hold a conference in either the last week in January or the first week in February because, as a result of discussions with the Shopping Hours Reform Council, SOS, the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, the Keep Sunday Special campaign, the consumers and other groups, I am confident —
Mrs. Rumbold rose
Mr. Randall
I shall finish the point and then I shall give way.
From the discussions that I have had with those groups and from some statements that I have received — I do not want to go into detail because they were confidential — I am confident that a solution could have been found which would have formed a reasoned consensus for those groups, for the interests that they represent and for the House.
The Government have blown it.
They should have held a joint conference.
There is no question but that it would have involved tough chairmanship and I am convinced that the Minister — whom I should have expected to chair the conference — would have had to hit a few heads together.
However, the parties involved were prepared to have their heads hit together to arrive at a solution.
As the basis of its policy, the Labour party has advocated such a conference.
When we form the Government — whether it is in April or May, we do not yet know — we shall hold the conference to reach the consensus, the potential for which already exists.
However, the Government unfortunately failed to bring the people together.
The Minister held a number of meetings and I know what went on, but the opportunity was lost.
Mrs. Rumbold
I am interested to learn that the hon. Gentleman believes that a conference will be the panacea to all the ills connected with Sunday trading.
Would that it were so.
The absolute naivety of his suggestion knocks me out.
Whatever people say to him in confidence and whatever they may say in twos or threes, if he had been here when the issue was raised on the Floor of the House only a week or so ago he would have realised — indeed he was here so he should have realised this instantly — that the leaders of the groups might come to an —
Mr. D. N. Campbell-Savours (Workington)
He was at the Dispatch Box.
Mrs. Rumbold
Indeed he was.
The hon. Member should have observed, at that debate, the variety of views held by hon. Members.
The leaders of the groups that he mentions might well come to some sort of compromise — I might have achieved that — but I would not be able to command a majority of Members, who have other ideas.
How would the hon. Gentleman solve that?
Mr. Randall
I am confident from the discussions that I have had that we could have found the basis for an agreement.
In the Minister's position, I would have hit heads together, stated what I believed would be ultimately acceptable to the House of Commons, and had the courage to put the case to the House.
Instead of doing that, the Minister kicked the ball into the long grass.
She has been pressurised by the big companies that contribute to the Conservative party and been forced to deliver what they want.
That is why we are in this trouble, and why the Government have been grossly irresponsible.
The Minister should have started with an agreement on terms and conditions relating to employment protection and dealt with the other aspects afterwards.
That would have got her 80 per cent.
of the way to her goal; but, as a Minister on the right of the Conservative party under political pressures, she could not do it.
The next Labour Government will do it; we will have the guts to come to the House with a solution that we think will be in the interests of the consumers, those who want to retain the special nature of Sunday, those who work in the industry and all the other interested groups.
This Minister will go down in history as the Minister who killed off small shops in Britain.
The trend already has been remarkable: we used to have 140,000 village shops in the 1960s.
Only 39,000 remain.
People representing those shops tell me that the latest move by Tesco and the others that are breaking the law could sound the death knell for some of the vulnerable stores.
The Opposition feel strongly about this.
We are told that the people of Britain want to shop on Sundays.
Well, let us put the case to the House and vote on it.
The opinion polls do not reflect the true opinions of the British public.
They do not want their small stores destroyed and put out of business.
They have a great deal of love and affection for the small stores, and the Minister will go down in history as the woman who wrecked them.
As a result of the opening on 8 December, small shops' trade for the day in the south midlands fell by 15 per cent.
In Bristol, a group of shops affected by trading on 8 December saw their incomes drop from about £4,000 to less than £3,000, a drop of about 25 per cent.
That is serious.
It means that those shops are no longer viable and we condemn the Government's inaction on the reform of the Shops Act 1950.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold)
The hon. Member for Ogmore (Mr. Powell) made a good point at the beginning of the debate when he said that there have been considerable difficulties in redesigning the Shops Act 1950 to meet the requirements of the 1990s.
Like the hon. Gentleman, I well recall the Second Reading debate of the Shops Bill 1986 which followed upon the discussions and deliberations of the Auld committee which, since as long ago as 1985, had been engaged in a series of debates about Sunday trading.
After considerable deliberations, a great deal of attention, many discussions with the various parties concerned — no doubt the kind of conference which the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West (Mr. Randall) so naively believes will produce a solution — the committee came forward with the only viable solution, total deregulation of Sunday trading.
As a result, the Government introduced the 1986 Bill.
As hon. Members may or may not recall, Conservative Members had a free vote, a conscience vote, because the Bill was regarded as being of sufficient importance to require people to make up their own minds.
On that occasion, the Government's proposals were not accepted by the House.
I freely admit that, following that, the Government have been unwilling to introduce other proposals because they feel that they would have to be enforceable, workable and acceptable to a majority of hon. Members.
It is a wonderful notion that we could have a conference of the main spokesmen for the different organisations
Mr. Randall
They have agreed to that.
Mrs. Rumbold
Of course they have.
Of course they will come together and discuss the matter.
Of course it is believed that some will give way to others.
I have had discussions with those people, collectively and individually, but even were the leaders prepared to make some concessions, the strongly held views of people at both ends of the spectrum are such that it would be exceedingly difficult to introduce a proposal to the House which hon. Members would accept could form the basis for coherent, workable and enforceable legislation.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
What is the evidence for that?
Mrs. Rumbold
I have been sufficiently foolhardy to raise the issue from time to time with small groups of individuals who put their point of view to me when it is easy to be civilised and who propose arrangements whereby Sunday trading could be limited to certain times, to shops of a particular size, to the selling of particular goods or to certain types of shop.
If groups of, say, 50 to 100 people were to be asked how many of them would like to see some deregulation on Sunday, only about half would put up their hands; the other half would want to keep Sunday special.
That is what would happen if the matter were put to the House, but the Opposition seem to think that the matter could be resolved overnight.
As I explained in my statement on 27 November, I have undertaken intensive discussions with a wide range of major and conflicting interest groups on possible ways of reforming the Sunday trading laws for England and Wales, and they will continue next year.
I am willing to talk to anyone who comes to me with a proposed solution that they believe the House would accept — including the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West and other Labour Members.
However, it is unclear to me at this time what recommendations one could put in the form of legislation to be put before the House that would command the majority needed to make sensible legislation, to allow the country to move forward in the 1990s.
Neither the Government nor Parliament can decide with confidence on the options for reform until questions about the compatibility of the Sunday trading provisions of the Shops Act 1950 with article 30 of the treaty of Rome, which deals with free trade, are answered.
I remind Labour Members that that article, which was signed in 1972, was referred by another place to the European Court of Justice, and that question of compatibility must be resolved.
Many of the proposed options, particularly those advanced by the Keep Sunday Special campaign, would continue to restrict Sunday trading by a class or list of goods.
Whether or not agreement could be reached, it would not be sensible to settle policy on the merits of any proposals until their compatibility with Community law could be determined.
There is nothing new in that concept.
This week, Labour Members announced that they are total Europeans, believe 100 per cent.
in Europe, and that theirs is the party of Europe.
I am therefore surprised to hear the hon. Member for Ogmore express concern at our reluctance to reach a decision until the European Court of Justice makes its pronouncement.
I thought that the hon. Member for Ogmore and other Labour Members would be anxious to await that judgment.
When we joined the European Community some 20 years ago, Parliament decided that our own courts should refer questions of international compatibility in law to the European Court.
I made it clear on 27 November that we intend to bring forward proposals for Sunday trading once the legal position is clear.
Mr. Randall
The right hon. Lady is skating on thin ice.
Mrs. Rumbold
Not at .The hon. Gentleman is absolutely wrong about that.
I am convinced that if the hon. Gentleman were ever in a position of responsibility in the House — the likelihood of which is becoming increasingly remote — he would also find himself advised that it would be foolish to put before the House proposals which in a few weeks or months might fall outside the law.
I point out to the hon. Member for Ogmore that the Sunday trading laws could be suspended only by primary legislation.
It would be neither right in principle nor practicable to introduce such a Bill.
An order made by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Home Department under section 43(1) of the Shops Act 1950 would only lift the requirement for shops to close ordinarily by 8 pm on Sundays.
It would not affect the suspension of the Sunday trading provisions of the 1950 Act.
I was asked why we cannot suspend the law, and I have explained why that would not be possible.
I have also been asked whether it would be possible to make partial exemption orders under section 48(1) of the Shops Act.
That, too, would not meet the purpose: such orders require protracted and elaborate consultation on the part of local authorities with local traders.
Except in emergencies, the orders allow only for the sale of additional grocery provisions such as bread, flour, fish and confectionery until 10 pm on Sundays.
The hon. Member for Ogmore said that the opinion polls demonstrated that only a limited number of people would be interested in total deregulation.
Other polls have been published in the newspapers, however, and the issue has gained a good deal of attention over the past few weeks.
I have experienced some of it personally.
People from the newspapers foolishly park outside my home on Sundays, I suspect to see either whether I go shopping or whether I go to church.
As they are parked outside in their cars, I do neither: I find it quite irritating to have my Sundays plotted.
I dig the garden, or wrap my Christmas presents.
That seems to me a better way of spending Sundays — among my family.
Opinion polls always give different answers depending on the questions that have been asked, and I suggest that the hon. Gentleman should not place too much emphasis on the outcome.
The hon. Gentleman referred to another issue in which I take a good deal of interest — women and work.
I am very concerned about women, their rights and how they are looked after and protected at work.
I am keen for them to have a greater opportunity to develop both their working and their family lives.
I place equal emphasis on both aspects.
The majority of women — and, indeed, the majority of men — are feeling that they must start protecting family life.
The hon. Gentleman suggested that women might feel that they were under considerable pressure to work on Sundays.
I understand his point, but many women have written to me asking us specifically not to prevent them from working on Sundays.
Many said that they welcomed the opportunity to work, and were not able to do so during the week because there was no one look after their children.
They therefore chose to look after their children during the week, and to allow their husbands to do so while they went to work on Sundays.
That is a matter of choice, and I am sure that the hon. Gentleman would not wish to deny people the opportunity of employment.
One of the common threads that have emerged from my dicussions has been the necessity, when considering how the law might be reformed, of tackling the question of protecting employees from being obliged by their employers to work on Sundays, against their wishes, or incurring any penalty for not doing so.
It is a matter of great concern that employees should receive proper rewards for working on Sundays.
The hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West (Mr. Randall) assumes that I have been sitting drinking cups of coffee and not talking to people about the issues.
That is foolish of him, because we have discovered that there is agreement more or less across the spectrum.
The Government generally take the view that matters of pay and hours are better left to negotiation between employers and employees, or by their representatives, and that they should certainly not be dealt with in legislation or in codes of practice provided for in statute.
Employees aggrieved by the actions of their employers may seek redress through the courts or at an industrial tribunal.
The Government recognise the importance of personal conscience in this context and included a measure of protection for existing shop workers against being made to work on Sundays in the Shops Bill which was debated by the House in 1986.
I assure hon. Members that we readily acknowledge the strength of feeling about that aspect of Sunday trading and will take it fully into account when we draw up proposals for the reform of the law.
I shall be more than happy to comply with that undertaking.
The Member for Ogmore also asked me to consider the question of enforcement.
As he and the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West know, my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General, in his personal capacity as Law Officer of the Crown and not as a Minister, came to the House to inform it how he intended to proceed.
He made clear on 27 November what he felt was the best action for him to take in his capacity as a Law Officer.
I deprecate the rather ungracious and ill-considered words of the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West in referring to my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General.
That was unnecessary and completely wrong.
The Attorney-General has made clear to the House the position under the law and it is important that the House should recognise that.
The hon. Member for Ogmore also raised the question of the Robert George case.
Contrary to press reports, Sunday working was not the central issue in that case.
The crux of the matter was the overall length and organisation of working hours during a peak session and their impact on the employee and his particular family circumstances.
The industrial tribunal that heard that case accepted that it was undesirable for employees to be prevented from taking time off with their families, although there were other issues involved.
In that case, Sunday was the only day on which such time off with the family was possible.
That would not necessarily apply to all cases, The hon. Gentleman must remember that many people are willing to work overtime, including Sundays, at peak periods.
The hon. Gentleman will recognise that many people work on Sundays to deliver our emergency services.
Many do that by choice.
The men and women in the national health service go into our hospitals and work exceedingly hard, not necessarily by choice, but because it is part of the work that they undertake to do.
The same is true of the police and the law enforcement officers generally, and of many people who man the emergency services, such as the fire service.
Mr. Powell
I was not referring to a press report of the Robert George case.
I listened to Robert George at a conference at which he gave chapter and verse of the detail of his case.
My hon. Friend the Member for Kingston upon Hull, West (Mr. Randall) was present at the conference when Robert George was on the platform.
I was referring not to press reports, but to my conversation with the gentleman concerned.
His statement to the conference and to me personally was that it was a Sunday issue.
The fact was that he did not want to work on Sunday.
He had worked for the same firm for 16 years without working on a Sunday because of his objection to working on a Sunday and his wish to stay at home and then to go to church.
Mrs. Rumbold
As I said, the industrial tribunal accepted that employees should be able to take time off with their families.
He wanted to take Sunday off and spend it with his family.
However, the principle of Sunday trading was not at the heart of the judgment.
I am sure that this will not be the last occasion on which we shall debate this issue.
There are many difficulties involved, not least with regard to the application of the law, given that we must wait for the judgment of the European Court of Justice.
No doubt we will hear the views of the hon. Member for Ogmore once that judgment is made.
I understand that he is likely to bring forward proposals in a ten-minute Bill in the not-too-distant future and I will listen to that debate with great interest.
I am here to listen to all my colleagues and to all hon. Members and anyone else who wishes to make representations to me.
I am interested in possible solutions.
If the solutions of the hon. Member for Ogmore command great support, we will consider them with great interest.
I am convinced that it would be foolish for the Government to formulate policy until we are clear, from the European Court, what that policy should avoid so as not to become entangled in the law.
I can assure the hon. Member for Ogmore that once the legislative procedure is clarified, the Government will be more than anxious to end the anomalies and the present situation in which people are unclear and therefore feel free to take the law into their own hands.
We are not anxious to see the situation evolve.
We want to take control of the situation, but it is no use hon. Members like the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, West telling me that we should have a conference and then table a Bill and that would be the end of the matter.
Were it that easy, we would have done that three or four years ago.
It is not that easy.
People must understand that the issue is difficult and needs a great deal of give and take.
They must also understand that the issue is very important for the people of this country.
At the end of the day, I hope that there will be a general recognition that Sunday is different and that we all, from time to time, need a breathing space during the working week.
The legislation that we intend to introduce will have to have the support of the House and the different interests will have to be brought together before such legislation can be introduced.
Iraq
Miss Emma Nicholson (Torridge and Devon, West)
I am extremely grateful to have the opportunity to raise this issue and I am glad that my hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs is present, because I know that he will listen with his usual thoughtfulness, great knowledge and understanding of the problems that I will enunciate.
I am glad that he is to reply, because I am confident about his knowledge of this large subject.
Although this place has heard tales of much horror and beastliness over the many generations that hon. Members have spoken about the plight of victims throughout the history of this place, I suggest that the plight of the people whose human rights we will discuss this morning transcends almost every other horror that we have heard here.
Genocide is a very heavy word.
It is a word which is mostly only used when we discuss Hitler's treatment of the Jews or when we consider Cambodia.
Some appalling things have happened to those poor people, but the plight of the Shias in the south of Iraq matches, and possibly even surpasses, the horrors that those poor people suffered.
It is difficult to think of that.
I visited Auschwitz last year.
It is impossible to get it out of one's mind once one has been there.
Indeed, having been brought up after the war and having heard of the plight of those poor people, one has never forgotten it in any case.
Of course, that left me with a large question — how could people ignore what happened to the Jews?
How could people turn a blind eye or a deaf ear to the horrors that they suffered?
Having seen the Shias in the refugee camps in south Iran and in south-east Iraq, I can understand at last how it is possible to ignore such appalling things.
The reason is that when the reality is so truly appalling, it transcends everyone's imagination.
One cannot absorb it and one just turns off.
Perhaps the way not to turn off is to think of individuals.
Mr. Al Sultan is a primary school teacher of about 45, a civilian, not a man who joined the army — he is an educated man, a graduate.
He taught in a primary school near Basra.
Mr. Al Sultan is now a shrivelled, blackened person.
His poor hands are black claws with burns from napalm bombing.
He has no eyelids.
He cannot sleep.
His eyelids have been burnt off.
He puts a scarf around his head to try to sleep.
He has 90 per cent.
burns all over his poor body.
He is damaged beyond repair.
He will never be able to write because he will not be able to use his hands.
His pain is unending.
Perhaps the worst victim — if there can be a worst victim — is little Amar, the youngest and worst napalm victim to have survived.
He is a boy of 10.
Amar cannot sleep, either, but he cannot sleep because he cannot forget.
His whole family, save a sister, were destroyed in March.
His sister is still living, because she is in a hospital next door.
The doctors fear that if they tell him that she is alive and she dies, the psychological trauma will be so enormous that he will give up completely.
Little Amar does not have a face any more.
His face looks like a Halloween mask — fixed and rigid; a shiny mask all over his face.
His neck cannot move; it is fused rigid.
If he takes his clothes off, which he does not do very easily because it hurts so much, one sees open wounds from the top of his chest down to his toes.
Amar cannot smile, he cannot cry, he cannot laugh — he cannot do anything because he has no muscles in his face, no nerves, no nothing.
He has no ability to move anything at all.
I am raising money for him at the moment.
Kind surgeons have offered to operate on him, if only we can get him over here.
But nothing will ever make up for Amar for the total loss of mother, father, entire family, house and everything.
One could say that Amar and Mr. Al Sultan are lucky.
Despite their pain and suffering, they have got out — they have got away.
They have been taken across the border — illegally.
They have been smuggled out — out of Basra, out of their village, into the safe haven of Iran.
Let us think for a moment about some of those who have been left behind.
There is an underground prison outside Basra.
There, 700 men are said to have been imprisoned underground, without daylight, for 11 years.
It is said that the stench is so appalling that no one can go near them now.
They have long hair and long nails and, not unnaturally, a white pallor, and very little to eat.
God knows how they are still alive.
Another one who got out is a doctor who translated for me.
He went back into Iraq, in the marshes, at great personal danger to himself and translated for me when we met some Shias.
He is a well-educated and articulate man.
It is appalling to hear a doctor describe, with the detailed anatomical knowledge that only a doctor can have, exactly what happened to his poor body when he was tortured ceaselessly, unendingly, with just short gaps to let him regain consciousness, for weeks on end.
That went on intermittently, sometimes for weeks at a time, for nine years.
That poor man also finds it difficult to sleep.
Our short time for debate this morning should be given to those victims.
A woman in a refugee camp outside the city of Ahwaz in the south of Iran said,’ Take my voice to the world.
Let the world hear my voice.’
That is what I want to do this morning.
Those people have no voice themselves.
That is the point about victims throughout the world — someone has to speak for them.
But it is difficult to get there and to find people being tortured; it is such a horrible activity that it is done in secret.
It is difficult to find people who have been tortured — so many of them are still in prison or have died.
The fate of those who are still living and of the hostages who are now being held by the regime in Iraq is not being decided by a beneficent Government.
We have our wrangles in this place, but essentially we have a beneficent democracy.
Most of us believe that we are here to do the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
That is what drives us on.
We differ on detail and sometimes on deep philosophical attitudes and questions, but none the less, our differences pale into nothing if we compare our beneficent democracy — which we have inherited, not created ourselves — with the wicked rule in Iraq and some other countries.
The fate of those people is being decided far away from where they are.
It is being decided in Washington — perhaps by people in the Pentagon; perhaps by George Bush.
If only we could persuade George Bush to look back at Iraq to see what has been left behind.
Their fate is being decided in the United Nations, by the committees which endlessly discuss and debate and churn out pieces of paper that nobody seems to read.
Even the United Nations Security Council, which has given thought and time to the plight of those troubled people, the Kurds, does not appear to have given any thought or time to the plight of the people in the south of Iraq, the Shia.
Their fate is being decided in the Hague, where a great man, a former Foreign Minister of the Netherlands Government, Mr. Van der Stoel, published his interim report as special rapporteur on Iraq and human rights on 17 November.
His final report comes out in February.
Their fate is being decided in Geneva where, to my great sadness, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan resigned last week from his post as special United Nations high commissioner for refugees in Iraq because he had spent the previous 10 days in Baghdad, trying to persuade Saddam Hussein to ease the plight of his people.
Their fate is also being decided here in London, where our Foreign and Commonwealth Office and our Minister for Overseas Development, with whom I have had many talks on this large subject are doing all that they can to help.
I pay a special tribute to my right hon. Friend the Minister for Overseas Development.
During the summer and early autumn she helped me with Government aid and guided me in the direction of private aid.
She helped me with advice, support and encouragement to bring humanitarian aid to the Shias who have escaped and are in the camps in south Iran.
That has been monumental help, but it has not been just practical help.
With about £0.5 million that I have collected, a large sum of it from the Minister and other sums from other places, I went and bought, and watched the purchase, delivery, consumption and use of the simple bare necessities of people in the camps.
Those necessities are sacks of flour and sacks of rice, although I am glad to say that the Iranian Government are now providing flour for every refugee within their borders, and certainly for the Shias.
That is no mean undertaking, because Iran has 3.5 million refugees within its borders, the largest number of any member nation of the United Nations.
The Red Crescent has the most work to do of any member of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The aid, including children's shoes and cooking oil — the simple, basic things — has been of large benefit to many thousands of refugees in Iran.
Their plight is indeed a miserable one, but, as they say, they do not want charity.
They want to be back at home.
They want to be in a free and democratic Iraq where they can vote for their leaders and have a democratically accountable Parliament.
I say a warm thanks on behalf of those refugees to the Minister for Overseas Development, whose help has been inestimable, whose competence is great and known to us all and whose officials work with such commitment, concern and effectiveness — I can vouch for that.
I know that my right hon. Friend will continue to do everything that she can, and that is a great deal.
Mr. McKelvey
I could not agree more.
My hon. Friend adds emphasis to my point that dogma rules.
Conservative Members say that they do not wish to pursue people or insist that their will should be enforced.
It makes one wonder about that when one hears of someone of such frailty being pursued and put in prison for failing to pay a tax that everyone recognises was nonsensical from the moment that it was introduced.
Mr. Gerald Bowden
Does the hon. Gentleman condone the borough of Southwark, which has £35 million-worth of rent arrears, for its failure to collect?
Does he feel that that is a proper approach of socialism to outstanding debt?
Mr. McKelvey
Many things can cause a failure to collect and one of them is the inability of the poor to pay.
We must consider these matters and make —
Mr. Gerald Bowden
What about benefits?
Mr. McKelvey
If people are paid benefits, the benefit officers make the appropriate deductions, but that is not the answer in the case of people who are so poor that the benefit officers say that nothing more can be deducted.
The only response is to clap them in irons, but that will not persuade anyone to listen to reason or to feel that he should be accountable.
The truth is, as Conservative Members know, that the poll tax was unwanted.
It was an abomination and the Government were advised by the counterparts of those who now sit in the officials' Box not to introduce it.
The hon. Member for Welwyn Hatfield talked about how the Government were able to save money.
He told us about the chaos that was caused by socialist policies and referred especially to public works departmens.
He said that the number of those employed in such departments was cut drastically.
It is interesting that there are three advisers in the Box to advise the Minister during a debate on a Back-Bench Member's motion.
Mr. Robert Hughes (Aberdeen, North)
It is astonishing that the hon. Member for Dulwich (Mr. Bowden)— does the hon. Member represent Dulwich?
I forget.
I should know because I live in his constituency.
I do not vote for him, of course.
It is astonishing that he should have made a riposte about housing benefit being available to the poor for housing costs and to have given the impression that he was in favour of housing benefit.
If the strictures of the Conservative party against the implications of socialism were implemented, there would be no housing benefit.
Help from the state to assist the poor is a socialist idea yet it seems to be enthusiastically welcomed by some Conservative Members.
The Minister for Roads and Traffic (Mr. Christopher Chope)
I pay tribute to my hon. Friend the Member for Ruislip-Northwood (Mr. Wilkinson) for the close interest he has taken in the case of his constituent, Mr. Frank Brand.
I congratulate him on securing this debate today.
My hon. Friend has been typically diligent in his pursuit of this matter with British Rail, with both the chairman and the director of employee relations.
He has also had correspondence with my hon. Friend the Member for Derbyshire, West (Mr. McLoughlin), the Minister for Shipping and Public Transport at the Department.
My hon. Friend has set out his concerns very clearly for the House, and set out in detail how this case was handled by British Rail.
As he has explained, Mr. Brand was dismissed by BR from his post as a senior steward with InterCity On Board Services — InterCity's train catering division — in November 1990.
This followed a complaint alleging that he had issued a buffet receipt to two young passengers in lieu of a travel ticket and failed to account for the £5 received.
The allegations stemmed from a letter received by BR's area manager at Gloucester in November 1990, in which a woman alleged that her son and a friend, while travelling from Stonehouse to Gloucester, were stopped by the steward and asked if they were trying to avoid paying their fare.
They are said to have explained that they were looking for the conductor to buy their tickets as Stonehouse station did not sell tickets at that time of night.
The steward is said to have issued the boys with a receipt, made out for £5 and indicating that it was for the journey from Stonehouse to Gloucester.
On the return journey, the boys were apparently challenged by the ticket collector on the train, who explained that the receipt was not a valid ticket, and that they would have to pay the full fare.
The mother asked that the area manager investigate who had issued the bogus ticket.
With her letter, she attached the receipt said to have been issued to her son.
Investigations by BR showed that the only steward on the train in question was Mr. Brand.
He was seen by the Gloucester area catering manager.
He was subsequently charged, under BR's disciplinary arrangements, to answer the allegations.
A summary hearing was held, chaired by BR's InterCity catering manager at Paddington.
My hon. Friend has commented in detail on the transcript of that hearing, including the statements by the witness, Mr. Farrell; the differences of opinion about the handwriting on the receipt; whether someone might have stolen the receipt book and forged the receipt; unsupported allegations about previous examples of Mr. Brand's paperwork being missing; and the apparent lack of follow-up to the mother's original letter.
As my hon. Friend has said, the hearing focused particularly on the buffet receipt and whether or not it was written by Mr. Brand.
The type of pen and colour of ink used was believed to match that used by Mr. Brand.
I undertand that the British Transport Police yesterday found the receipt and now confirm that the ink is black — the receipt had a reference number written on it, 092, the one issued to Mr. Brand for this journey and known only by InterCity staff.
This, with the similarities in handwriting, led the BR manager to conclude that he felt convinced beyond all reasonable doubt that Mr. Brand had committed the offence.
He dismissed Mr. Brand with immediate effect, reminding him of his right to appeal in writing within seven days.
The appeal was fixed for 19 December, but was postponed until 16 January this year to allow Mr. Brand to give notice to his union to arrange a legal representative.
The appeal was chaired by the business group manager for Bristol and the original verdict was upheld.
My hon. Friend has set out a number of concerns, including the lack of firm evidence, the way in which the matter was investigated, and the conduct of BR's disciplinary hearing.
He has also drawn the attention of the House to the difficulties he has faced in arranging a proper investigation or a change in BR's management's attitude towards an employee.
He has made his points in a measured and careful way.
He accepts that he cannot make a categorical statement about innocence or guilt, but he feels that his constituent has not been given a fair hearing.
I know that my hon. Friend will recognise that this case is very much a management matter for BR, and the decision to dismiss Mr. Brand was entirely BR's.
But my hon. Friend's points are important ones about fairness in handling disciplinary matters, and I shall of course ensure that they are drawn to the attention of BR.
I am sure that BR should take careful note of them.
With the rediscovery within the past 24 hours of the original receipt and, I am informed, the two statements from the youths involved, I am sure that my hon. Friend would wish to take the matter further.
My hon. Friend the Minister for Public Transport has said that should he wish to have a meeting with him and a representative of BR, he would be happy to offer that opportunity.
I hope that that demonstrates that the persistence of my hon. Friend has, if nothing else, at least found the receipt that hitherto had been missing.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at six minutes to Three o'clock.
Mortgage Repossessions
Mr. Bryan Gould (Dagenham)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You may recall the brief reference by the Secretary of State for Social Security earlier this afternoon to today's meeting between Ministers and the Council of Mortgage Lenders on the subject of mortgage repossessions.
The issue is clearly of grave concern to hundreds of thousands of families who risk losing their homes, and to local authorities that will have to shoulder the burden of the homelessness that might ensue.
It is also of grave concern to owner-occupiers who must fear the catastrophic impact on property values if so many houses are repossessed.
Yet there has been no formal statement from Ministers.
They may have nothing to offer, but that has not stopped them holding press conferences or making public statements.
Have you, Mr. Speaker, had any intimation from Ministers that they intend to make a statement, today or in the very near future, that would at least enable the House to question Ministers about that meeting and to show that, even if Ministers have no solution to offer, the Opposition have?
Mr. Speaker
I agree that it is an important matter.
That is why I allowed a long run on question 1 today — It was longer than I would normally allow.
I made inquiries about the press conference and I am assured that it had nothing to do with this matter.
The hon. Gentleman's point will no doubt have been heard by Ministers responsible.
Interruption
New Clause
Transitory exemption for school leavers —
(1)
After paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 to the 1988 Act (personal community charge: exemption) there shall be inserted the following paragraph —’ School leavers 5A.
A person is an exempt individual on a particular day if
(a)
he is aged under 20 on the day,
(b)
the day falls within the period of 6 months beginning with 1 May 1992,
(c)
immediately before that date he was undertaking a qualifying course of education, and
(d)
the course was not undertaken in consequence of an office or employment held by him.’
(2)
After sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6A of Schedule 1A to the 1987 Act (personal community charge: exemption) there shall be inserted the following sub-paragraph —’(1A) If such a person as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) above ceases to undertake such a course of education on or after 30th April 1992, he shall continue to be exempt until the start of the earlier of the following days —
(a)
1st November 1992,
(b)
his twentieth birthday.
Brought up, and read the First time.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
I beg to move, That the clause be read a Second time
Mr. Speaker
With this it will be convenient to take the following: New clause 17 — Abolition of 20 per cent.
community charge contribution and extension of community charge rebates to students from April 1992 —.
—(1) In subsection (3) of section 131 of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992 (community charge benefits) in paragraph (a) the words’ and is not there shown as undertaking a full-time course of education on the day’shall be deleted;(2) In subsection (5) of that section after’concerned’there shall be inserted:—’up to 100 per cent.
of his liability for personal community charge contributions’;(3) Sections 1 and 2 above shall have effect from April 1992. '.
Government amendments Nos. 127 and 128.
Mr. Portillo
Although the Bill is principally about the council tax, the new clause relates to the community charge and what is known as the student gap.
At present, exemptions from the personal community charge exist for 18-year-old school pupils in respect of whom child benefit is paid, and 18 and 19-year-olds who are on qualifying courses of further education.
But about half of the 200,000 people who fall into either of those categories go on to full-time education and become entitled to student relief of the community charge.
At present, however, there is a student gap, which may last for a few weeks or a few months, separating the exemptions from the day on which a person enrols on a full-time course of education.
Although it is possible for such a person to claim community charge benefit during that time, thus reducing his or her liability by up to 80 per cent., we accept that the administrative burden imposed on both the individual and the charging authorities is unnecessarily heavy.
We therefore propose to relieve local authorities and school leavers of that burden by exempting, until 31 October 1992, 18 and 19-year-olds who are undertaking a qualifying course of education on 1 May 1992.
Mr. Bryan Gould (Dagenham)
I suspect that new clause 33 is the forerunner of numerous similar Government-inspired changes to a Bill which the Government assured us, when they dragooned it though its Committee stage, was in pristine and perfect condition and would need no amendment.
This is, I suspect, the beginning of a process that will lead to much the same outcome as was brought about by the hundreds of Government amendments — sometimes running into four figures — that have been tabled to similar Bills.
If such an outcome does indeed result, it will show just how damaging the guillotine and the resulting truncation of Committee debate have been.
We none the less welcome this particular representative of the genus.
If all the others deal with small issues in a way that improves the Bill, we shall have less ground for complaint.
The new clause is undoubtedly good news for the group of students who will benefit from the closing of what the Minister described as the student gap — I believe that the Government's estimate is 200,000.
This is, of course, part of the slow, gradual, painful process whereby Ministers are forsaking, step by step, all the policies and principles that underpinned the poll tax.
One by one, the arguments that were said to justify it are being abandoned.
New clause 33 does not go far enough.
Typically, the Government have had the courage to concede by implication that they have lost confidence in what they legislated for so confidently just a short time ago.
What they lack is the courage and confidence to pursue their conclusions to their logical outcome.
As a consequence, students are still not entitled to rebates, and the 20 per cent.
contribution rule remains, along with all the damage that it does — especially to local authorities that are struggling to collect the poll tax.
Our new clause 17 would extend to students the right to claim community charge and, in due course, council tax rebates.
Students are undoubtedly a section of the population who have suffered substantial hardship as a result of Government-inspired measures.
I have a student daughter myself, and I know from her accounts — and from her constant recourse to the parental purse — that life is indeed very difficult for students.
Their grant has been frozen in real terms at much below the level at which they could expect to survive on it; they have been denied entitlement to income support, housing benefits and rebates; there are no jobs with which they can supplement their incomes during vacations; and those who find themselves desperately hard up discover, when they turn to the hardship fund, that it has already been exhausted.
For all those reasons, I think that students are particularly deserving of help.
The Government's proposal is welcome, but it only scratches the surface of the problem.
Our new clause 17 would establish their entitlement to rebates, which would benefit them greatly.
We expect to have an important debate tomorrow afternoon on the 20 per cent.
contribution rule, which the Government insist on retaining until 1 April 1993; but our new clause 17 would also have the effect of abolishing, as from 1 April 1992, this 20 per cent.
contribution rule.
If it were abolished, that would have the blessing, as far as I am aware, of every local authority association, the Institute of Revenues, Ratings and Valuation, and the Child Poverty Action Group, the very strong blessing of the citizens advice bureaux — and the enormously authorititative support of the Audit Commission, which, in its report, had this to say on the subject:’ Local authorities say that large numbers of income support recipients are in arrears with community charge payments for 1990/91.
These chargepayers make up a very small amount of the total value of outstanding community charge.
Pursuing these defaulters for such small amounts is not a good use of scarce recovery resources when there are much larger debts outstanding.
The Government have already accepted that there will be no minimum contribution to the council tax.
Abolition of the minimum 20 per cent.
community charge contribution for income support recipients would ease the administrative burden on local authorities very considerably.’
I do not intend to rehearse at length— the opportunity for that will come tomorrow — the powerful arguments, financial and practical, which would support the abolition of this rule at the earliest possible date.
Today I shall content myself with quoting what I hope by now is a familiar argument for the Minister, advanced by the Audit Commission.
It is that the attempt to collect the 20 per cent.
contribution from those on income support costs £15 for every £6 net revenue raised.
Even on grounds of simple housekeeping and accounting, that ought to conclude the argument.
It is not even as though the Government have adhered to their own reasons for refusing to act on this in the past.
They have conceded, by abolishing the 20 per cent.
contribution rule for the council tax, that there is no ground in principle for maintaining it.
We all recall that in the heyday of the poll tax the one principle that Ministers and Conservative Members were most reluctant to abandon was that everyone should pay something.
That principle has now been abandoned; the Government no longer advance or maintain that position.
They abandoned the principle for the council tax, so no argument in principle remains.
The Government then resorted to the argument of practicality.
They said that it was impossible to abandon the 20 per cent.
contribution rule because income support rules had been constructed on the basis that a 20 per cent.
contribution had to be paid.
They said therefore that if the rule was changed there would have to be a consequential change for the social security rules.
That argument no longer applies because no consequential change is now required.
The Government have abandoned any pretence that income support payments include an element that would cover the 20 per cent.
contribution, so they can do away with the 20 per cent.
contribution rule at the earliest practical opportunity, with no difficult practical consequences for income support.
We are left with a slightly opaque, not to say metaphysical, argument from the Minister of State.
He maintained that the rule was an essential concomitant of the poll tax because it was a personal tax, yet we are told that in respect of the council tax, which is also, at least as to 50 per cent., a personal tax, there is no difficulty in doing away with the 20 per cent .
contribution rule.
If it can be abandoned in the case of the personal element of the council tax, it is hard to see why it cannot be abandoned immediately for the poll tax.
If it were abandoned, the burden on local authorities of trying to collect what the Prime Minister described as a virtually uncollectable tax would be substantially lightened, and that would be of great benefit.
Ministers are fond of criticising local government because many local authorities are less than 100 per cent.
successful in collecting the poll tax.
If they were serious about helping local government with that difficulty, they would abolish the 20 per cent.
contribution rule.
That is what our new clause 17 would do.
I commend it to Ministers, but, bearing in mind our debates in Committee, I confess that I do not do so with any great hope that they will see sense for once and will accept this sensible recommendation.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman (Lancaster)
I welcome the Secretary of State's intention to fill in the student gap, but I am bound to say that I can see no logical reason for attempting to collect the 20 per cent.
from students now that the Government have conceded in the new council tax that students will not pay it.
My council and students would very much like the 20 per cent.
contribution to be abolished for the final year of the tax.
Mr. Dick Douglas (Dunfermline, West)
I am a bit bemused about the definition of a student and should like to have it clarified for England, Wales and Scotland.
The Government have moved away from their view that everybody should pay the poll tax and are making some amends.
However, the plight of students is well known to every hon. Member and it is absurd, especially in Scotland, that local authorities are trying to collect the 20 per cent.
from students for 1989-90.
Earlier in the debate a Scottish Office Minister was present, but he has departed.
Do the Government have figures for Scotland about the number of students involved and the cost to local authorities of trying to collect this tax?
The Government have abandoned in the so-called council tax not only the rule that everybody has to pay but a key element of the poll tax — accountability.
There is no strict relationship between local authority finances and the accountability of councils to the electorate who may or may not be paying.
Although the Government proposal is welcome, it flies in the face of all logic.
They are redressing a gap but not accepting the other enormous gap of students in Scotland being asked to pay 20 per cent.
of the poll tax from 1989 onwards.
Local authorities are chasing up and down the land trying to collect taxes from people who may have moved three, four or five times.
That is nonsense.
The cost is exorbitant and the Government should take this opportunity to tell that to local authorities, especially in relation to students, although there are other categories to which we may refer in other clauses and amendments.
The Government are getting into an absurd position and they should recognise that.
Mr. John Bowis (Battersea)
I do not question the fact that in some parts of the country students are finding it difficult to make ends meet.
Like the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould), I also declare the reverse of a pecuniary interest because we are paying out to our student sons and daughters.
Some students have been placed in difficulties by local authorities that have set a community charge that is so far beyond the reach of people that even the 20 per cent.
required from students makes life difficult.
Students in my borough of Wandsworth and in other, mostly Conservative, boroughs whose community charge was below target have no problem, because an element of the student grant meets 20 per cent.
of the reasonable charge.
The difficulties arise in Labour boroughs where authorities have rashly and ineffectually overspent.
Mr. Ian Taylor
What my hon. Friend says causes me some concern, in addition to my hesitation about the merits of regional banding.
I hope that my hon. Friend would not propose that there should be any regional banding to favour London.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) has pointed out, my constituency abuts on London, and such a proposal would cause great dismay to my constituents, who already believe that London has too good a deal.
Mr. Hughes
I am not sure that I can agree with the last sentiment that my hon. Friend expressed.
We have been offered a pot-pourri of amendments — some favour London, some favour London and the south-east and others suggest carving up the country into all sorts of different regions.
Mr. Wilkinson
My hon. Friend and I are, in political terms, territorially contiguous.
Does he at least recognise that there is a particular difficulty for outer London and the south-east where property values are high and where disposable incomes may not be commensurately great?
Is it not the case that all the constructive criticism of the Bill has, by and large, come from right hon. and hon. Friends who represent outer London and the south-east?
It is no accident that that is so.
Mr. Hughes
It is no accident that that is so, but my hon. Friend the Member for Ruislip-Northwood (Mr. Wilkinson), who is a respected neighbour, is wrong.
Mr. James Couchman (Gillingham)
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Hughes
I wish to make some progress, because there are many points that I wish to raise.
If we are to have a property tax, it must be logical, and the logic is clear.
Mr. Couchman
I had not intended to intrude on my hon. Friend's speech, but does he consider that a schoolteacher, whose salary is fixed through national wage agreements by the independent pay review body for teachers and who lives in my hon. Friend's or my constituency in the south-east, is better able to afford the council tax on a higher band than a teacher who lives in Darlington or elsewhere in the north?
Mr. Hughes
I do not share my hon. Friend's contention that one should support national wage bargaining.
I support bargaining for London.
My hon. Friend's point is interesting, but the argument for it does not lead one to support any of the amendments that have been selected.
Regional banding could not be agreed to simply on the basis of national wage bargaining.
That suggestion would distort a property tax with a personal element, because the aim of the amendment is that people living in an £80,000 house in the north should pay more than those living in an £80,000 home in the south.
I do not understand the fairness of that.
People should pay according to the value of their property, and it is therefore reasonable that there should be one national band.
If there were significant differences between regions, there might be an argument, but we all know that that simply is not the case.
There is no typical region.
There were two Yorkshire Members present when I began my speech, and there are now three.
The number is growing by the minute.
Property values in Yorkshire alter according to the part of the county.
A single regional band could not be applied to Yorkshire, with council tax prices set against a regional band for, say, London and the south-east.
A few weeks ago, several of us went to Langbaurgh, for obvious reasons.
Those of us who visited the lovely market town of Guisborough know that the values of property there are very similar to those in my constituency of Harrow.
How could Yorkshire be placed in a different regional banding structure from the one that applies in my constituency?
Mr. Paul Murphy (Torfaen)
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that the Government have agreed on a separate system for Wales and Scotland and that, within Wales and Scotland, there are considerable disparities in property prices?
How, then, can Yorkshire be any different?
Mr. Hughes
I am part Welsh and part Scot, and I had understood that the argument was that Wales and Scotland are nations and therefore entitled to a different national system.
Mr. Ian Taylor
They have a different system of finance.
Mr. Hughes
As my hon. Friend rightly interjects, they have a different finance system.
An argument must be made for that — it is not a reason to mess up the rest of the country.
Mrs. Fyfe
As the hon. Gentleman agrees that Scotland is a different nation, why does he not accept that it should have its own system if it prefers, and allow it to have a fair rates system?
Mr. Hughes
If the hon. Lady is simply trying to cause arguments within my family, she will not succeed.
I am sure that she knows what I mean.
Although only a few miles separate Richmond from Leeds and Beverley from Hull, prices differ enormously.
Prices in north Yorkshire in general are very similar to those in outer London, but those in Leeds and Hull are not.
Regional banding would distort the system, and produce many illogicalities and unfairnesses.
I can make some revealing comparisons between my constituency and the neighbouring borough.
Conservative Members may be in danger of creating an issue where none exists.
My postbag, and trips around the constituency, suggest to me that — in general— people are relieved that the community charge is going, and consider the council tax fair, reasonable and decent.
The last rates bill received in Harrow, in 1989-90, by a couple living in a 1960s-built, three-bedroomed semi averaged £549.
This year's community charge bill for two people is £506: according to the indicative figures, this year's council tax bill will be £441.
I do not consider that a ground for complaint.
The last rates bill for a similar house in Brent, the neighbouring borough, was £1,550.
This year's two community charges come to £656, while this year's council tax bill will amount to £517.
Again, I see no room for complaint.
Mr. Blunkett
We had all this jiggery-pokery in Committee.
I do not want the comparative figures to be distorted.
The hon. Gentleman has not taken into account the £280 that a couple will have received this year because of the so-called flat-rate £140 poll tax reduction.
Surely any comparison between past and present must take into account the £4.25 billion that was added to value-added tax.
Mr. Hughes
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman, for two reasons.
I always wondered what made the big difference between the last rates bill for Brent and the present arrangements; now I understand that it was the £140 reduction.
Personally, I had thought that it was the bunch of madmen from the Labour party who ran the borough in the old days.
The hon Gentleman has described my figures as jiggery-pokery.
That is all very well, but why does he not come clean and give us Labour's figures?
I have challenged the prospective Labour candidate in Harrow, West to do so, but he has not bothered to reply.
Mr. Maxton
The next Labour Member for Harrow, West.
Mr. Hughes
That will come as a terrible shock to him.
Labour will not come clean with its figures, so it is bound to describe ours as jiggery-pokery.
Labour is simply trying to hide the awfulness that lurks behind its so-called fair rates system All the concern felt in local authorities in London and the south-east — which I well understand — really relates to grant.
Two so-called alternative schemes have been suggested.
Interruption
I am sorry that hon. Members whose constituencies are some distance from London are not interested in London's problems; they can continue to talk among themselves.
Mr. Derek Enright (Hemsworth)
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Hughes
The hon. Gentleman's constituency is not near London, but yes.
Mr. Enright
It most certainly is not.
If the hon. Gentleman, from a London constituency, would pay some attention to the problems that we face in Hemsworth, such as those with RECHAR, which is helping to keep rates in his area down, he would be doing us a service.
Mr. Hughes
I referred to Yorkshire six minutes ago — it has taken the hon. Gentleman that long to work up a head of steam.
The problem of RECHAR is that his political friends are stopping the money coming to this country.
I refer to Bruce Millan, for instance.
It has been suggested that a London equalisation scheme could be brought back.
It could not be; it was predicated on the business rate.
The London discount scheme would just be regional banding in another guise.
We need to look at needs multipliers and area cost adjustments, particularly for outer London — they are not very generous this year.
We want them improved for the coming year and certainly by the first year of the council tax.
We must always remember what people will have to pay.
Judged by that, the council tax will be seen as a fair system.
Mr. Harry Cohen (Leyton)
The hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) has been arguing against a regional band for London, thereby costing his constituents about £66 a year, based on average house prices in London.
I had to cut short my attendance at the Hairdressing Council dinner to speak in this debate
Hon. Members
A fringe benefit?
Mr. Harry Cohen (Leyton)
I can only say that the parting was such sweet sorrow.
I am in favour of a regional band for London, based on average house prices.
The application of the Government's national bands will mean a loss of grant for London of about £300 million a year, which works out in terms of people's bills at about £60 per adult per year and £100 in some constituencies.
Such a loss of grant for local authorities will mean either a higher council tax in London or more cuts in services.
The assumption behind the Government's imposition on London of a national band is that Londoners can afford to pay more, which is not true.
That assumption does not take into account Londoners' real disposable income.
They have high mortgage costs, high rents, high transport costs and high bills of many varieties.
House prices are about 45 per cent.
higher than the national average, and that should be taken into account.
Londoners will be disadvantaged by the national band.
It has been estimated that about 15.7 per cent.
of them will be in the top two bands, compared with only 5.6 per cent.
elsewhere.
In the top three bands the contrast is even more stark: an estimated 55.1 per cent.
are in this category in London and only 23.1 per cent.
elsewhere.
That means that Londoners will face higher council tax bills.
The relationship between the council tax and people's ability to pay it was always shaky, and the imposition of a national band on London will make it even weaker.
The very idea is absurd.
The end result will be that Londoners and London local authorities will pay millions more each year.
That will hit Conservative and Labour areas in London.
If the Government go ahead with the legislation, Conservative Members in London and the south-east will find that it will be difficult to reverse after the general election no matter which party is in power.
Now is the time to put the case for a special banding system for London.
London's case is being ignored by the Government.
Its special factors should be recognised and it should have a regional banding system more reflective of its house prices.
Mr. Wilkinson
We have been privileged in the debate to hear some widely contrasting contributions.
It is clear that the timetable is quite inadequate to deal with such important matters.
I did not support the timetable motion and believe that my decision was right.
It is quite preposterous that in 35 minutes we shall reach the end of this debate on banding, a matter of considerable interest to my constituents and, I suspect, to many other constituents in London and the south-east.
The speech by the hon. Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) was trenchant and honest, as one would expect from the hon. Gentleman.
It was also clear and to the point, the simple point being that property values are so high in London and the south-east that in all equity there must be some special weighting to account for them.
They are by no means compensated for by a disproportionately high level of real disposable income.
People in outer London have high commuting costs.
Many of them have inordinately high mortgages around their necks and they are finding it extremely difficult to service them in this unusually long period of high interest rates.
Instead of taking a Gadarene rush at this important matter of the reform of local government finance, the Government should have taken more time.
They could have published a White Paper or set up a commission of inquiry.
They should have taken account of all representations and consulted adequately.
That would have enabled us to announce in our manifesto that when we were returned to office at the election we would take the most sensible course of action.
I am not expert enough to say which of the banding systems best fits the bill.
Valuations should be individually conducted and a proper length of time should be taken over each one.
If that were done, there would be far fewer appeals.
There should be a weighting system to account for variations in house prices in different parts of the country and within different districts of the same region.
The Department of the Environment purports to have knowledge enough at its fingertips to enable a standard spending assessment to be made that takes account of all sorts of individual circumstances in each local authority area.
It is not beyond the wit of man to introduce a weighting system to deal with local variations.
In all logic we have already sold the pass by having separate bands for Scotland and Wales, and I am most worried about the current matter.
Not only do we have inadequate time to deal with important issues, but there is a real risk that unless the other place does its job properly the measures will reach the statute book fundamentally flawed in terms of banding and the special problem of high property values in London and the south-east.
Unless my right hon. and hon. Friends on the Treasury Bench can produce a new formula to deal with this problem, I shall have to support the new clauses and I shall vote against the Government.
I shall consider my position tomorrow on Third Reading in the light of what transpires when the House divides this evening.
Mrs. Fyfe
There are some who think that there is no fun to be found in local government finance, but they can be proved wrong by this debate.
I was at one stage tempted to forgo my chance to contribute to it because of the fascinating speeches of Members representing inner and outer London constituencies as they struggled to find some fairness, justice or logic in the banding system.
There are to be different banding systems for Scotland, Wales and England to take account of the fact that they are separate nations.
That is all well and good, but if separate nationhood is to be recognised when it comes to banding, the wishes of the separate nations should be heeded when it comes to the taxation that they want.
The proposed tax will take no account of regional variations.
It is clear that London is out of kilter with much of the rest of England, if not the whole of it.
No hon. Member can pretend to be ignorant of London prices.
After all, we all have to live in London in some form of property.
My very ordinary London flat costs about half as much again as my flat in Glasgow, which is an infinitely superior building in which to live in every respect.
Everybody knows that London prices are out of line with prices in the rest of the country.
The same could be said for many a flat in many English provincial cities.
I am making a comparison not between Scotland and London but between London and most of the rest of the country.
As I have said, London prices are out of line with those that prevail elsewhere.
The answer does not lie in saying that London has some advantages that other parts of the country do not enjoy.
Surely we should treat the entire country fairly when introducing a local taxation system.
That fairness would ensure the awarding of Government grant on the basis of genuine calculated need and not on political prejudice against some local authorities while favouring others.
If the Government were concerned to arrive at a proper system, they would accept that fairness was the answer.
In Committee, the Government rejected our fair rates proposals.
Our response was,’ What about having more bands to take account of the difficulties that arise because of the differences in property prices in London compared with other parts of the country?’
That approach was also rejected, because it was getting too close to a rating system, but it would have had some logic, a factor that is entirely outwith the system with which we are now confronted.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn
As the Opposition believe that taxes, particularly local taxes, should be based on ability to pay, is it not absolutely scandalous that they suggest that the elderly and the single, whatever house they live in, should have to pay more than those with the ability to pay and are not willing to grant a discount?
Mr. Allason
My hon. and learned Friend is entirely correct; I endorse his remarks.
My constituency contains many single pensioners.
There are probably more people over the age of 70 living in my constituency than in the constituencies of any other right hon. or hon. Member.
I am concerned about those people because they do not use local authority services much but are penalised by high charges.
South West Water, for instance, has the highest standing charges in the country.
My amendment would result in a reduction in the burden on these people to the tune of 50 per cent.
I recommend that to the House because it will offer great relief to people who live alone.
The elderly people in my constituency worry about their financial predicament.
Generally, people become more worried about these matters as they get older.
Amendment No. 9 would give many people tremendous relief — not just the elderly living alone but many other people at the lower end of the income scale, such as single-parent families.
All would benefit from this generosity.
The principle of discounts has already been accepted — the Government accept the 25 per cent.
I am merely asking for an extension of the logic which is already so well known to Marsham street.
We should increase the 25 per cent.
discount to 50 per cent.
I would even accept an increase to 35 per cent.
There is a certain logic in claiming that single people living alone should be allowed to pay half the charge paid by their neighbours.
I commend the amendment to the House.
Mr. David Bellotti (Eastbourne)
In Committee, my hon. Friends and I tabled an amendment to increase the discount from 25 to 50 per cent.
Unfortunately, it was not well debated, due first to filibustering by Labour Members
Mr. Maxton
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I am sure you would agree that, when an hon. Member uses the term filibuster to describe our proceedings, that is a slur not on Labour Members but on the Chairman of the Committee in question.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
I do not think that the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) meant it that way.
Mr. Bellotti
The two Chairmen of that Committee gave distinguished service, and I am sure that no one took my remarks to mean what the hon. Member for Glasgow, Cathcart (Mr. Maxton) says they meant.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West) rose
Mr. Bellotti
I want to finish my introduction before I give way.
There were some amazing interventions by Ministers in Committee as well.
I remember one of 384 words during the discussion immediately before the debate on discounts.
That resulted in my proposal to increase the discount to 50 per cent.
not being taken until one and a half minutes before the guillotine fell.
Despite that, I managed to speak 322 words in the time left to me by Labour Members and Ministers.
At least tonight I have about 45 minutes in which to speak, and whether I take that much time will depend on how we get on.
If the hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) wants to intervene now I will give way to him — but I see that he has changed his mind.
Interruption
I commend amendment No. 7 to the House.
It would increase the discount from 25 to 40 per cent.
It is true, as the hon. Member for Torbay (Mr. Allason) said, that single-person households face difficulties with meeting some of their costs of living from their income.
One need only think of water, gas, electricity and telephone charges, which fall disproportionately on single person households.
The council tax, too, will fall disproportionately on them because the 25 per cent.
discount is not enough, given the average income of single person households compared with that of households containing two or more people.
As the hon. Member for Torbay said, the Government have conceded the principle that some extra benefit should accrue to households containing only one person.
The 25 per cent.
discount represents the Government's attempt to meet that need, but have they really considered whether the figure relates precisely to people's incomes?
Mr. Maxton
I find the hon. Gentleman's arguments astonishing.
He and his party advanced the idea of a local income tax based on ability to pay.
Now he suggests a 40 per cent.
discount for every single householder, whatever his income.
His system would mean that single householders on good incomes would pay much more than houses containing two or more people who, together, had poor incomes.
What is the logic in that?
Mr. Bellotti
I am grateful for what the hon. Gentleman has said, because it enables me to explain that proposals for a local income tax relating it to ability to pay have been rejected in Committee and on Report, so we are now in the business of trying to improve this unfair tax which is based on property.
To do that, it is right to examine people's incomes and to see whether they can afford the tax.
The argument usually deployed is that the millionaire will benefit enormously, but there are very few millionaires.
On the other hand, there are millions of elderly pensioners on low incomes in single households, all of whom will be hit by the council tax.
We should pay more attention to those millions of elderly pensioners than to the much smaller number of millionaires.
This problem was known under the rates as the widow factor.
The plight of widows was recognised by all parties; we all agreed that the rates were unfair to them.
Indeed, that was one of the main reasons why the Government brought in the poll tax, which failed abysmally, just like the rates.
Even the Government have recognised the problem of widows.
The Secretary of State for Wales, for instance, has said:’ How much more abominable than a tax on widows?
But that is what the rating system is.’
The council tax will treat widows unfairly in the same way, because it does not give them the discount that they deserve.
The proposed discount will go only a certain way towards doing what is needful.
We believe that a single-person home should receive a discount proportionate to the income of its occupant.
Twenty-seven per cent.
of people aged between 65 and 74 and 50 per cent.
of those over the age of 75 live alone.
Millions of people in our country live alone —
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn
Is the hon. Gentleman talking about England, Wales, Scotland or Britain?
Mr. Bellotti
In every constituency represented by every hon. Member there are many elderly people living alone.
Even with a 25 per cent discount, single adults living alone in a property banded above D will pay more under the council tax than under the poll tax.
Is this fair?
I do not believe that it is, and we ought to look at it again.
It is interesting to note that there is some all-party support for the idea of raising the discount above 25 per cent.
Some members of the Committee would have liked to support such an amendment in Committee and we have had a speech already tonight from the Government Back Benches in support of it.
I will quote some specific figures that give credibility to amendment No. 7.
Taking first the retirement pension of a single person at £52 and of a couple at £83.25, the single person's pension as a percentage of the couple's pension is 62 per cent.
Then, looking at average pensioner income — this is from written answers in Hansard, 25 July 1990, c. 305-6, based on 1987 net income figures — the single person figure is £75.10 and the couple's figure is £145.67.
The single person's income is 53 per cent.
of the couple's income.
The next example, gross household income, is taken from the 1989 family expenditure survey.
The pension of a single retired person mainly dependent on state benefits is £58.88 and that of a couple is £101.50.
The single person's pension is 58 per cent.
of the couple's.
Taking the average of those three quite different sets of figures, we draw the conclusion, as does Age Concern, which has advised the Committee and hon. Members in general on this, that the average single person's income is 60 per cent.
of that of a household consisting of two people.
On the basis of those figures, and with the advice which Age Concern and other sources have given, we believe that the figure of 40 per cent.
is the right one if one wishes to take into account the ability to pay and the income of the people whom we are taxing.
Those are good principles for any taxation system.
I challenge the Minister to deny that 40 per cent.
is the right figure.
If there are any sources available to the Government that disprove that figure, it is right that the Minister should put those sources to the House.
He could not put them to the Committee and I look forward to seeing whether they can be put forward tonight.
If they cannot, the Government must surely recognise that the 25 per cent.
is 15 per cent.
below what it should be and that we are asking single-person households, on average, to subsidise households of two or more persons in the payment of the council tax.
It is people on lowish incomes in that sort of situation who will suffer far more than those on higher incomes.
I do not make any apology for accepting that single millionaires will be at an advantage in that situation, but the millions of people on lowish incomes, particularly the retired, will be penalised most.
It is on behalf of the latter that we should have had an opportunity of voting in Committee, which we were denied, and that we should have an opportunity tonight to vote in the House.
We know that there are hon. Members on the Government Back Benches who would have supported the proposal that the discount be increased from 25 per cent.
to 40 per cent.
Not to have a vote, because of the guillotine and for other reasons, is to fail the very people for whom we should be speaking.
I hope that when the Minister replies he will treat this matter seriously.
We could not have a debate in Committee and the House deserves serious answers on this extremely important issue.
If we do not get them, when this tax is put into place many single elderly people, in particular, will feel not only hard done by but that they have not been properly considered.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
I am absolutely delighted that in this Bill the Government have provided the discount for a single-person household and that that discount is automatic and mandatory.
I am delighted, too, that my constituents can be told in the coming months that the Labour party does not want the single-person household to have a discount.
As the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) said earlier — I apologise for referring to him when he is not in his place — there are 7 million single-person households in this country.
He also pointed out in Committee, when we had no figures to put to him, that there are a very large number of second homes whose owners will effectively receive a 50 per cent.
discount through only paying the property element of the tax.
It is that 50 per cent.
for the empty, unoccupied homes that makes it very difficult for me to go along with my hon. Friend the Member for Torbay (Mr. Allason), who wanted the 50 per cent.
to apply to a single-person household.
The hon. Member for Dagenham quite rightly used the Government figure of £780 million as the amount by which the discount system will be beneficial to single-person households.
I objected in Committee and in the House tonight to his implication — it was not stated in so many words — that the £780 million would be paid locally by the other people in the area picking up the bill for the single-person households.
That is a gross distortion of the truth.
The reality is that the number of single-person households in a particular district is part of the profile that is drawn in order to establish the standard spending assessment, and therefore the grant that goes to the local authority.
So that £780 million is being paid by all of us from the generality of taxation.
Mr. Robin Squire (Hornchurch)
Just to underline what my hon. Friend is saying, it is also the case that the profile takes into account second homes, so that the same principle applies there too.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
That is absolutely right.
That £780 million is part of the 85 per cent., give or take a couple of percentage points, that central taxation and the unified business rate provide in financial support to our local authorities.
Perhaps I can draw a little further on the hard work and research of the hon. Member for Dagenham.
He pointed out in Committee that, according to the Audit Commission, the proportion in inner city areas is probably around 40 per cent.
and in some London boroughs is as high as 50 per cent.
Yet the Labour party still opposes these single-person discounts.
I represent an inner city seat.
If 40 per cent.
of my households are single-person households — I do not think that it is quite that high — I shall make absolutely certain that every one knows the Labour party's policy for them.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
I do not think that my hon. Friend will be able to do quite that.
He will be able to tell them about the Labour party's opposition to discounts, but he will not be able to tell them how much they would pay under the Labour party system, because the Labour party will not say.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
That is fair comment.
I do believe that it is a case of think of a number and double it.
The Labour party says that we cannot argue that a single person should pay less than a family next door with several working adults.
We have all made mistakes politically.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
The poll tax.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Yes.
We made many mistakes, but there was one piece of common ground for hon. Members on both sides of the House, which apparently no longer exists.
It was that it was unfair for the single-person household to pay the same as the household with two, three, four or five members.
That was said year after year.
Mr. O'Brien
The hon. Gentleman voted for the community charge.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Yes, I plead guilty.
I voted for it.
It seemed a damn good principle at the time.
Mr. John Wilkinson (Ruislip-Northwood)
Does my hon. Friend think that that is an entirely happy precedent when he is discussing discounts which are fraught with anomaly, difficulty and contradiction?
He has been wrong once; can he be sure that he will not be wrong again?
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
What do people say about needing enemies?
Of course we all make mistakes.
My hon. Friend may be that perfect example of a person who never has
Mr. Wilkinson
No.
I made the same mistake.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Yes, I made a mistake.
No, I do not think that I shall make the same mistake again.
The Labour party now shuts its eyes to the two, three or four-person household, and it ignores the single pensioner living alone.
Day after day, Labour Members love to quote the case of the single millionaire.
Unhappily, I am not a member of the exclusive club of millionaires.
I can think of only one or two in my acquaintance, but in order to find an answer to the perennial argument of the single millionaire, I asked someone whom I believe is a millionaire.
The House will forgive me stealing someone else's comment.
He said,’ Martin, don't be silly.
There is no such thing as a single millionaire.
We would at least have a butler.’
That quietly disposes of the argument.
Never mind, it seemed a good story at the time.
The Labour party said that it wanted some mechanism other than discounts; that it would deal with pensioners with what it called a single pensioner premium.
But, as Conservative Members pointed out in Committee, to talk about a single pensioner premium is to concede the principle behind discounts.
It was also pointed out in Committee that, if single pensioners received such a premium, so would a millionaire.
Conservative Members asked, why just a pensioner — what about a single widow?
There seemed to be no answer to that question.
The Labour party is not consistent, but it never is.
I am sorry that the hon. Member for Bristol, South (Ms. Primarolo) is not in her place.
In Committee, she was keen to defend the rights of the single working mother with a 20-year-old daughter who came home from college.
She was determined to defend the discount to that mother, although that did not seem to fit the rest of her contributions in Committee.
When my hon. Friend the Minister made it clear that such a student would be invisible, that a student returning for the summer holidays would not affect that household, I was not sure whether the hon. Lady was pleased or angry.
She should not accept my hon. Friend's assurances.
But having 22,000 students milling around my city, I am delighted about the Government's attitude to student discounts and particularly to the student gap, as it is called — the three months which often used to cause problems under the old community charge arrangements.
In Committee, we had long discussions about that, and were genuinely sympathetic to the worries expressed by the citizens advice bureaux.
However, they seemed to be arguing that, somehow or other, the single person's discount would deter people from renting out rooms in their homes.
That argument is almost impossible to accept.
It is a completely unfounded fear, but even if there were the odd few cases of people refusing to rent out a room in their home because, in their ignorance, they felt that, as landlords, they would be penalised, are we seriously to argue that we should deny the discount to the other 7 million people?
That is an extraordinary situation.
As we are running short of time, let me end with one area where there is a clear divide.
I have said that the most unpopular aspect of the old rating system was the fact that the single person household paid the same as the multi-occupied household next door.
That was common ground between Labour and Conservative Members, but it is no longer.
The hon. Member for Dagenham has said time and again that the Labour party objects in principle to the discount system, and perhaps we should emphasise that.
That is something that we should proclaim loud and clear.
That is the biggest criticism that we can lay at the Labour party's door.
Mr. Peter Fry (Wellingborough)
I shall not detain the House long, but I want to refer to two aspects of discounts.
The debate and the Bill are not just about local government finance but about the acceptability of local government finance.
The point has been made clearly that the rating system was completely unpopular, particularly to people living on their own.
That is accepted by the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti), just as it is accepted on the Conservative Benches.
It is incredible that the Labour party, which has reformed itself and brought itself up to date in so many other policies, is going back to an old policy on local government finance.
But what made the community charge so unpopular was its size and certain iniquities.
The great advantage — let us talk about the advantages — to many single people was that the community charge was fairer than the rating system.
In this short debate, we have to address ourselves to the question whether the discount of 25 per cent.
being suggested for the single householder is sufficient.
I would venture to suggest that it is not.
I support my hon. Friend the Member for Torbay (Mr. Allason), because common sense dictates that to run a household on one's own is considerably more expensive than for two people with two incomes.
We must recognise that.
I appreciate that the legislation, as drawn, enables my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State to draw up regulations which could redefine the 25 per cent.
Therefore, I join those who say that that 25 per cent.
should be altered, perhaps to 33er cent.
Discounts for empty properties will be assessed at 50 per cent.
My hon. Friend the Minister knows full well that, under the rating system, local authorities had a great deal of discretion about whether to charge on empty properties.
Under the community charge, they retained that discretion.
In fact, they had even greater discretion, because they were allowed to charge from nothing up to twice the standard community charge.
But, as I understand it, the present legislation insists that all empty properties will be assessed at 50 per cent.
Some of the people who complain most bitterly about the community charge are those who discover after their homes have been repossessed that they must pay the charge not only on their new property — because it is imposed on the individual — but on the property which they lost, and which they thought was now the responsibility of the building society.
They discover to their horror that they are still legally liable.
Some local authorities, such as Torbay, that have within them a large number of second homes, from which they must derive some income because of the cost incurred in administering that situation, might like greater flexibility — such as that available under the rating and community charge systems.
East Northants district council wrote asking me to make that specific point.
Despite the two question marks that I put over the Bill, I believe that the Government are right to proceed with the reforms that it contains.
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities on the way that he has piloted the Bill through the House so far.
Mr. Portillo
I thank my hon. Friend the Member for Wellingborough (Mr. Fry) for his kind remarks.
I am not surprised that he ventured into the fray this evening, because he has already won an outstanding victory for his constituents and I well understand his desire to enjoy another.
Before the Bill came before the House, we decided to make a change so that an authority with very enlightened policies — such as East Northants — which was able to reduce both its community charge and that which the county imposed should be permitted to continue doing so under the council tax.
Therefore, the tax imposed by any county can be reduced by a district.
That is an important reform for my hon. Friend's constituents and I congratulate him again on that victory.
It is satisfying when a Minister is attacked from opposite directions — by both one's own right hon. and hon. Friends and Opposition Members.
That is quite something.
I enjoyed the speech of the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould).
It was full of fantasy, was entertaining and purported to represent conversations in the Department of the Environment.
The hon. Gentleman produced a more entertaining account than life itself — and given that life has been fairly entertaining over the past year, that is quite an achievement.
The hon. Member for Dagenham said that the Government are not prepared to move to a property tax and he is absolutely right — we are not.
I do not believe that the British public are prepared to move to a property tax.
They got fed up when there was one and only a party that has been out of power and living in blinkers for the past 12 years could possibly propose returning to a naked property tax.
The hon. Member for Dagenham said also that the proposed discounts have nothing to do with ability to pay.
It is certainly the case that they are not crafted against people's incomes.
However, the hon. Gentleman is well aware that large numbers of people — such as widows, single pensioners and young people starting out in life — live on their own as single occupants of households.
They are not touched by the rebate system, because — generous and expensive though it is — it does not reach them.
Although Labour promises more generous rebates, no one believes it, because the proposal has not been costed, no details of it are available and no money would be made available.
The hon. Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) would be shocked if she knew the extent to which the hon. Member for Dagenham attempts to lead the public into believing that Labour would operate a more generous rebate system.
That leaves groups of people who are above income support and rebate levels, but who none the less have quite modest incomes.
We believe that a single person discount is suitable.
The hon. Member for Dagenham — greatly to his political peril — refuses to acknowledge the resentment that was felt by those living alone because their liability under the rating system was the same as the family living in a similar property next door.
That shows an extraordinary lack of understanding by Labour and I am delighted by it.
The fact that Labour is committed to giving no discounts is — as was said by my hon. Friends the Members for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo) and for Torbay (Mr. Allason)— marvellous news from our point of view.
It is extraordinary that Labour should be so out of touch with public feeling.
It is rich for the hon. Member for Dagenham to claim that he is worried about the complexity of our proposal; that from the hon. Gentleman who suggests that there should be property valuations on four different bases and annual rolling revaluations on a banded basis — although he keeps rather quiet about it.
It is extraordinary for the hon. Gentleman to say that he is worried also about the administrative complexity of our proposal.
We could propose a simpler system.
A naked property tax would be simpler, but it would not be as fair.
We are prepared to adopt a system that is a little more complicated, provided that it is fairer and responds more to the wishes of the British public.
No register is needed.
The onus is on the individual claiming the single-person discount to inform the local authority and there is no reason why it should not conduct a canvass to establish who will be claiming that discount.
That is quite different from asking single persons entitled to the discount to inform the local authority of that fact and to record their names.
It is absolutely different from keeping a register of every adult in the community.
Labour has not made headway with that point.
The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 is not designed for that purpose and it is dubious whether it could be used in that way.
It could run foul of data protection legislation.
The Data Protection Registrar is quoted as warning local councils that they could break the law if they maintain a register of all adults for the council tax.
The Municipal Journal also quoted David Smith, the assistant registrar, as saying that’ excessive’or’irrelevant’information held on computer would fall foul of the Data Protection Act 1984.
For households that did not qualify for council tax discount, data on adults other than the liable person did not appear to be necessary.
The 1976 Act, which does not apply to Scotland, is not suitable for that purpose and I am considering whether it should be disapplied for that purpose.
I propose to consult local authority associations on that very point.
Mr. Douglas
Has the Minister clarified with the Data Protection Registrar the question of local authorities compiling a list?
What would be the difference in data protection terms between a list and a register?
They would seem to have the same purpose.
Can the Minister give any assurances on that point?
Mr. Portillo
A local authority will record those people who step forward as being entitled to single-person discounts.
It may record also those who are liable persons.
There is no problem with that; it is quite different from a register.
Mr. Gould
That matter is of great practical importance to local authorities.
Does the Minister agree that his own remarks today and those of the Data Protection Registrar are a good deal less categorical than the Minister's earlier assertion that the keeping of a register would be unlawful?
When does the Minister propose to resolve that issue?
Does he understand and accept that it is important that local authorities should receive reliable guidance as soon as possible?
Mr. Portillo
Yes, and when the hon. Gentleman reads my remarks, he will see that I said that I am considering disapplying the 1976
Act and that I want to talk to local authority associations about that, so we will be in consultation with them.
I voted for my hon. Friend the Member for Torbay in 1983 in Battersea.
I did so with great enthusiasm — not least because of his stand against rates.
I commiserate with my hon. Friend on his misfortune this evening, in finding himself inadvertently supporting us in the Lobby.
My hon. Friend will realise that I do not wish to mislead him and that the setting of discounts for single people is a matter of judgment.
Given that we wish to raise a given sum by means of the tax, a more generous discount will involve a higher headline figure for double-adult and larger households.
Let us take the example of a band D property containing two adults, whose council tax for standard spending is £400.
If we allowed single people a 50 per cent.
discount, that amount would have to rise to about £440.
Let me add that the council tax is partly personal and partly property-based.
If we regard the proportions as’ half and half’, it is logical to assume that households containing two or more people should pay 100 per cent., that the occupants of a house that is empty or not their principal residence should pay 50 per cent. , and that a single occupant — being, as it were , in the middle — should pay 75 per cent .
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Tristan Garel-Jones)
If that is so, why was the draft treaty text put forward by the Dutch — sporting what one might call’ the other vision’— rejected by 10 of the 12 member states?
Mr. Ashdown
I know that the Minister has a different view from that which the Prime Minister has expressed on such matters.
I invite him to read the Prime Minister's response to the right hon. Member for Chesterfield, which was far and away the most interesting part of the debate — Amended text or not, it reveals the muddle to which the other 11 nations of Europe do not subscribe.
It is a model towards which they are moving away from—
Interruption
Mr. Skinner
What does that mean?
Mr. Ashdown
It is a model away from which they are now moving.
They are moving towards increasing integration and increasing unity.
That part of the Prime Minister's speech will be studied carefully because it reveals his intentions, although I do not believe that they are shared by the Minister.
The Prime Minister declared again today that Maastricht was a good deal.
Maybe it was a good deal for the Conservative party, but it was a very bad deal for this country.
Every citizen in Britain in due course — in my judgment, it will be sooner rather than later — will pay a real, direct and personal price for what the Prime Minister negotiated at Maastricht.
People will pay first in higher mortgages, lost jobs and diminished economic opportunities because of the uncertainty caused by the opt-out clause on the single currency.
That uncertainty means higher interest rates if the pound comes under pressure and has to be supported again.
It means more doubtful inward investment.
Whatever comments were made in the heat of the negotiations at Maastricht, there can be no doubt that those who wish to invest in Europe will want to invest in countries that will be part of the economic and monetary union and not in countries outside it.
It will mean more doubtful inward investment at the very moment when this country needs such investment most, as we come out of the recession.
It means the end of any realistic possibility of bringing the new European central bank to London.
It means that London's position as Europe's main financial centre has been weakened and that that of Frankfurt has been strengthened.
Mrs. Currie
I wonder whether the right hon. Gentleman has read last week's edition of The Economist, which investigated which European Community countries conformed with the convergence conditions set in the treaty.
The right hon. Gentleman is worried about uncertainty, but is he aware that the United Kingdom is already included in four of the five lists of items which create convergence and that only the fifth — the narrow band of the ERM — separates us?
We are a lot closer than Germany, Italy and the vast majority of the Community.
Where is the uncertainty in that?
Mr. Ashdown
I am grateful to the hon. Lady because she makes the point that I was coming to.
In those circumstances, why on earth stay out?
The hon. Lady is right — the tragedy is that Britain is one of the few member states which could have met the convergence conditions of the EMU almost immediately.
This country has paid a high price for that in lost jobs, lost homes and bankrupt businesses because of the effects of the Government's economic policy.
The Government now risk throwing it all away because of the conditions to which the hon. Lady referred.
Instead of playing a leading role in the new monetary union, we shall be semi-detached from it — robbed of our full chance to shape its institutions, suffering economically because of the uncertainty, and condemned always to follow monetary union, never to lead it.
That is what the uncertainty created by the Prime Minister's opt-out will cost us.
That uncertainty would continue under Labour.
We have studied the Labour party's recent pronouncements and we now know that Labour proposes to renegotiate the whole deal.
In last Friday's edition of The Times, the shadow Foreign Secretary stated that Labour would’ review’the’role and powers of the European Commission work for conditions to make the single currency possible and attractive’.
By the by, those conditions are wholly unacceptable to our partners and would destroy the whole purpose and form of a central bank.
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) also said that Labour would’ negotiate for revision’of the social protocol.
Come back Harold Wilson — all is forgiven.
The Tories would like to repeat the mistakes of the 1950s, while Labour are determinted to repeat the mistake of renegotiation in the 1970s.
The second way in which Britian will pay for the deal is in lost influence in Europe.
At Maastricht the Prime Minister reinforced Britain's wretched reputation as the chief roadblock of Europe.
We are not the partners who must be consulted — we are now the obstacle around which the rest of Europe must find a way.
Other member states bypassed us on the single currency by giving us an opt-out, for which the Prime Minister had to pay at Maastricht — and for which the British people will have to pay even more in the months ahead — and they bypassed us on the social chapter by simply going ahead without us.
The rest of Europe will now construct the social institutions of Europe with Britain excluded — but we shall not be excluded from being influenced by what they do in the short term.
No doubt we shall, once again, want to join them in the end.
Britain proves yet again that those who will not learn the lessons of history are condemned to repeat the mistakes of history.
That is exactly what we have done twice before in this half century.
As is well known — the hon. Member for Bolsover has referred to this — the Liberal Democrat party was not content with all the provisions in the social chapter of the Maastricht drafts.
For the benefit of Mr. Ian Aitken and The Guardian, and others, our objection was not to the social charter which was, of course, not even under discussion at Maastricht — although the Leader of the Opposition did not seem to know that.
Our objection was to elements of the social chapter in the treaty —
Mr. Skinner
That is not what the right hon. Gentleman said to Walden.
Mr. Ashdown
That is exactly what I said both then and subsequently.
Article 118/3 of the social chapter opens the way, as the Prime Minister said, to European-wide collective bargaining.
In Britain, we have moved away from such arrangements.
They are wrong for this country's future and contrary to this party's belief in decentralised wage bargaining.
Again, the Leader of the Opposition seemed not to grasp the fact that, in article 118B, the social chapter provided for circumstances in which, if European businesses and trade unions agreed, they could take Europe-wide action through the Council without reference to the European Parliament, let alone this one.
That is simply inimical to this party's commitment to a democratic, powerful and responsible European Parliament.
Fortunately, both those clauses enjoy the protection of unanimous voting or could be changed when they came to practical application into law.
However, we would have wished to see those clauses altered.
Indeed, they could have been altered if the Government had not wasted their bargaining power in attempts to defend the indefensible, attack the trivial and obtain the illusory.
Therefore, when it came to the social charter, when we really would have liked to influence events, Britain was left with no negotiating power, few friends and only one course of action — to opt out of the social dimension altogether.
That was not game, set and match for Britain; it was a lousy piece of negotiation which left Britain on the sidelines of Europe.
Perhaps more regrettable is the fact that a real opportunity has been missed.
If there is one area in which Britain is ahead of Europe, it is in the liberalisation of our markets and the dismantling of the systems of the corporate state.
At present, our partners in Europe tend to follow an old-fashioned prescriptive approach to social policy.
That is very familiar to the Labour party.
Labour Members like the idea that one can formulate the blueprint in Brussels and hand it down to be followed in every corner of the Community.
That is the kind of approach that they would like to have again at Westminster.
It is, however, an approach that failed in the 1970s, and one that will not work in the 1990s.
It is too inflexible, too costly, and too rigid.
We need not a’ blueprint’approach but an’entitlements’approach to rights at work and in society.
Europe should be built around the concept of European citizenship, with each citizen entitled to certain defined basic rights — political rights, rights of ownership, rights at work and social entitlements.
It is for the European institutions to define those’ floor-level’rights, but it is not for Brussels to say how they will be observed.
It is up to each individual state and each individual workplace to decide that for itself — subject, ultimately, to the decisions of the courts.
Incidentally, if our Government really believed in the principle of subsidiarity, they would have ensured that decision-making would be decentralised within the United Kingdom as well as within the Community.
The new treaty tells us that decisions will be’ taken as closely as possible to the citizens’.
I say’ Yes, please — and why not start in Scotland and Wales?’
The third great deficiency of the Maastricht treaty — again one that Britain, to its discredit, helped to create — is its entirely inadequate response to the democratic deficit in Europe.
Here is the Government's big lie: the claim that an increase in the power of the European Parliament would mean a decrease in the power of the Westminster Parliament.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The truth is that in European affairs it would be difficult to diminish further the power of this Parliament.
Our Parliament does not hold the Commission to account.
We do not even hold our own Ministers to account.
We do not scrutinise European legislation properly; indeed, we allow the Executive to carry on very much as it pleases.
That is the democratic deficit.
We need the European Parliament to repair it, but in that regard the Maastricht treaty has comprehensively failed.
The European Parliament remains far too weak.
In the end, it will have to be strengthened to play a full democratic part in the Community.
In the end, we shall have to ensure that all laws passed by the Council must also be passed by the Parliament.
That is what co-decision, democracy and accountability actually mean.
Mrs. Gwyneth Dunwoody (Crewe and Nantwich)
I agree that it is important for our Parliament to examine EC legislation closely.
The House has two very effective European Committees, but there seems to be an astonishing dearth of Liberal Democrats prepared to sit on them, although they have the right to do so.
Mr. Ashdown
That is a perfectly reasonable point.
I will explain the position.
As there are only 20 Liberal Democrats in the House — although we are supported by 23 per cent.
of the electorate — it is impossible for my colleagues and me to involve ourselves in all the work of the House.
Until the European Parliament is strengthened, the events about which the Government and the European separatists most like to complain — those brought about by an interfering and inappropriate Brussels — are likely to continue, because the Government missed the opportunity to make the Community more democratic and accountable.
Perhaps that is what they want, but it is not good for either Britain or Europe.
Mr. Harry Barnes (Derbyshire, North-East)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Ashdown
I think that I have already given way a reasonable number of times.
Fortunately, we in this Parliament have never seen Maastricht as an end.
We have always seen it as a milestone on the road to closer integration and closer unity.
There are those in the House who pretend that that is not so.
The Prime Minister, to appease members of his own party, pretends to be one of them, but he knows the truth.
He knows that, although Maastricht may mark a watershed in the process of integration, it does not mark the end of the process.
With or without Britain, the rest of Europe will continue along the road.
Of course, we cannot be certain that Europe will succeed.
There are huge problems — economic, historical and social.
Perhaps those problems will ultimately prove too great.
Perhaps Europe's leadership will prove too weak.
Perhaps the essential task of bringing in the new democracies of eastern Europe will founder on economic collapse, ethnic unrest and social upheaval.
I am certain of one thing, however: we must do all in our power to ensure that none of that happens.
Europe cannot stand still.
There is no refuge for us in simply maintaining the level of integration at which we have now arrived.
If Europe does not go forward, it will start to go back — back to a Europe given to confrontation and not co-operation, back to a Europe where Germany exploits its economic power and its position as broker between east and west, and back to a Europe where instability in the east is matched by impotence and indecision in the west.
That cannot be in any of our interests, especially at this time.
Ministers pride themselves on their attention to detail, but I ask them to lift their eyes and survey a broader picture.
They should look at the Europe that will exist in five or 10 years' time, at a Community with 18 or 20 members and perhaps even more, and at the interests that we have in common— security, defence, foreign policy, the environment, prosperity and peace in the world.
That Europe must be more united, more effective and more far-sighted.
It will view the events of Maastricht as important, but as yesterday's agenda, and it will marvel at the failure of countries and their leaders to grasp the opportunities for progress.
I am certain of something else, too.
It is in Britain's interest for us to be at the heart of that Europe — where the Prime Minister said that he wanted us, but where he signally failed to put us at Maastricht.
We should be helping to shape the democratic institutions on which Europe will depend.
We should be providing leadership in the new economic institutions that Europe will need.
We should be making available our experience of world affairs, which will be essential to the outward-looking Europe that we must create.
That was the opportunity that Maastricht could have given us.
The Prime Minister failed to grasp that opportunity.
He put the short-term interests of the Conservative party before the long-term interests of this country.
Sadly, Maastricht represents the third occasion in half a century on which Britain has been given the chance to face its European future and, I regret to say, the third occasion in that time on which we have chosen to seek refuge in the past.
For that failure the country will, in due course, pay a heavy price.
Mr. Nigel Forman (Carshalton and Wallington)
I pay warm tribute to the Leader of the Opposition for his fine debating speech.
His debating technique, however, disguised some fatal flaws and internal contradictions in Labour policy.
Not the least of those was highlighted capably by my hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, South-West (Mr. Budgen), who pointed out that, if the right hon. Gentleman was to achieve any of his aims in regard to European monetary union and convergence, he would be required to support policies that would inevitably increase the country's tax burden considerably.
The right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown), the leader of the Liberal Democrats, presented what appeared to be a coherent policy on Europe.
He has adhered to that policy consistently for several years.
I feel, however, that it takes insufficient account of the natural caution and pragmatism of the British people, which was admirably reflected in the negotiating approach of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and his colleagues in the Cabinet.
I congratulate my right hon. Friends the Prime Minister, the Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor on their negotiations leading up to Maastricht and at the conference itself.
Their approach was in great contrast to what might have been the position had the official Opposition been in government.
In case the House doubts the substance behind that view, it has only to consider a Gallup opinion poll that appeared recently in The Daily Telegraph.
It showed that by a ratio of 2: 1 the electorate preferred to have my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister in charge of the policy than the Leader of the Opposition.
Liberal Democrat supporters shared that view by about 4: 1.
Clearly, the British people know when the policy is in safe hands.
Looking back, we can see that the Maastricht summit was the culmination of a long process — a significant stage in the development of the European Community.
It was the stage at which the 12 member states did a good deal more to clarify their long-term goals.
I am referring particularly to European monetary union with a social dimension, coupled with aspirations towards European political union which, as can be seen from the debates that we have had in the House and those on the continent, means many different things to many different people.
It was also the stage at which the Twelve addressed the critical questions of structure and procedure for the future development of Europe: whether the Community and Europe as a whole wish its design to be more or less monolithic, whether it wants to be more or less supranational, whether it wants to have more or less qualified majority voting and more or less jurisdiction for the European Court of Justice.
Mr. Nicholas Soames (Crawley)
Does my hon. Friend agree that the pillared structure that has been negotiated by our right hon. Friends is more likely to provide the sort of flexibility that the institutions will need, bearing in mind that Europe is standing, to some extent, on shifting sands and that none of the situations extant in the 1950s, at the birth of the Community, remains the same today?
It may be that there will have to be extensive changes in those institutions in the years to come.
Mr. Forman
I agree with my hon. Friend, but I go further.
The 1990s provide a great opportunity for Her Majesty's Government to demonstrate to our Community partners the validity of the new hybrid approach that the Government have pioneered.
It is interesting to note that, in attempting to answer the questions at Maastricht, most of our Community partners said that they wanted to go faster and further forward.
The Government correctly understood and successfully argued that in most of the new areas of competence the approach should be largely intergovernmental — as was suggested by my hon. Friend the Member for Crawley (Mr. Soames)— thus introducing a greater element of flexibility into the future institutional arrangements of the Community.
That must make sense in the policy areas to which my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister referred — foreign policy, security and home affairs.
We now have the opportunity to demonstrate in practice that our more hybrid approach is better suited to the needs of the next decade.
The new methods of European co-operation will prove increasingly relevant and useful in the enlargement of the Community, which will carry on apace from about the mid-1990s and — this has not yet been mentioned in the debate — in the awakening of public opinion in France and Germany where they are beginning to realise some of the implications of what their political leaders have signed.
On the eve of 1992, we must encourage our partners to focus in sensible ways on the real challenges of the coming 10 years.
What do I mean by that?
Sir Russell Johnston (Inverness, Nairn and Lochaber)
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that the intergovern-mental co-operation which was a characteristic of the European Free Trade Association was not successful?
To suggest that that is the way forward for the future must be objected to by the fact that Sweden, Austria and the EFTA countries now want to join the supranational Community.
Mr. Forman
I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman, but I understand his point from an historical perspective.
However, the Community has always had variable depth in its integration — in some areas it has been deeply integrated and in others there has been shallower integration.
It is appropriate that the areas of policy now being pushed forward on an intergovernmental basis should be done in that way because that is how we carry with us consent in our national Parliaments and public opinion.
The programme for the next 10 years should be based on a clear recognition of the need for an early enlargement to include the aspiring EFTA countries, to which the hon. Member for Inverness, Nairn and Lochaber (Sir R. Johnston) referred, and the three central European countries — Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia — to the east of the Community.
That would make irreversible the shift to democracy, market economics and social pluralism in the former communist states.
In its wisdom, the Community felt able to do that for the Iberian peninsula a few years ago and it would be right and proper for it to do something analogous for the central European countries.
I hope that the Community will concentrate on providing within its borders only those things that it does best — a common legal framework for a large liberal market economy with a social dimension.
That is the formula and it is what I believe will prove most successful.
In so far as it is necessary to have new political institutions, the Community should cherish rather than threaten the rich diversity of nations and regions within it.
On external relationships, we must use all our influence within the Community to see that it is not just a magnet for new members, which it clearly is already, but an influence for global free trade and payments.
If the Community can take constructive and urgent action, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Shoreham (Sir R. Luce) said, to bring the Uruguay round of the GATT negotiations to a successful conclusion, it will have done something of value for its members and the global economy generally.
Assisting with the creation of a viable payments union in the area that used to be described as the Soviet Union would be the single most important contribution that the Twelve could make to that unstable and dangerous part of the world.
By stabilising that part of the world, we would be making our contribution as a building block to better world monetary arrangements which will be important once the ecu is a means of exchange and a currency that can look the yen and the dollar in the face.
As my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has said many times, we should work as hard as we can in the heart of Europe to lead our partners away from the cause of Euro-dirigism and Euro-protectionism, which if allowed to develop under the influence of Madame Cresson and such people would render the entire Community less competitive in global markets and blight the prospects of the developing countries to the south and east of the existing Community.
Once we have incorporated the Maastricht treaty into our law — presumably, as my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister said, in the first Session of the new Parliament — we must press on in the second half of 1992, when we have the presidency of the Community, to set out more clearly our vision of a common European future.
In this brief speech, it is not appropriate for me to attempt that task but I shall give the House three examples of the sort of arrangements for which the Government should press in the second half of 1992 when we have an opportunity to carry them forward.
We should encourage a growing body of Community practice that builds upon the excellent subsidiarity article 3b in the Maastricht treaty.
That is critical and I am delighted that it has found its way into the treaty with powerful German support.
At a future review conference — such conferences will occur every few years in the Community — it might be desirable to go even further and press for a clause in the Community body of law that makes it crystal clear that all powers that are not specifically allocated to the Community should remain as of right with the member states, as is the case in the American constitution.
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor and his counterparts ably negotiated amendments in the documents on economic and monetary union.
I should like to see Her Majesty's Government using all their influence in an attempt to ensure that article 104A is implemented to the letter.
For hon. Members who are not conversant with every last article, that is the guarantee of a no-bail-out rule, which is important if we are to contain the development of economic and monetary union to sensible proportions.
It will be vital if we are to ensure our objective of developing a European monetary union while retaining the bulk of fiscal powers unadulterated in national hands — in the hands of national Governments and Parliaments, where they should remain.
I was struck by the words of Graham Bishop of Salomon Brothers in a recent publication on the importance of the no-bail-out rule.
He said:’ The purpose of the rule is clear: It is the circuit breaker between monetary union and the back-door creation of a United States of Europe', where a centralised government takes control over domestic public expenditure as the price of a bail-out.
If the rule is credible, EMU should involve only the lightest fiscal interference when budgetary policies are sound, because the debt of EMU members will be of the highest grade.’
If we achieved such development of economic monetary union, we would be doing it on a sound basis.
I strongly welcome the text that was negotiated at Maastricht on the European system of central banks in stage 2 and the European bank in stage 3.
Article 2 stresses the primary objective of price stability and article 7 enshrines the guaranteed independence of the European central bank.
The full benefits of price stability and statutory independence for the European central bank, and indeed for the Bank of England — that must be a necessary institutional corollary — will be enjoyed only if a future Government and Parliament agree in good time to adopt a single European currency.
In today's European capital markets, the freedom of exchange rates, to which some of my hon. Friends are so attached, means only the freedom to devalue — a course of action that would prove to be as futile as it is nugatory in modern conditions.
In a recent article in the Financial Times, Sam Brittan pointed out quite succinctly:’ At present the UK already has, as a member of the hard ERM, most of the obligations of a single currency without all the advantages.
There would be little to be lost from going the whole hog.’
I agree with him, and there would be much to be gained at the appropriate time.
The full benefits of a single currency will come through, which will benefit Britain and the entire Community.
I hope that the Government will draw the logical conclusions and lessons from their earlier correct decisions and lead this country forward, at the appropriate time, to a single currency and ever-closer union of the peoples of Europe.
Mr. Denis Healey (Leeds, East)
People have short memories, and it may be useful to remind the House that in 1972 President Pompidou announced on French television that there would be a European common currency by 31 December 1980.
The Werner plan, from which that prediction was drawn, was wrecked by events outside Europe — the Nixon shocks and partly the effects of the OPEC increase in the oil price — but no hon. Member seems able to recall that it ever existed.
Maastricht could suffer the same fate.
I agree with hon. Members who have said that it may prove to be a major step towards the valuable goal of greater unity in Europe, but let us face the fact that it changes nothing in today's world.
The summit did not even attempt to close any of the yawning gaps in the single market, which must come into effect at the end of next year.
It simply agreed a timetable for producing a single currency by, at the latest, 1999 — with or without Britain.
Even in this area, nothing significant will change in the real world until phase 2 of European monetary union takes effect in 1994 — more than two years from now.
I want to start by asking what are the risks that the Delors plan — the origin of European economic and monetary union — will suffer the same fate as the Werner plan did 20 years ago.
Let us remind ourselves, as the Prime Minister wisely did in his opening speech, that the Maastricht treaty does not come into force for more than 12 months — at the beginning of 1993 — and only if every one of the 12
Governments who initialled it get it ratified by their Parliaments.
The real debate is only beginning.
As the Prime Minister said, only the British and Danish Parliaments have considered European monetary union, as it is now defined, or European political union.
If we look at the initial response to Maastricht, the omens are not wholly encouraging.
There is growing opposition in Germany to giving up the deutschmark without any real return in political union, which Chancellor Kohl had said was a precondition of moving to a single currency.
I see from today's Financial Times that a leading member of the board of the Bundesbank said yesterday that the Maastricht summit was a failure and might prove to be’ a suicidal failure’— serious words from a key member of the body that drew up the detailed proposals for European economic and monetary union.
I cannot resist the feeling that the Government's extraordinary surrender yesterday to German bullying over the recognition of Croatia had something to do with the need to appease German public opinion, which is turning nasty on the whole process — or perhaps it was just sucking up to the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher), who has succeeded in abandoning her resistance to German blandishments and has formed a common front with Chancellor Kohl in demanding the immediate and unconditional recognition of Croatia.
But then, it is, of course, a funny old world.
French ratification is little more certain, because the extreme right, under Le Pen, is campaigning hard against what it inelegantly calls the’ federasts’of the European movement.
Le Pen may succeed in winning allies on this issue from the more moderate right wing, as he already has on the issue of immigration and race in France, which is a depressing prospect.
The ratification of the Mediterranean countries is no more certain.
The Spanish Prime Minister has already said — it was said also by the Portugese at Maastricht — that their ratification will depend on more money for what is called cohesion and structural funds.
They are talking of sums far higher than France, Germany or Britain seem prepared to provide.
I am interested to see that the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, with his deep knowledge of the Spanish people and countryside, seems to agree with me on that.
But the biggest challenges to Maastricht will come, as they came to the Werner plan, in developments outside the European Community.
It is clear that almost all the European Free Trade Association countries, except perhaps Iceland, will want to join the Community.
They will probably all be members well before 1996, which is the earliest date for phase 3 of EMU.
That will mean an enormous shift in the centre of gravity in Europe towards the north — something that we in Britain should heartily welcome, because on many issues, our approach, or at least, that of Labour Members, has much in common with the countries of northern Europe.
If things go well, it seems that, certainly by the end of the century if not by the earlier date of 1997, it may be possible to form a single currency to which Germany, France, the Benelux countries, Denmark and the EFTA countries will belong.
In such a case, it seems inconceivable and well nigh insane to imagine that Britain would stand out.
All of us must have been deeply disturbed by the Chancellor's refusal to answer the question this afternoon — yes, we agree that Parliament must take the final decision, but what decision will he recommend in those circumstances?
Mr. Giles Radice (Durham, North)
He does not know.
Mr. Healey
He knows very well, because he is against a single currency in principle, like his predecessor, the right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson), who clearly expressed his views — which, I think, are shared by the present Chancellor — in an article in one of the tabloid newspapers.
I believe it was the Evening Standard.
Mr. Radice
My right hon. Friend referred to the Chancellor's views but, when we asked him that question in the Select Committee, it became clear that he was not so much against it in principle as uncertain in his own mind what he should do.
Mr. Tony Banks
Sounds like a Liberal.
Mr. Healey
He does sound like a Liberal, but I do not like to explore the murky recesses of the Chancellor's mind.
However, I must confess that his failure to give an answer — even that answer — to the question this afternoon was very significant.
The EFTA countries are not alone.
I agree with all the right hon. and hon. Members who said — I think that almost all who have spoken so far made this point — that it is very important to give Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland the prospect of joining the Community at least by the end of the decade, and to give them every possible assistance in meeting the economic and political conditions for membership as soon as possible.
Of course, that will mean a big shift of gravity inside the Community to the east.
By the end of the decade, power will have shifted to central and north-east Europe from its present location, which I suppose is somewhere between London, France and Rome.
Mr. Tony Marlow (Northampton, North)
And Berlin.
Mr. Healey
I accept that, although I gather that even the German Parliament is deeply divided on how much of it and how much of the Government should move from Bonn to Berlin.
I think that the biggest challenges to the Maastricht process will come, as they did before, from outside Europe.
The United States is clearly already becoming much more self-centred.
If, partly because of Europe's obduracy over the common agricultural policy, the GATT talks break down, the process of disengagement from external responsibilities may move very much faster than anyone expects or hopes, both from Europe and from the west Pacific area.
The most important single factor is the disappearance of the Soviet Union from the world stage.
Lenin, who does not often get a kind word these days, was right in at least one of his prophecies.
He prophesied that the triumph of communism would lead to the withering away of the state.
I do not think that anyone has ever seen a state wither away quite as fast as the Soviet state has in recent weeks.
However, the disappearance of the Soviet Union will have very disturbing consequences.
It has been replaced by a commonwealth of independent states.
If, as I believe, NATO is a biological monstrosity because it is an organ without a function, the commonwealth of independent states is a political nightmare because it is a function without an organ.
It has, at the moment, absolutely no institutions through which to express itself.
It is worth remembering the lessons — even the recent lessons — of history.
The disintegration of the European empires after the last war was followed by 45 years of armed conflict in the ex-colonies, in which 20 million people died in the far east, in the Indian subcontinent, in the middle east, in Africa and even in the Caribbean.
All those factors are likely to be at work now that the Soviet empire has disintegrated.
Even worse, the European empires at least left behind them working administrative structures and moderately healthy economies, which meant that most of the ex-colonial countries have managed to maintain stable states and thriving economies — although, of course, not thriving as fast as ours in the west — but the Soviet empire is leaving no administration at all , only economic catastrophe.
It is often said that it is not very easy to turn an omelette back into eggs.
Since the perestroika process began, the Soviet economy has followed a steady course downwards, and there seems no prospect at the moment of it reversing that process.
We shall all be watching the success of Mr. Yeltsin's programme to form a judgment on it, if it is introduced in January.
If economic catastrophe is added to the political disintegration, the consequences for Europe could be dire, not only in terms of the millions of refugees who are already predicted, but possibly through the sale of nuclear weapons to any body of people or any Government in the third world or elsewhere who have the hard currency to pay for them.
I do not believe in a nuclear civil war in the Soviet Union — I think that Nazarbaev and Krawczuk want to hang on to their nuclear weapons as a defence against a Russian attack.
I do not think that they have any intention of using them — nor have the Russians — but the risk that, as the system disintegrates, people may simply sell off the smaller nuclear weapons is a real one.
I was glad that that was recognised by Mr. Baker on his recent visit to the Soviet Union.
They pose enormous threats to western Europe and more immediate threats to eastern Europe, but there is still no obvious way in which the west can help to avoid the consequences until there is at least some clarity about where authority lies in the Soviet Union.
I agree with the hon. Member for Carshalton and Wallington (Mr. Forman) that by far the most useful thing that we could do in the short run would be to fund a payments union among the commonwealth of independent states so that they could at least have a currency in which to trade with one another.
Against that background — I doubt whether many hon. Members would dispute the dangers that I have outlined — the argument about who won at Maastricht is pitifully irrelevant.
Maastricht was not a triumph for any Government, although each of the Governments present claimed it as one.
Least of all was it a triumph for the British Prime Minister.
I was interested to see that the Financial Times and The Spectator picked the same phrase — they described it as a’ pyrrhic victory’.
The Prime Minister has, of course, produced some novel marriages, some very strange bedfellows.
The previous Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley, said that she was’ thrilled’by the Prime Minister's success at Maastricht.
My dear friend — if I may so describe him — the previous Foreign Secretary, who resigned from the right hon. Lady's Government over Europe, was equally thrilled, although he did not express himself — he never does — in quite such colourful language.
To complete that glorious trinity, my right hon. Friend the Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) joined the throng during the debate.
I do not think that there is much for us to be proud about in the fact that the Prime Minister has relegated Britain to a second division of countries that can survive only by having low pay because they have low skills.
Obviously, he sees Britain as the sweatshop of the world — he almost said as much — and, if we are unlucky enough to find him in office for more than a few more months, we may find ourselves taking the place previously occupied by the Soviet Union, as Upper Volta with rockets.
The only significant critic — I use the word’ significant’with meaning — is the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) who, in spite of everything that the Whips can say to him, apparently still intends to vote against the Government tomorrow.
The right hon. Gentleman glares, or rather stares impassively, at me.
He certainly did not shake his head, but then, as the right hon. Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) said, he is a’ ghastly man.’
Perhaps more worrying for the Government is the attitude of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, who was reported by a most reliable gossip columnist called Peterborough in that impeccably Conservative newspaper The Daily Telegraph as saying that it would have been better if there had been no deal at all.
I suspect that the Prime Minister and the other Ministers would agree with our great national poet, William Shakespeare, that’ Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.’
The time has come for the Prime Minister to stop playing Conservative party politics with the issues and to rise to the real level of the challenges that confront us in Britain, everyone in Europe and, indeed, every inhabitant of the planet.
I realise that, if someone is driving a car, and sitting behind him is a lady with a handbag and a man with fangs, he may feel it wiser to drive in the slow lane.
My advice is that he should pull into a lay-by, turf the others out and then hand the wheel over to firmer and safer hands.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Mr. Hugh Dykes.
Mr. Hugh Dykes (Harrow, East)
Such was the ringing applause for the speech of the right hon. Member for Leeds, East (Mr. Healey) that I did not hear you call my name, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I am grateful to you, and also to the right hon. Member for Leeds, East.
The applause rang through the House.
The right hon. Gentleman gave his usual vintage performance, with many justified facts and views, and it was warmly received in all parts of the House, not only for its humour but for some of his more sombre comments about the present ominous geophysical appearance of Europe.
That, too, reinforces the lesson and message of the significance of the Maastricht summit — that greater cohesion and unity of the European Community is even more indispensable for solving its own internal economic, social and political problems and those of the rest of Europe as well.
As chairman of the European Movement in Britain, I am gratified to observe that a treaty which I would describe as extensive and profound has at long last been signed.
Members of Parliament and the British press have, understandably, been preoccupied with the matters about which the Government decided — with some justification, although that is a matter for debate — that there should be hesitation.
The two key areas were final acceptance of the European monetary union agreement and the Government's resistance to many of the suggestions in the social programme of the additional treaty — those were not the original social suggestions in the social action programme.
However, the press in the other European member states rightly concentrated on the long list of measures that were agreed and signed in the Maastricht treaty.
There has been less debate on those here, and I guess that over the two days of the debate there will still be less.
Paradoxically, I shall share that omission, refraining deliberately from referring to those many matters in order to keep my speech short.
Nevertheless, they represent a considerable achievement by all the member states.
The Bundestag had a debate on those matters last Friday.
Although I have read only a summary of the one-day debate and not the full text of all the speeches, I believe that my impression is correct that the British hesitation over the two key areas was hardly referred to at all.
The House of Commons, understandably — again, with some justification but not with total justification — will assume that for the other member states the double hesitation by the United Kingdom was the crucial aspect of the agreements at Maastricht, but it was not.
For the Community as a whole, the Maastricht agreement and all its areas — including the social provisions, which the others will accept outside the treaty on the basis of a separate protocol to be agreed in a few months' time — were the significant aspect.
Given the Community's capacity to help other European countries — not only the successful ones who now wish to join, and are already beginning to apply, but the east European countries, with all their problems — it is extraordinary and perverse to suggest that there should be greater disunity in the Community at the very moment when greater aid and support is called for.
I was impressed by the way in which our Cabinet colleagues and other members of the team — the distinguished presence of the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, my hon. Friend the Member for Watford (Mr. Garel-Jones), prompts me to add his name — negotiated successfully on behalf of the United Kingdom.
I suppose that this is a small matter to mention, but allowing for a slight extension to the 24 hours of the second day, the negotiation was completed more or less in the time allotted — a remarkable feat and a testimony to the profound drafting and negotiating skills of many of the member states and many of the governmental teams.
We should also pay tribute to the Dutch presidency.
Mr. Soames
Does my hon. Friend agree that when such councils involve constitutional amendments to the treaty as well as, as always, substantial business for the Heads of Government to transact, some new formula should be produced whereby meetings could be scheduled for a longer period?
The agenda was in every respect unreasonable for the time allowed and it is remarkable that what was achieved was possible at all.
Mr. Dykes
That is a good point, and I agree with my hon. Friend.
Indeed, an original idea suggested informally by several people a long time ago was that there could be a two-day preliminary meeting, and then a two-day summit of the European Council.
My hon. Friend was correct, too, in the implication of his remarks, in that due to lack of time or the natural delegation of functions, the European Council, the Council of Ministers and various other councils more and more frequently ask for Commission reports and proposals on matters.
As a result, the Commission — still with 8,000 officials, who may be well paid but are nevertheless overworked — is dealing with more and more material not only initiated by itself in its legislative function of making proposals, but increasingly at the request of the politicians in the European Council.
It is a double problem, to which my hon. Friend the Member for Crawley (Mr. Soames) has rightly referred.
Although many keen Europeans in this country and a significant and growing number of people outside, not only the younger generation, will naturally be disappointed that the Government chose to refrain from full commitment in two key areas, the long list of developments that were agreed is immensely encouraging.
Although it may not seem much in terms of substance, part two of the treaty which deals with European citizenship raises the intriguing idea that in the one member state in which there is not a written constitution we now gain access to the treaty additions and to the written constitution which already exists in the Community.
We also gain access to all the protections that will flow from that.
There is also the future possibility of building some of the elements of the European convention on human rights into specific treaty additions of the European Community.
An antediluvian handful of hon. Members, many of them retiring at the next election, are not keen on these matters, but they are a diminishing and insignificant number.
There is a substantial consensus in the House for deepening the European Community, which came from the Maastricht agreements.
I was not referring to my right hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, South (Sir W. Clark).
I know that he is retiring, but he need not be too sensitive.
I was referring to other more prominent hon. Members.
My right hon. Friend has always had his views on the matter, whereas other colleagues have changed their minds more frequently.
I respect my right hon. Friend's views on these matters.
Interruption
The direction towards a true and profound European union is welcome and inexorable.
It is inescapable because
Mr. Tony Favell (Stockport)
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Dykes
I will not give way at the moment, although I may later.
Mr. Favell
My intervention may be helpful.
Mr. Dykes
I will not give way, although it is tempting to do so.
The whole process is inescapable precisely because more and more people want it to be so.
We may say,’ Eat your heart out’to Norman, to Peter, to William, to Austin and to others, if I may use just first names.
A growing number of the population, not just the younger generation and not only because of the superficial conversion of the Labour party, want that process.
They want Europe to become one entity and they will rapidly reject the national frontiers of the European member countries, which are now losing their residual relevance.
Socially, economically and in human terms, the citizens of the Community are coming together.
That is the unstoppable reality.
Mr. Marlow
Never mind the detail.
Mr. Dykes
If I had time to go into detail, as my hon. Friend the Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow) urges, my speech would be far longer and other colleagues would not be able to speak later.
The pre-economic and monetary union full convergence measures are more severe in their final outturn than was anticipated several years ago when the whole debate began.
We must be realistic about that.
As time goes on, many of the economic and financial conditions may change significantly and the final stage of the agreement will need to be
Hon. Members
Fudged.
Mr. Dykes
not fudged, but agreed in concrete terms on a rather different basis.
Although the United States economy is embraced by a single currency, and although many harmonised conditions conceal the differences, one wonders how much real internal convergence there is between the economies of Illinois, Texas and North Dakota — probably far less than there seems.
The internal rates of inflation of the different states are far greater than we think, but there is no way of measuring that because of the existence of a single currency.
The same will happen in Europe as stage 2 of the European monetary system gets going.
Nothing less than the aim of a full conglomeration of the living and working conditions of all European Community citizens — who will remain patriotic citizens of their own member states — will satisfy most citizens and electors in the various countries as their own national elections occur and as the European Parliament elections occur.
I do not share the view that there has been a limited addition to the powers of the European Parliament.
I believe that the extra powers will evolve into a significant additional step.
Mr. Favell
My hon. Friend paints a vision that does not exactly fill me with glee.
There will be another conference in 1996.
Will my hon. Friend crystal ball gaze and tell us what he expects will happen there?
Mr. Dykes
To which aspect of the conference in 1996 does my hon. Friend refer?
Mr. Favell
Presumably we shall go further towards the vision that my hon. Friend has.
Where does he expect us to be after the 1996 conference?
Mr. Dykes
It will be best if my hon. Friend succeeds in catching your eye, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that he can deal with those matters himself.
Mr. Harry Barnes
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Dykes
I will not because I am aware of the time and I wish to be fair to other hon. Members.
Although our debate today will continue until 2 am, there is a long list of hon. Members who wish to speak and I promised to be brief.
The difference between pre-Maastricht and post-Maastricht is potentially profound, exciting and striking.
Until the treaty was concluded last week — it will be signed at the end of February — the provisions of the treaty of Rome had remained creaking, distorted and hard to fulfil.
All that is now transformed.
The new machine of European union has inexorably started to run.
It will not be long before the circumstances in this country — I do not refer to a change of Government at the next election, which I profoundly do not wish to see — allow us to catch up in the two key areas which were subjected to further delay on this occasion.
It will be a matter of catching up.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
All sensible people want the maximum co-operation in Europe, especially when we remember the horrific wars our continent endured.
We want the maximum unity, friendship, co-operation and trade to raise the standards of living and prosperity of all our peoples.
The questions are: how do we achieve that and what sort of an alliance and what model of European unity do we want?
Do we want to create a megastate or a union or commonwealth of democratic, self-governing countries?
Once again at Maastricht, Britain appeared as the odd man out.
Throughout this story, Britain has often appeared to be the odd man out.
On one issue, we said no, but on another we said maybe.
We should ask why, time after time, Britain seems to be the odd man out.
One of the main reasons is that our system of democratic parliamentary self-government is incompatible with the Brussels machine, which has an unelected Commission with the sole power of initiative and right of veto, a Council of Ministers which legislates in secret, the so-called Parliament, which is not really a Parliament, has no roots in this country and will never be the focus of the hopes, aspirations and loyalties of our people, and a Community court, which in many ways is a political court and engine of federalism, standing above Parliament.
That apparatus does not fit with parliamentary self-government.
It already makes us do things that we do not want to do and stops us doing things that we want to do.
A second reason is perhaps that we have not obtained many of the much-trumpeted benefits that we were promised from the original Common Market.
We were told that there would be substantial benefits to our balance of trade, but, in fact, we had a multi-billion pound deficit inflicted on us.
There has been no reform of the common agricultural policy and the average British family now pays about £17 a week extra for its food.
This year we are paying into the Common Market budget about £2.5 billion more than we receive in order to subsidise richer countries.
We give more money to the Common Market budget than we give in aid to the third world.
What sense is there in that?
Let us think what we could do with that £2.5 billion in the health or education services.
Another possible reason is the deceit.
Our people have often not been told the truth.
Our political leaders have always moved in a crab-like fashion, saying one thing but doing another.
Let us cast our minds back to the referendum.
In the Government's manifesto which was sent to every household it was clearly stated that there would be no political union.
The manifesto also said that there had been a threat of economic and monetary union which would have brought unemployment, but that that threat had been removed.
We often hear talk of trains.
We were not told where the train was going, but we were told that we must all clamber aboard or we should be left behind.
I always objected to the idea that everything is predetermined and that we have no choice.
That is a fundamentally undemocratic argument.
Maastricht has brought us some clarity, because we now know where the train is supposed to be heading.
The original draft treaty spoke blatantly of a’ federal vocation’.
Those words have been taken out and replaced by’ an ever closer union’but what is the difference?
There is none — it is merely semantic juggling.
The people who inserted those words have not changed their minds.
They made great strides at Maastricht and moved the train or conveyor belt a long way forward towards federalism.
Of course, they did not get all that they wanted, but they will be back for more.
Already, there are plans for another intergovernmental conference in 1996 and they already have a timetable for economic and monetary union.
The mythical train has not only a destination but a timetable.
We are told that federalism means different things to different people, that it is a benign arrangement which does not centralise but pushes power downwards to the people and the regions and that it is based on subsidiarity.
I think that that is another deception.
Let us consider economic and monetary union and a single currency.
What happens to economic and monetary policy, to interest rates, exchange rates, budgetary policy, taxing and spending which are the substantial bread-and-butter issues of our politics?
Where do they go?
Do they go downwards?
Of course not — they go upwards.
All those vital issues are to be rigidly centralised and that is the crux of the matter.
All of our economic life is to be decided by an unelected, unaccountable single central bank.
That is not democracy or power to the people — it is all power to an autarchy of unaccountable conservative central bankers.
That might be the heart of Europe, but it is certainly not the heart of socialism.
The highly centralised single bank will be a law unto itself.
It will be beyond the reach of the ballot box.
Governments would have to undertake solemnly not to seek to influence it.
I cannot conceive of anything more objectionable, more retrograde or more reactionary.
If such highly centralised decision-making
Mr. Quentin Davies (Stamford and Spalding)
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Leighton
No, because we do not have time.
If we had such highly centralised decision-making it would not matter who won elections or who was Chancellor of the Exchequer, because such issues would be decided elsewhere.
The electorates of each country would be stripped of their powers.
There would be no subsidiarity in monetary policy.
Short-term interest rates would be uniform — identical throughout the area.
Regardless of local circumstances, they would be the same in Glasgow as in Naples; the same in Lisbon as in Berlin.
There would be no local flexibility.
We already have the first stage of economic and monetary union — the exchange rate mechanism — and it is already doing great damage to Britain.
Everybody agrees that the present rate of inflation would justify a cut in interest rates — British industry is crying out for one.
Yet we cannot have a cut because interest rates are now set, not according to the needs of our domestic economy, but for the sole purpose of propping up the pound in its ERM band, thus prolonging the recession.
That will do great damage, but even after all the pain that it will inflict, it will fail.
It is always dangerous to prophesy, but I am prepared to do so and say that it will not be possible to hold the pound at DM2.95.
Our inflation rate is now coming down to approach German levels — but any fool can do that by recession, by knocking the economy flat on its back and by causing mass unemployment.
That is the economics of the graveyard.
We are also told that wage increases have to come down to German levels, and there has been some movement in that direction.
The important factor, however, is unit labour costs, and they are decided by productivity.
As a result of deflation, productivity in Britain went down last year, whereas in Germany it went up.
So while unit labour costs in Germany increased by 3 per cent., in Britain they increased by 11 per cent .
With a fixed exchange rate, that means that Britain loses competitiveness, and will continue to do so on a cumulative basis.
That all means that we pretend that the pound is worth what it is not.
To see what happens when people pretend that a currency is worth what it is not we have only to consider Germany's monetary union.
The Germans pretended that an east mark was worth the same as a west mark.
At a stroke, overnight, east German industry was knocked out, and the work force was made redundant.
The exchange rate mechanism benefits the stronger economies, especially the German economy.
It builds in and reinforces their dominance, but it damages the weaker economies.
The Select Committee on Employment took evidence from a variety of sources on the effect of ERM on Italy and France.
It found that the system had inflicted an extra 1 million unemployed on Italy and more than half a million on France, and had slowed both countries' economic growth.
The ERM is a high-unemployment club, with a slow growth rate.
Already it is having the same effect on Britain.
We have high and growing unemployment, and under those policies that high unemployment is built in for the whole of the 1990s, along with recession and slow growth.
Our public services are crumbling, our schools are rotting, our health service waiting lists are growing and our railways are not working — all because our economy has not produced the growth to pay for them.
The ERM means that that situation will be perpetuated throughout the 1990s.
While we have separate currencies a poor economic performance will show up as a balance of payments deficit — but with a single currency that warning signal would disappear, and a poor performance would show up by whole regions or countries becoming depressed and blighted areas afflicted with mass unemployment.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Llanelli (Mr. Davies) explained, at Maastricht not a single word was spoken about full employment.
Full employment is no longer an aim of economic policy.
Everything — growth, employment and prosperity — is to be subordinated and sacrificed to pegging the exchange rate of the pound.
That means that people — human beings, flesh and blood — are sacrificed to an arid, dogmatic, mistaken theory of money.
Money is to be the master, not the servant.
The Labour party's role should be to bring those matters under democratic control and not to surrender them to remote, unaccountable central bankers.
What we had at Maastricht was old hat; it was living in a time warp.
Since the Delors committee reported, the whole world, especially Europe, has changed.
The Berlin wall has come down.
We have had the collapse of the totalitarian regimes.
New democracies have been born, struggling against appalling odds to find their feet, with hyper-inflation and national rivalries.
Those are the new issues, priorities and dangers.
What was the response to all that at Maastricht?
Half our continent is an area of instability and need.
There are a dozen states asking to join and participate in an all-European economic and political arrangement.
That is the great historic opportunity.
What did we do?
What happened at Maastricht?
The whole issue was virtually ignored.
Instead, they want to waste the next decade poring over the details of economic and monetary union rather than dealing with the real issues confronting Europe.
The more we deepen — to use the jargon — the Community, the more obstacles we put in front of eastern Europe.
How do we imagine that the Poles could put the zloty in the exchange rate mechanism?
How could the lev or the rouble be put in the ERM?
We are building new obstacles and barriers.
Our experience of multilingual and multinational federations has not been very good.
There was one in central Africa, which collapsed.
There was one in the Caribbean, which collapsed.
Even in Canada, there are problems in Quebec.
After the recent elections, even Brussels cannot govern itself and it looks as if the multilingual state of Belgium is about to collapse.
There are the problems in Yugoslavia and in the Soviet Union, where a federation is moving towards some kind of commonwealth of independent states.
Maastricht was not the last word on the development and future of Europe.
It was the wrong agenda.
In the next decade — and let us bear in mind the next intergovernmental conference — there will be different Ministers who may have different ideas.
They will learn from experience.
I am convinced that the prospect held out at Maastricht will not be the prospect that we shall have at the end of the 1990s.
Mr. Bowen Wells (Hertford and Stortford)
I hope that the Maastricht treaties will be the high water mark of federalism in Europe.
That will be proved to be so because of the dogged, persistent and brilliant negotiating work by the Prime Minister, the Foreign Secretary and his two Ministers of State, especially my good friend the Member for Watford (Mr. Garel-Jones).
They have persistently insisted that the treaty we signed contained agreements to enhance democracy within Europe, within the Commission and within the European Parliament, and at the same time embraced closer European union by means of getting agreements between the Governments of the Twelve on foreign policy, security matters and matters connected with home affairs.
The means of negotiation has profound implications for our democracy, for the accountability of Europe to the electorates of Europe and for the accountability of Ministers to their national Parliaments.
It is right that we should consider tonight the question how we enhance the democracy, responsibility and accountability of the European institutions and of our own Ministers to the national Parliament.
On European monetary union, it seems to me that it has long been the cherished aim of Conservative Governments to find a means by which we could control the value of our currency — to make it predictable in its exchange rate, as it was for much of the 19th century.
In that time, we were tied to the gold standard, which we found to be inadequate and inflexible, especially as it depended in part on the mining activities in the gold mines of South Africa and the Soviet Union.
We abandoned that after the war for the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates.
We did not at the time think that we were sacrificing sovereignty to join that system.
It ushered in a period of expansion over the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s the like of which the world had rarely seen.
It is essential that we should find a way to control our currency and to make it stable.
I believe that joining a European monetary union with a single European currency would be a good way to achieve that.
However, we should not do that if we joined at the wrong exchange rate — as happened, as the hon. Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) explained, with eastern Germany.
We should have the right not to join when the timetable date is reached in respect of the present European monetary union treaty.
We would be foolish to join if that meant serious dislocation of our social, economic and unemployment situations.
I wish that all members of the Community had reserved a similar power not to join, but that was not to be.
We have an extra lever in the establishment of European monetary union, because, in contradiction of what the hon. Member for Edinburgh, Central (Mr. Darling) and the Leader of the Opposition said, we are going to be fully involved in the negotiations for the establishment of the central bank and the way in which it will operate.
I hope that we will now discuss how to make that central bank responsible and accountable.
That must be achieved not simply through ECOFIN, but through all 12 national Parliaments involving the Finance Ministers and Prime Ministers of the 12 countries.
The decisions taken in the three pillars to which I have referred — security, foreign affairs and home affairs — should come back to this place for a decision whether the policies adopted at those Councils are correct.
We must pay particular attention to the declaration at the end of the treaty about the role of the national Parliament.
We in this House have a serious point to address in that respect.
In addition to the three pillars that I have mentioned, we must consider the accountability of the European Council that will be the principal means of establishing policy.
The Council of Heads of Government meets without a published agenda that we can discuss before meetings are held, and it meets in absolute secrecy.
At the moment, we in the national Parliaments simply receive the press releases that the Heads of Government decide to release after the events have occurred and policies have been made.
That is a thoroughly unsatisfactory way of calling our Heads of Government and that Council to democratic account for their actions to this House and to our people.
The increased qualified majority voting in the Council of Ministers, to which we have agreed in the treaty, means that we must have a way of keeping our national Parliaments better informed than they are at present.
The word’ federalism’is seriously misinterpreted and misunderstood.
It is an example of the ability of the Twelve to misunderstand one another.
Only if delegations from this House regularly meet delegations from other national Parliaments will we be able to understand the arguments, appreciate them and become sympathetic to the problems facing other member states.
In that way, we will generate the consensus that is absolutely essential in a democracy ruled by a democratically elected Parliament and, indeed, by an executive in Brussels.
As soon as we can after the next election, we must consider how we are able to carry out those essential functions if the European union is to be democratically accountable.
That means bringing members of the European Parliament into the House and into our Committees.
Members of the European Parliament receive warning of matters that are to be discussed by the Commission and by the various pillars and councils that have been established by the treaty.
The treaty has advanced Europe, but it is a Europe of nations which is on trial.
Unless the European union works properly, democratically and accountably, we will begin to revert to the horror of a supranational federal Europe which we all fear, and which the majority of people in this country and most hon. Members will reject.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
As one who joined the Labour party to support my predecessor John Mackintosh as a great European enthusiast, I take great pleasure in the position that has been taken by my party in recent months on this important issue.
I passionately favour the increased co-operation within the European Community and the developments that are taking place.
However, I am very sad that the Government — for the next few months, anyway — are trying to drag their heels and opt out of so many important aspects of what the Community is doing.
The hon. Member for Hertford and Stortford (Mr. Wells) said that he wanted more democratisation of the institutions of the Community.
I heartily agree with him, and I suspect that that is really an argument in favour of federalism in due course — I would not necessarily be too frightened of taking that course.
It probably will evolve, but no doubt slowly.
However, the hon. Gentleman cannot expect me to agree with his preface, in which he said that his right hon. Friend the Prime Minister had negotiated brilliantly.
If the Prime Minister was brilliant, he was certainly spectacularly outshone in the opening speeches.
My right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition wiped the floor with the Prime Minister, and never has that been more spectacularly done.
The Prime Minister must be a considerable disappointment to his hon. Friends.
He is certainly a bitter disappointment to people in this country.
He will be labelled the drop-out Prime Minister.
He is dropping out of progress for our people in the European Community.
It is worth dwelling for a couple of seconds on what he has dropped out of.
It is a great shame that the social chapter has been excised from the treaty.
Annex IV of the draft treaty on European union refers to the’ Agreement concluded between the member states of the European Community with the exception of the United Kingdom.’
It goes on to state:’ The undersigned eleven have agreed’to article 117, which states:’The Community and its Member States shall have as their objectives the promotion of employment, improved living and working conditions, proper social protection, dialogue between management and labour, the development of human resources with a view to lasting high employment and the combating of exclusion.’
That is what the Prime Minister went to Maastricht to exclude Britain from.
It seems extraordinary that a British Prime Minister can represent such a betrayal of the interests of millions of people in Britain as a victory for British interests.
Yet that is the giant con that has been peddled in the Conservative press in recent weeks.
It will not stand up to examination by the electorate in the coming election campaign.
One aspect of Britain's opting out of the social charter is that it must surely undermine the single market.
The Prime Minister says that it is an advantage to have low wages and longer working hours and that that will attract investors who want to take advantage of bargain basement labour.
If that is so, presumably costs to industry will be that much lower here than in the rest of Europe, so there will not be equal competition with enterprises in the other 11 nations of the European Community.
There will no longer be a level playing field and the single market will be undermined.
Mr. Quentin Davies rose
Mr. Home Robertson
The hon. Gentleman should perhaps concentrate on feeding his sheep rather than intervene in the debate at this stage.
Mr. Quentin Davies
The hon. Gentleman has obviously recognised that the Prime Minister secured for us a major competitive advantage at Maastricht.
The hon. Gentleman said so himself.
We have a different regime from the other 11 member states, one which is more competitive.
Is it not a considerable tribute to our diplomacy that we were able to persuade our Community partners to allow us to gain an advantage over them?
Mr. Home Robertson
The hon. Member for Stamford and Spalding (Mr. Davies) seems to want to treat the work force of the United Kingdom in the same way as he treats his sheep.
Yes, the Prime Minister has negotiated a set of circumstances in which it will be possible for employers in Britain to pay lower wages and work their employees for longer hours in worse conditions than their competitors on mainland Europe.
That may be the competitive advantage that the hon. Gentleman wants for his constituents, but I do not want it for mine.
It is important that we should recognise that Britain's opting out of the social chapter will create difficulties because the European single market will no longer be a level playing field.
There will be a downside to that.
We cannot expect our competitors on mainland Europe to put up with such discrimination.
We are building up problems for ourselves.
It must be a matter of concern that Britain will become a semi-detached part of the European Community.
In this debate, we are confronted with a squalid abdication by the Government of responsibility to the British people.
The Government deserve to be condemned by the electorate, as they surely will be.
However, I am confident that the European Community will continue to progress in the direction in which it has been driving — and rightly so — for the benefit of all our citizens and citizens on the mainland of Europe.
I am confident that the Labour party will put Britain back into the main stream of Europe as soon as a Labour Government is elected.
That will be a good thing for our citizens and for business and enterprises in the United Kingdom.
We keep hearing comments tonight — we also heard them in the debate before the Maastricht summit — about sovereignty.
People talk about the great sanctity of the sovereignty of Parliament.
Who is kidding whom that a middle-size country such as the United Kingdom is sovereign in the modern world?
Are we sovereign in defence, in our dealings with multinational corporations or in any significant matter?
No, we are not.
The only way in which we can achieve sovereignty is by sharing it.
By sharing our sovereignty with our partners in the European Community, we can begin to achieve some realistic control and influence over events.
I say that with the most heartfelt
Mr. Richard Shepherd (Aldridge-Brownhills)
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Home Robertson
The hon. Gentleman must forgive me: I want to be fair to other hon. Members who have been here for a long time.
As a Scot, I speak about shared sovereignty with great feeling.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Saffron Walden (Mr. Haselhurst), who acknowledged that there was shared sovereignty within the United Kingdom.
The sovereignty of the people I represent has been shared with the English since 1707.
It has not necessarily been a good thing in all ways, and there has certainly been a downside.
We have lost a lot, and there are ways to improve the structure of the United Kingdom which would improve democracy and accountability in our government.
That is why I am passionately committed to establishing a Parliament in Scotland, and home rule for Scotland within the United Kingdom and within Europe.
However, it has surely been to the mutual advantage of the people of Scotland and England that we have had that union for the past two and a half centuries.
It has been of considerable economic advantage to both countries.
I am sad to say that some Conservative Members and one or two of my hon. Friends seem to have a little Englander mentality.
The narrow nationalism expressed by people who want to cling to total sovereignty for the United Kingdom is rather like the arguments we hear from Scottish and Welsh nationalists — unrealistic and out of date.
It is wrong for any realistic person to pursue such outmoded attitudes, especially anyone in government.
I am sad that the Government, in their dying months, have decided to cop out of the main stream in Europe.
I look forward to the day, in a few months' time, when my right hon. Friend the Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) will be getting back into the main stream of that debate and participating fully in the European Community for the benefit of all our citizens.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
Thank you for calling me, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I know that the winding-up speeches have to start soon, so I shall be brief and leave out much of what I wanted to say.
I can cover the issue by associating myself wholly with the speeches by my hon. Friends the Members for Saffron Walden (Mr. Haselhurst) and for Crawley (Mr. Soames), who said precisely what I think.
European idealism brought me into politics in the first place.
I fundamentally believe in Britain as a part of Europe.
Therefore, I welcome the tone and scope of the treaty that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister negotiated at Maastricht.
I shall home in on the social action programme and the declaration on racism and xenophobia, which was separate from the main treaty, but was signed at Maastricht.
As background, there is no doubt that many black, Asian and Jewish British people are deeply concerned at racial attacks in the United Kingdom and even more concerned about what is happening in continental Europe.
They ask what 1992 means for them.
They are especially worried about the success of the Vlaams Blok party in the elections last month in Belgium, about the rise of the Deutsche Volksunion and Republikaner parties in Germany and by the high opinion poll ratings of the national front, led by the odious Jean-Marie Le Pen in France.
They will welcome enormously the steps forward that have been made in the signing of the new declaration on racism and xenophobia, especially the penultimate paragraph, which states:’ The European Council asks Ministers and the Commission to increase their effort to combat discrimination and xenophobia, and to strengthen the legal protection for third country nationals’.
Although the declaration was proposed by the Dutch presidency, British Ministers were its main friends during the discussions.
They stopped it being watered down and prevented the part about combating discrimination from being taken out.
I also welcome the role that the British Government played in this important new move.
There is no doubt that Britain does lead, in the sense that it is the only country with a comprehensive framework of race relations law.
Our reputation is high on this, as is that of the Commission for Racial Equality.
However, freedom of movement is limited to EC nationals only, and a significant proportion of Britain's ethnic minorities have citizenship of their country of origin and therefore will not be able to move freely within the Community.
There have been some moves forward on this.
The Commission, the European Parliament and the International Labour Organisation have discussed extensively the possibility of extending freedom of movement to third-country nationals.
My concern is that the single market simply will not be able to operate effectively while one important part of the labour force lacks mobility.
I look forward to a directive under the social action programme.
I welcome the declaration, which is a big step forward, but, given British experience and law, we could have had a directive in which we could have taken the lead.
I ask my hon. Friend the Minister to look at that.
Britain has set the European Community on a course that I wholly applaud — an ever closer union of nation states.
We have set the tone for the future, and that is to be greatly welcomed.
I have been looking for that ever since I first became involved in politics.
Mr. George Robertson (Hamilton)
This has been an interesting and wide-ranging debate, in which some notable contributions have been made.
It is unfortunate that some speakers in the debate — for example, the Prime Minister — have cast doubt on the quality of the debate on these momentous issues in other European Community countries.
We have had more debates on these issues, but it is insulting to suggest that our partners do not give them sufficient attention.
A debate that starts at 3.30 in the afternoon and goes on until 2 o'clock in the morning is hardly an advert for open government.
It would have been better to hold the debate during the day, when television coverage would have taken the views of hon. Members to a wider public.
Mr. Andrew Hargreaves (Birmingham, Hall Green)
The hon. Gentleman has referred to what my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister said.
However, to take an example at random, how many times does the hon. Gentleman think that the Bundestag discussed the Maastricht agreement before it was signed?
Mr. Robertson
Regularly.
If the hon. Gentleman had been in earlier, he would have heard the hon. Member for Harrow, East (Mr. Dykes) saying that last week he had attended a debate on this subject in the Bundestag.
The hon. Gentleman would do better if he chose his targets with more precision.
Much discussion took place in both the Bundestag and the federal German Bundesrat about the content of the intergovernmental conferences.
Although our debates on this subject have attracted a flurry of interest, attendances at debates on the European Community are not noted for their large size.
Among the outstanding speeches made today, I have to mention that of my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition.
I hear from those who have not been imprisoned in the debate for a long time that the electronic media have reported well the exchanges that took place.
The political reporters on all stations have paid tribute to the outstanding contribution made by my right hon. Friend, and the way in which he trumped the sporting aphorisms of the Prime Minister, used in the orchestrated triumph that we have had to live through in the past few weeks from a Government rocked on their heels by the assault from the Opposition today.
I start on the same note as the Prime Minister and my right hon. Friend — by recognising the historic nature of the events through which we are living.
Last night — or was it the night before?— I was in the House of Commons Library when a number of hon. Members commented when the Ceefax screen put up the headline’ Soviet Union to end on 31st December.’
We can now believe that nothing is impossible in politics.
Everything is changing rapidly and beyond all recognition.
That is why the Maastricht summit was always going to be important well beyond its paper agenda.
It represented a unique western European opportunity to grab control at that supreme moment of time and to consolidate the structure of what is one of the few secure fixtures in this fast-changing continent that we inhabit.
In many senses Maastricht did just that.
Mr. Gerald Howarth (Cannock and Burntwood)
My hon. Friend is quite wrong on this.
The Government may have decided that membership of the exchange rate mechanism should be managed in such a way that we do not devalue, but if we wish to devalue, we can.
My hon. Friend's remarks about a single currency alarm me greatly because I much admire his intellect, not to mention the fluency of his speech.
But I urge him to accept that a single currency, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) made clear the other day, means a massive transfer of political and economic power to the centre.
Mr. Davies
My hon. Friend and I share many ideas, including, I believe, those on monetary policy.
Although the gold standard is no longer practical, it was not a bad thing.
It was not a destructive episode in the monetary history of humanity.
When we adhered to the gold standard, the House had no say in monetary policy because the money supply was dictated arbitrarily and objectively by the volume of gold discovered in the world.
I doubt whether our predecessors in this place before 1914 thought that the powers of the House were compromised or undermined as a result.
If we are to adopt a single currency, we must achieve the theoretical advantages which are there to be grasped.
If we are to achieve those in practice, we must first prepare the ground carefully.
I pay tribute to the convergence criteria, which were largely a British proposal.
Secondly, we should consider carefully the statutes of the monetary institution.
The document before us goes a long way towards providing for the independence of the monetary institution, which will be a crucial element in the success of a single currency.
However, I should like to go further and suggest that the minimum term of appointment of the governors of the institution should be eight rather than five years, to ensure that it goes way beyond the electoral cycle of any member state.
I should prefer that the appointments are not given to the governors of the banks of individual member states.
It would be undesirable if governors from the central banks of member states felt that they had, in some way, to be the advocates of the interests of their own member states.
If the project is to be successful, it is vital that, as with the Swiss national bank, when the board of that monetary institution meets, it has only one consideration in mind — how to reconcile the requirements of price stability and liquidity in the Community as a whole.
Having achieved this excellent treaty of Maastricht and secured the derogation on monetary policy, by which the Government have set so much store, may I make a plea to them?
In the morrow of great victory, will they show some equanimity and, above all, not give business in this country or abroad the impression that in practice we are any less committed to a single currency than any of the Twelve or that we are any less likely to be a part of it?
If that impression were unfortunately given — I am sure that it will not be — investment from both British and international investors, would be deflected from this country and it would go to the continent to other areas likely to adopt the single currency.
Moreover, in that event, it might become difficult to manage our parity in the years leading up to 1996-97.
Those currencies which currently belong to the exchange rate mechanism and are not perceived by the markets as likely to join at least the first echelon of a single currency may come under pressure in the market.
People will be reluctant to hold them, and that would have unfortunate consequences in the form of higher interest rates.
It is also important for the City to ensure that the central bank and monetary institution come here.
I totally accept the assurances that I have received that the derogation negotiated at Maastricht does not reduce our chances of having the central bank in the City of London.
I take great comfort from that assurance.
I look forward to this country being in the vanguard of the single currency because of the advantages that it will bring us and the Community.
We shall be there thanks to the excellent monetary and economic management that we have enjoyed in the 1980s and will continue to enjoy for the rest of the 1990s under a Conservative Government.
Rev. Martin Smyth (Belfast, South)
I shall mention some of the issues to which the hon. Member for Stamford and Spalding (Mr. Davies) referred, although there seemed to be a lack of logic in his remarks because he cheered the Government on while encouraging them to be careful.
Unlike the Labour party, my party was at least prepared to table an amendment to the motion, so I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate.
People sometimes think of Northern Ireland Members as isolationists, but we have always played a role within the United Kingdom.
Although the United Kingdom is on the continental shelf, it has played a positive part in Europe's history.
Our people have regularly rallied to save Europe from military and political dictatorships.
Religiously, to go to the other extreme, we were partners in giving Europe a living Christian faith.
Northern Ireland, as part of the United Kingdom, shared in that significantly as the old Celtic Christian church sent missionaries throughout the continent, and there were Ulstermen in the Napoleonic war and both world wars.
We are not isolationist, but we question whether incipient integration is actually the way forward.
Reference has been made to economic and monetary union, which have played a role in the discussions.
Closet federal Europeans earlier maintained that the EC was merely a gigantic free trade area; now they boldly affirm that political and monetary union were always at the heart of the treaty of Rome.
The Prime Minister has returned from Maastricht and claimed that federalism and the opening of the door to a delayed decision on monetary union is the successful result of his able negotiations.
What is the reality?
Although the countries of the European Free Trade Association had worked out trade arrangements with the Community, recent decisions of the European Court ruled them to be incompatible with the treaty of Rome.
I shall take up some of the comments of the hon. Member for Stamford and Spalding on a single currency.
I do not believe that it will necessarily enhance trade opportunities; I think that those who have argued that have done so superficially.
Japan has not found the fluctuations of the yen against the dollar and European currencies a serious barrier to its ability to increase exports.
The United Kingdom sharply increased its volume of exports to the United States in the 1980s, when the dollar gyrated wildly.
Let us compare that with our experience in the EC.
I am glad that two Treasury Ministers are present.
Perhaps the Chancellor, when he winds up, will he confirm that we have maintained a huge, if diminishing, trade deficit with the EC, amounting to a total loss since 1978 — if my figures are correct — of £54,270 million, as against a profit in trade with the rest of the world of £75,186 million.
Therefore, is it surprising that the Ulster Unionist party pleads for a wider vision and a clear protection of our interests and those of the old Commonwealth countries in any new European arrangements?
During those 23 years, what one might term our membership fees in Europe have shown net outflow of at least £15,036 million according to the 1991 HMSO Pink Book.
The Government regularly claim that they want value for money.
Are we obtaining that in Europe?
The Confederation of British Industry has stated that the agreement is good for business.
British business and industry must sell itself better, certainly in Europe, and maintain its markets with the rest of the world, which may turn away from us as we turn more towards Europe.
Some might well say,’ Ask not what Europe can do for the United Kingdom, but what the United Kingdom can do for Europe.’
However, it might be more salutary to ask: what part of Europe?
Perhaps we can be of greater help by standing further apart from the new colossus, bridging the world with our American, African and Asian connections, as well as greater European contacts.
We should bear in mind one narrower aspect: the principle of subsidiarity, through which democratic processes should be devolved to Northern Ireland — and I also echo the cries from Scotland and Wales.
The European grants, correctly assigned to Northern Ireland due to its isolation within the market and its relative poverty, should not be gobbled up by parsimonious Treasury Ministers as they hide behind the concept of additionality.
I have for a long time been suspicious of the doctrine of gradualism in politics and the foibles of the Foreign Office, which uses the double-speak of diplomacy, as I saw in the Anglo-Irish diktat and now smell in Maastricht.
We have been assured that major European policy decisions, especially on foreign affairs, will have to be unanimous.
However, as has already been mentioned, Germany quickly broke ranks with the rest of the EC and the world over Croatia, which led, in the words of our Foreign Secretary, to’ an acceptable compromise’.
Perhaps we can find some hidden logic if we compare Chancellor Kohl's statement of 28 November when he said:’ European economic and political union is irreversible.’
His headlong flight to recognise Croatian independence also helped lead to the fragmentation of Yugoslavia — a part of Europe.
Will other’ acceptable compromises’be imposed?
What is the Government's view within the European family on those countries that have accepted and signed the treaty of Rome and the Helsinki agreement?
Those treaties accept the territorial boundaries of member states, yet the countries that sign them blithely ignore their undertakings.
Gibraltar is one such glaring example and, nearer home, the false claim of the Irish Republic is another.
It broke the international agreement of 1925 and, in its 1937 constitution, made de jure claim over Northern Ireland.
For years, that was shrugged off merely as an aspiration or dismissed as Unionist propaganda, not to be taken literally or seriously.
Now the Belfast newspaper, the Irish News, argues for the retention of such a claim in articles 2 and 3, while the Dublin Supreme Court described the matter as a’ constitutional imperative’.
We have referred to promises and understandings given in the European context.
Promises were given at Sunningdale in 1973 that articles 2 and 3 were to be withdrawn and were repeated before Hillsborough in 1985.
The improper claim remains as a spur to terrorists, proxy bombers for those who see the claim as a’ constitutional imperative’.
What is the position in Europe, where we recognise each other as partners?
I believe that the Irish Republic should join the democratic countries in the new Europe and renounce such a claim, as Germany did over Alsace and Lorraine.
The reunited east and west Germany had to endorse the Oder-Neisse line before it was recognised.
The Ulster Unionist position on that is clear from our amendment.
We maintain the integrity of our nation as we promote better relations between neighbours.
At this season of the year we should remind ourselves of the parable that neighbours are not simply the people who live next door, rich friends, or even merely those with whom we agree.
In that context, I trust that we as a nation will continue to maintain our integrity and influence.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
It is now almost 7 o'clock and the Standing Order limiting speeches to 10 minutes must be applied.
Mr. Richard Shepherd (Aldridge-Brownhills)
It is an honour to follow the remarks addressed to the House by the hon. Member for Belfast, South (Rev. Martin Smyth).
Like him, I am a member of a union.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is formed by people with one language, with sentiments in common and by their feeling and will to make it work.
That is the union that I understand.
Today we are considering a union of Europe, and I do not know how to relate to it.
I listened with interest to my hon. Friend the Member for Stamford and Spalding (Mr. Davies), who almost conveyed the impression that he had been parachuted in to an Amazonian jungle in which democratic accountability plays no role, and that we needed the benefit of a judgment on arbitrage and merger policy from New York city.
Ours is a democratic country, in which democratic accountability lies at the heart of the relationship between the citizen and the state.
The House will have noticed how assiduous the Leader of the Opposition was yesterday in not speaking one word about democracy and how the peoples of this land hold their Governments to account.
Nor did he raise one word about the history of his own great movement, about the fact that the working people of this country were urged to organise and to use their vote, through which they could change the policies under which they lived.
In our democratic age, that is essential to the concept of our rule of law.
We expect the law to be enforced, we expect it to be held because every citizen who lives under that law may change it.
In the treaty of union, where is the mechanism by which we may change the law?
Where is the mechanism whereby we may hold Ministers accountable?
We have witnessed the reduction of a great Department of State — the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food — to a branch office in Whitehall.
Our farmers, seeking retribution or justice, and our consumers, who are equally seeking those concepts, now have to go to Brussels, for there is no way in which we may satisfy their aspirations.
We have handed over that power.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe), the former Foreign Secretary, advanced some curious concepts of constitutional independence.
If constitutional independence is what sovereignty is, I do not know how one can reduce it by pooling it.
That is a contradiction in terms.
Sovereignty says nothing about the state one lives in, whether it is a democracy or an autocracy, but it means constitutional independence.
That is what has been at issue since the Single European Act — I was not here before that — and today with the treaty of union.
I cannot give over any of the powers that I, as a Member of Parliament, elected by the citizens of Aldridge-Brownhills — and each of us elected by our respective constituents — was given when I came to this Parliament.
Yet every leading member of the Government and the Opposition talks as if we were merely bankers.
Our country, as a nation, has a spirit and will — it is much bigger than merely the mechanisms of markets.
We are humbled and brought low by them, but the spirit of man — and I now have to say woman — and the freedoms that we enjoy lie within our grasp as long as we hold this House.
That is what we have lost, in the sense that the people scorn us because of the way we march to tunes through the Lobby.
We can no longer represent their wills or their expression.
Of course we scorn that.
We came here knowing that, if injustice existed, we could set it right.
The Leader of the Labour party — of all parties — yesterday stood there and talked about passing away the power to redress the grievances of our citizens.
The speed limit on our motorways was reduced the other day, and I give a cheer for that.
For years, I have wanted the Government to reduce the speeds of lorries and buses going down the M1 and the M6, but Europe did it.
It imposed it on our system of government, and now we cannot change it, whether it was right or wrong.
Since John Locke and the formation of our constitution through the late 18th and the 19th centuries, the question has been, where does authority lie?
We do not have sovereignty in this House; it is a shorthand for the sovereignty of the people.
That is who we represent, and those are the arguments that we have to judge.
Is it not shaming that the leaders of great parties cannot tell us that they are asking us to set aside our ability to live under laws that we set?
Hitherto, when they asked us to obey those laws, we have known that we could change them, but hereafter a combination of people with different languages, understandings and cultures can set, and are by combination setting, upon us standards, rules and laws which may be suitable for Greece, central or northern Europe, France or Spain but which are not right for us.
We have a choice.
So many hon. Members have poured scorn, but what makes a political society work?
The greatest level of polity — political organisation — is democratic self-government.
There is no higher form of government.
One can expand the boundaries, and because it is the sentiment of the people that one should expand the boundaries, it has manifestly worked for nearly two centuries in the United Kingdom.
We break that trust by handing over power to unelected people without any mechanism for changing their decisions.
How can people have faith in us if we hold our job to redress the grievances of those who set us here as unimportant?
I urge those on both Front Benches to reflect on how they can make up for that democratic lack.
The great Labour party — which brought together militants, because it thought that they knew what they could do for the working people of this country — is scornfully setting democracy aside.
I watched its bemused leader struggling with economic concepts which he can barely grasp.
I say this with scorn, because the leader of the Labour party can no longer hold out to his people the prospect that they may change the law through this place.
Were the Labour party to have the trust of its people, it could legislate for every item in the social chapter tomorrow.
It could make that the central point of its election manifesto if it is so profoundly excited by it.
Then it could justify to the people the costs and benefits associated with it.
Why does the Labour party want others to introduce those measures?
Is it because the Labour party does not believe that it could convince the people, on its own terms, that those are meritorious things to do?
We must ask the question, why?
Is it because the Labour party feels that it could not convince the people but could achieve its objectives through a centralist bureaucracy in Europe — rather than through argument and persuading its own people?
Mr. Quentin Davies rose
Mr. Shepherd
No, I shall not give way.
How do we control that process?
No one is tackling that.
Ministers are saying,’ We good fellows will talk together, and we'll come up with a decision.’
What will happen?
Let us assume that 100 per cent.
of the people in this country dislike or profoundly object to a law.
What do they do?
Let us think back to the proposition of the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn), who reminded us of our history.
We changed law by riot.
That is not the way.
That is not the sort of society that I would wish to belong to.
The tensions of racism and fascism are rising in Europe — all the things which we resolutely moved armies to defeat in the past.
By holding on to that possession, the people of this country would be able to hold on to the banners of freedom.
We have watched eastern Europe grapple for freedom and the liberty that we enjoy, yet I have heard the House of Commons talk solemnly as if this were merely a question of a pile of money at one end of a table or the issuing of financial intruments.
It is not — it is about the spirit and life of a nation.
I cannot let this go down — sinking — without leastways an exclamation mark and a cry,’ It is wrong.’
Mr. Bruce George (Walsall, South)
It is an honour to follow the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd), who is a near neighbour.
I hope that the Hansard writers will be able to capture the spirit in which his speech was given.
It struck me as being very 19th century in its oratory, and I compliment him.
In many ways the hon. Gentleman's speech was 20 years too late, because the horse has bolted.
The arguments about whether to join the European Community were won or lost two decades ago.
I campaigned against continuing British membership in 1975, and we lost.
I am not an enthusiastic European, but we cannot turn back.
We must try to meet many of the objections made by the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills.
Clearly the Community is not a democratic institution.
However, the cry for a return to an era of independence and economic autonomy for Britain is not an available option, so we must make the best deals possible in the circumstances in which we find ourselves.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. Nicholas Bennett)
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, North (Mr. Jones) on securing the debate, which is much prized.
It is an example of his assiduous, hard-working and caring role as a constituency Member that he has raised this matter which he feels is of great importance to his constituents.
My hon. Friend has raised a number of points in relation to the town and country planning process.
It will be helpful to set them in the context of the legislative framework which we have applied for many years.
I know that my hon. Friend will understand that I can make no comments about the merits of the proposal which is the subject of our debate or about the case for calling it in for determination by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
That would prejudice his consideration of the current application for a call-in and might also prejudice his consideration of the matter if it is called in.
As a consequence, I will confine myself to the facts as I understand them.
However, my hon. Friend can be assured that I have listened attentively to what he has said and his points will be considered carefully before a decision is made on whether the application should be called in.
Parliament has made local planning authorities responsible for day-to-day planning control, including the determination of planning applications and the initiating of enforcement action.
For most categories of development, the local planning authorities are the district councils, but county councils also have limited functions as planning authorities.
Whatever reservations there may be about individual decisions from time to time, the basic premise that most planning decisions should be taken locally has never been seriously challenged.
Local authorities are generally best placed to exercise the discretion that Parliament has judged appropriate in taking planning decisions.
Development plans drawn up with public consultation provide an important framework.
Central Government publish general advice on a wide range of planning issues through planning policy guidance notes and circulars.
However, we believe that unless there are exceptional circumstances, it is for people with local knowledge to look at individual proposals and to decide them in the way that best meets local requirements.
My hon. Friend does not, I think, dissent from that, but he has questioned local planning authorities' deciding planning proposals that they themselves have originated and in particular the position of the county council in relation to the district council.
Again, that is not a haphazard system, but one which our legislation has recognised for many years under successive Governments.
If elected local authorities are fit to draw up development plans and to judge the vast majority of planning applications, it would be odd to say that they were not fit to judge their own development proposals.
It is, of course, right to require them to adopt certain procedures to ensure that the public and the full range of interests represented by the authority have the opportunity to contribute to the consideration.
The regulations provide for this in certain circumstances and we are considering how to improve the detail of the procedures.
As I have already said, day-to-day planning control is for local planning authorities and it is not the role of the Secretary of State to become involved in that as a general rule.
However, there are two circumstances in which Parliament has seen a role for the Secretary of State.
The first is in relation to the need for an applicant who is aggrieved by the decision of the local planning authority on his application to have a right of appeal.
In practice, the great majority of appeals are now decided by inspectors appointed by the Secretary of State for that purpose.
Again, I think that the great majority of hon. Members would not dispute the need for a right of appeal.
Nevertheless, there are people who argue that local planning authorities' decisions best reflect local circumstances and should not be overruled by the central Government or their appointed planning inspectors.
That is a point of view which I understand, but which I should not commend against a background in which Parliament, when removing the unfettered right of a land owner to develop his land as he wished, thought it right to enable a land owner to get a second opinion if the local decision on his application was adverse.
Others argue that if developers have the right of appeal to the Secretary of State against a local planning authority's decision, so should other interested parties.
That argument minimises the fact that it is the local planning authority's role to represent the general public interest.
The more practical implication is that if such a wide-varying right of appeal existed, the likelihood is that the whole planning system would become totally bogged down.
The second circumstance is that planning legislation has given the Secretary of State the power to take applications out of the hands of local planning authorities and to decide them himself.
It is quite clear against the background that I have described that it was intended that it should be an exceptional power and that it should be used only when there are no other ways in which the individual applicant may consider the case himself through the planning process.
There is always a danger that if the regulations are overused by the Secretary of State, he will find that his business and duties in planning will become bogged down.
Regulations provide that if local planning authorities are minded to approve a proposal, but judge that it involves a material departure from the provisions of the development plan, they are required to refer the matter to the Secretary of State for him to decide whether he thinks it fit to call in the matter for his own decision.
It is possible for the Secretary of State to direct that a certain category of development should be referred to him if local planning authorities are minded to grant permission.
Such a direction has been issued, for example, in respect of a large-scale retail shopping development.
The Town and Country Planning (Shopping Development)(England and Wales) Direction 1986 applies when proposals include areas of gross shopping floor space of not less than 250,000 sq ft or 23,325 sq m.
The Secretary of State may receive representations in the light of which he may decide to require a particular application to be referred to him for decision.
Successive Governments have adopted the policy that individual decisions should be taken out of the hands of local planning authorities only if they raise issues of more than local importance.
It follows that decisions to call in will not be frequent.
It also follows that in looking at whether to call in, Ministers do not consider the planning merits of the proposal, but only whether the kind of issues that need to be decided are more appropriate for consideration in a wider than local context by the Secretary of State.
I should make it clear that when it is decided to intervene in a local authority's own proposed development, the local authority is required to apply to the Secretary of State for planning permission.
The kind of questions that might be asked in the context are whether the proposal could have wide effects beyond the immediate locality, whether it could give rise to regional or national controversy and whether it could conflict with national policy.
I turn, briefly, to the case of the medicentre proposal at the Heath hospital, Cardiff about which my hon. Friend is concerned.
The proposal is being processed by South Glamorgan county council under regulation 4 of the Town and Country Planning General Regulations 1976.
The project consists of a high specification, purpose-built research centre on land within the site of the University hospital of Wales.
My hon. Friend made certain representations about the proposal to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State in the course of a discussion last month.
Following further approaches from my hon. Friend, a direction was issued to South Glamorgan county council on 11 December requiring it not to approve the proposal until the Secretary of State had had more time to consider whether to call in the matter for his own determination.
I emphasise that in taking that step, we have not formed any view on the planning merits of the proposal.
What now needs to be established, in accordance with our usual policy, is whether the proposal raises issues of more than local importance or whether the matters in question justify a departure from the policy that matters of local importance should be dealt with by local authorities.
I assure my hon. Friend that we look forward to receiving any further written representations that he has in addition to the cogent case that he has put before the House today.
Such representations will be considered as quickly as possible in deciding whether we should call in the application.
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for raising an important constituency point.
I look forward to receiving further representations, if he has any, in addition to his important arguments today.
Knives
Mr. Harry Cohen (Leyton)
I am pleased to have obtained this debate on the important and serious matter of the increasing use of knives in crimes of violence.
Christmas is a time of celebration and joyfulness, but there is no doubt that during this time someone, probably more than one, will become over-exuberant, a knife will flash and someone will die.
Christmas will be spoilt not just for those involved but for their friends and relatives.
People should not carry a knife at any time and particularly not at Christmas.
We have recently seen the horrendous stabbing in Walthamstow which resulted in the death of Sergeant Alan King, a popular Chingford policeman.
Police Constables Simon Castrey and John Jenkinson received terrible knife injuries in a similar incident.
The Government have expressed their horror at such attacks on the police, but they also need to act.
I planned this debate before that terrible murder.
On one occasion, I was cycling with my wife at Whipps Cross when I saw two 14-year-olds with their bicycles.
One of them got out the ugliest looking knife that I have seen to cut a piece of string or something on his bicycle.
It was a matter of horror to me and my wife that such a young lad could carry that knife.
I cycled off quickly, but when I discussed the matter subsequently with my wife she said that to carry a knife was not uncommon nowadays.
She cited the example of a model boy from an impeccable family down the road, who I hope will have a golden future, who apparently always carries a knife for his own protection.
It is horrific that youngsters should think that that is necessary.
The Minister is a little older than I, but when I was a rough and tough lad, we would never have dreamt of carrying a knife and nor would he.
It is shocking that that ethos should exist now.
There has been a big increase in the use of knives in crimes of violence.
I have asked parliamentary questions about the illegal sale and possession of knives and I was told that 150 people were prosecuted in 1988 for having in a public place such an article with a blade or point and in 1989, it was 2,018 — a huge jump.
In 1990, a total of 903 knives were seized at ports, airports and other points of entry and in 1991 that figure had risen to 2,082.
I do not want to say that there has been a huge leap in the past year or so, because that would not true, but there has been a big leap since 1980.
For example, in 1980 in the Metropolitan police district there were fewer than 2,000 cases of the use of knives in offences of violence against the person and 1,240 cases where knives were used in robberies.
By 1987, those figures had shot up to 2,870 cases of the use of knives in offences against the person and 4,630 cases where they were used in robberies — a huge increase.
The figure have dropped a little since then, which I welcome.
That drop was a consequence of a campaign against the use of knives in mid-1988 and the effects of section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988.
But with the new ethos to which I have referred of youngsters carrying knives, allegedly for their own protection, there is a real danger that there will be another explosion of such crimes.
In 1989, it was estimated that sharp instruments were used in one in three aggravated burglaries, one in five robberies, one in 17 offences of violence against the person and one in 100 sexual offences.
Knives and sharp instruments are the most common weapons used in homicides and account for one third of all homicides.
An article in The Independent on Sunday on 19 May clearly substantiates my point about the danger of an explosion in knife violence.
The article was headed’ Death by Stabbing: the new British way of life’.
It said:’ Knife attacks are on the increase, with more young men carrying blades.,’
It talks of anecdotal evidence in 1991 that the carrying of knives is on the increase among young people and it quotes Detective Chief Superintendent Roger Stoodley, who works in east London, as saying:’ I have never known so many people to be carrying these weapons.’
Barrie Irving of the Police Foundation is quoted as saying:’ There is much evidence that more people are going out with knives.
There is a lot of threat and counter-threat in the pubs and clubs.
Much of it is display.
The knife is produced as the young man slips into a role that has been established in his mind by videos and that sort of thing.’
A serious problem already exists and it is becoming even greater.
The Government's response has been inadequate and that is why I initiated the debate.
I do not say that in party-political terms, because the Government's objective is the same as mine.
They want to see the elimination of the use of knives in crimes of violence, but their approach is that the law is adequate to deal with the problem and that nothing needs to be changed.
In a parliamentary written answer I was told:’ The sale and possession of knives is subject to a number of controls There will be practical problems in seeking to apply more general restrictions on the sale and purchase of knives which have a variety of legitimate everyday uses.’
The answer refers to the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 and ends by saying:’ The Government have no plans to introduce further legislation in this matter.’
When I asked about local amnesties, I was told:’ It is for chief officers of police to consider whether offering opportunities for disposing of offensive weapons would be a worthwhile crime prevention initiative in their own force area.’
Again, the Government are saying that the procedures are there and nothing further need be done.
I challenge that.
I accept that we do not want to become involved with domestic cutlery and important workmen's tools such as Stanley knives, but there is other action that the Government should take.
In the face of the dreadful attacks on police officers, the Home Office should have put together an urgent review team which should have incorporated other Departments and put forward a package of measures.
I hope that the Minister will take that suggestion on board.
I want to put forward some suggestions for inclusion in such a package of measures.
I acknowledge that not all will be appropriate, but some will be.
For example, there is a case for a further restriction on the sale of knives and for licensing shops.
I know that that is not supported by the Association of Chief Police Officers or by shopkeepers, but there is a case for saying that shops should be licensed.
In November 1980, my hon. Friend the Member for Dewesbury (Mrs.
Taylor) said:’ It is vital that we ban offensive and useless weapons.
I say useless' because people buy them for only one reason, which is to injure or, at the very least, to threaten other individuals.
We feel strongly that weapons of this kind have no place, so we support measures to ban them or prohibit their sale.’
The key point is that if the knives are used for one purpose and do not fall into the category of domestic cutlery there is a case for a ban.
There is certainly a case for enforcing the law more strongly to prevent under-age people buying such weapons.
In that same debate my hon. Friend said:’ The proposal that weapon sales be banned completely to people under the age of 16 should stay on the agenda.
The Minister is aware that the peak age of offenders is 15 and that it is boys of that age who commit the vast majority of street crimes and crimes involving intimidation or offensive weapons.’
Butterfly and gravity knives are already banned and there is a case for extending that.
I have some information about knives for sale by mail order.
I have an advertisement for CIA survival knives which states that it’ is a superb high tech fibreglass filled nylon construction knife which weighs just 20 gm. due to its double edge, spear point and double fluted reinforced spine, tremendous plunging power — it can literally be driven straight through a telephone directory (remains undetected by airport metal detectors)’.
Another one is advertised as a’ sabretooth survival saw’and it again is said to be able to pass unnoticed through metal detectors.
The advertisement says:’ when you need that extra edge'.
An advert for a CIA letter opener says that it can be driven by hammer through in plywood.
The OSS sleeve dagger is said to be’ Specially designed to be concealed on arm or leg, especially during body search.’
The advertisement says that it is supplied only to military personnel, but these are general adverts and I doubt whether that is the case.
Such weapons should be banned and there should be tighter control on their manufacture and import.
The police should be protected by body armour.
Research is being carried out on that, but it should be speeded up and it should not be left to police officers to buy such body protection.
That should be the job of the Home Office.
We should consider the supply of metal detectors and the regular retraining of police officers to enable them to deal with knife problems.
Police are often delayed through having to seek permission to enter places such as shopping malls, and the law needs to be enforced in pubs and clubs.
Penalties should be reviewed.
At the moment the punishment is up to six months' imprisonment and/or a £2,000 fine.
That is to be increased and perhaps there should be an increase in the sentence for hardened criminals going out with a criminal purpose and carrying a knife.
Section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 could be strengthened.
There should be a concerted programme to change the knife-carrying ethos in schools.
The Minister should get his oar in with the Minister for Health who is carrying out a review in conjunction with the mental health tribunal.
We do not want to see more knife carrying by people who are mentally ill, although that clearly affects a minority of community care cases.
Search powers should be reviewed and should be exercised where there are reasonable grounds.
Perhaps random spot checks could be carried out in the same way as breathalyser tests.
Above all, there should be a knife amnesty with knife banks not just outside police stations but elsewhere.
Local authorities could be brought into that and such an amnesty would need Home Office funding and improved publicity.
There is a case for implementing Labour's policy aim of a crime prevention council and a crime management foundation to undertake independent research.
I hope that the Minister will consider that package of measures to stop people carrying knives and to change the ethos.
Knives affect all our civil liberties and can even affect the ultimate one.
I give way to the hon. Member for Uxbridge (Mr. Shersby).
Mr. Michael Shersby (Uxbridge) rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
I take it that the hon. Gentleman also has the consent of the Minister.
Mr. Shersby
Yes.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) for allowing me to speak in this valuable debate.
As the House knows, I am parliamentary adviser to the Police Federation of England and Wales.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Castle Point (Sir B.
Braine), who represents the Police Superintendents Association, cannot be present at the debate and wishes to be associated with what I have to say.
As the House knows, a terrible situation faces our country.
No fewer than five police officers have lost their lives in the past decade as a result of attacks in which knives have been used.
A further 17 officers have lost their lives as a result of being shot, crushed or injured in some other way.
In the last couple of weeks we have heard about the tragic death of Sergeant Alan King and Detective Constable Jim Morrison and we have seen the terrible injuries inflicted on their colleagues.
As the hon. Member for Leyton has said, the common factor in many of these assaults is the knife.
I have one or two suggestions to add to those advanced by the hon. Gentleman in an attempt to alleviate the problem.
First, the Home Office should mount a national publicity campaign using all available media to warn parents and young people of the dangers of young people carrying knives.
It would remind them that young men who carry knives and youngsters who take them to school may lose their temper and find that one stab is enough to kill a school mate or a police officer.
Such a campaign should be mounted by the Home Office and not left simply to chief constables.
Parents should be reminded that they have a responsibility and that they can be fined and required to pay compensation for acts committed by juveniles.
The campaign should remind young people of the severe custodial sentences that are available for this type of crime.
I should like to see the Home Office introduce what is called the side-handled baton.
That is longer than the standard truncheon and would be useful to police officers who patrol alone at night because it affords additional protection against all kinds of assaults, excluding of course, assaults using firearms.
I hope that the Home Secretary will set up a working party jointly with the Police Federation of England and Wales.
It represents 125,000 officers in what is unfortunately only too truly the sharp end of policing.
I hope that the Home Office will review the stop and search powers.
Those powers were conferred under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and replaced those under the Vagrancy Act 1824.
In the opinion of the police, those powers are not adequate.
The Act does not give a constable power to search a person or a vehicle or anything in or on a vehicle unless he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that he will find stolen or prohibited articles.
That restriction was introduced because of the concern expressed about the old Vagrancy Act and the sus laws.
The Home Office and the House must strike a balance between preserving the liberty of the citizen and protecting the lives of police men and police women who are the only protection available to ordinary citizens against people who carry knives and who will stab and kill without regard for the misery that they inflict on their fellow citizens.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) on his success in securing this debate and thank him for raising the disturbing and important question of the use of knives in crime.
It has been brought to the forefront of our minds in a most horrible way — by the recent series of shocking attacks on police officers in London, which resulted in two officers being killed and two others receiving terrible injuries.
I am sure that the House joins me, the hon. Member for Leyton and my hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge (Mr. Shersby) in expressing deepest sympathy to the families of the officers who so tragically lost their lives in the course of duty.
We also offer our best wishes to those who were injured, and trust that they will make a full and speedy recovery.
Those incidents are a salutary reminder of the dedication of police officers to protecting the public.
The hon. Gentleman referred to an apparent increase in tbe number of offences involving knives, and I will examine the figures that he gave.
I know that some were provided in parliamentary answers from the Home Office.
Statistics on the misuse of knives are not readily available, because misuse is categorised under other offences, such as assault.
In 1989, however, S1 division conducted an ad hoc survey of notifiable offences between 1986 and 1989 in which sharp instruments and knives were used.
Not all forces responded to that survey, but the results suggested that the percentage of notifiable offences involving the use of sharp instruments and knives fell during the period surveyed.
The hon. Member for Leyton makes the point well that we could benefit from better statistics.
Details of the types of knives used in crimes are not generally available either, but ordinary kitchen and craft knives are believed to be the most commonly used in attacks, rather than the kind that the hon. Gentleman mentioned as being advertised.
The hon. Gentleman wants additional controls on knife sales.
Following the recent series of knife attacks on police officers, there were calls from the Police Federation for further restrictions on the sale of knives.
While I appreciate public concern about misuse, I do not see how additional controls on sales could offer an easy or practical solution.
I do not believe that licensing shops, for example, would help in practice.
However, I shall reflect further on the hon. Gentleman's suggestions.
There are, of course, existing controls on the sales of knives.
Certain types of knives that have no legitimate use — such as flick, gravity and butterfly knives — are banned.
If any other knife identified by its construction as being suitable for banning comes on the market or enters the country in some way, of course we will readily and rapidly consider adding it to the controlled list.
Banned knives all have distinctive mechanisms that can be defined in law.
It would be difficult to distinguish between items that have legitimate everyday uses in the home and workplace, such as kitchen and craft knives, and other types — for example, commando-style daggers — that might be considered undesirable.
It must be recognised that knives are a common feature of everyday life and that, in the wrong hands, almost any bladed or sharply pointed article is potentially a lethal weapon.
The Government take the view that imposing further restrictions on the sale of knives would not generally be practicable.
However, as I indicated, any particular knives that enter the country or come on the market will be examined to establish whether they can properly and effectively be added to the controlled list.
The Government's approach has been to tackle the misuse of knives by tightening the law on possession of knives in public.
The hon. Member for Leyton asked about further legislation.
Section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 makes it an offence to possess a bladed or sharply pointed article in a public place without good reason.
That Act also places the onus on the knife carrier to show that he had good reason for possessing it in public.
That measure was aimed at tackling the menace of the casual carrying of knives on the streets to which the hon. Member for Leyton drew attention.
It certainly appears to be used with good effect by the courts.
In 1989 — the latest date for which figures are available — there were more than 1,500 convictions under section 139 of the 1988 Act.
It supplements the Prevention of Crime Act 1953, which makes it an offence to carry an offensive weapon in public without lawful authority or reasonable excuse.
That offence, unlike the section 139 offence, requires proof of intent to cause injury on the part of the knife carrier, and tough penalties are rightly available to the courts.
The maximum penalty is two years' imprisonment or an unlimited fine.
The Government also introduced powers, under section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, to ban offensive weapons as specified by means of statutory instruments.
Butterfly knives and a range of martial arts equipment were banned by that means and the Government are ready to take further action if other types of weapon become a problem.
The Government believe that the measures I have outlined provide the police and the courts with the powers and penalties to deal with those people who carry knives.
As the hon. Member for Leyton knows, the maximum penalty for wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm is life imprisonment.
A life sentence is mandatory if an attack leads to death and is categorised as murder.
The hon. Gentleman referred also to a knife amnesty.
As he rightly suggested, there is great scope for local initiatives to increase awareness, particularly among young people, of the dangers of carrying knives and offensive weapons and to encourage the safe disposal of those weapons.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, the Metropolitan police launched such a campaign on9 December, which involves providing specially adapted bins near police stations where people can deposit knives.
I hope that that campaign, which continues until 19 January, succeeds in taking substantial numbers of weapons out of circulation.
In 1988, when such an amnesty was held in east and south London, some 1,400 knives were collected.
My hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge, who speaks from great knowledge of such matters, urges more public awareness.
An amnesty campaign is one way in which police forces can draw a great deal of local attention to the threat of knives and what can be done about it.
He is right that parents as well as young people should know the dangers, and I will refer my hon. Friend's suggestions to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
My hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge talked about side-handled batons.
As he knows, we would be prepared to consider arranging for a scientific evaluation of any equipment that might assist in public order control if the chief officers request it.
The offer is there and is open to senior police officers if they believe that such batons would be of advantage to their forces.
My hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge would like a review of police powers of search.
He referred to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, which stresses that there must be some objective basis for reasonable suspicion if somebody is to be searched, such as the individual's behaviour or information received.
It cannot be supported purely on the basis of personal factors.
When the codes of practice were revised recently in response to strong pressure from the police, the guidance was made slightly less restrictive by removing the statement that reasonable suspicion should be no less than the suspicion required to effect arrest without warrant.
I shall take back to my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary what my hon. Friend has said.
As there has recently been a revision of codes, I am bound to say that my right hon. Friend may feel that the time is not right for a review.
Current powers do not allow for searches that are based on a policeman's hunch that someone may be carrying an illicit article, or for blanket searches that are carried out in a particular area or among particular groups.
Legal changes in that direction would, I believe, attract widespread criticism on the basis that unjustified interference with blameless citizens was being sanctioned.
I should say to my hon. Friend —
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
Bible (Teaching)
Mr. John Bowis (Battersea)
As we come to the great season of Christmas, throughout the country schools and churches have been celebrating with their festivals, especially those of nine lessons and carols.
There is the great ninth lesson, the Christmas gospel, which recalls the opening words of Genesis:’ In the beginning was the Word.’
My theme is yes, but what word?
If someone is unlucky and goes to the wrong festival, the lesson will not open with the words that I have quoted.
It will start with something like that which appears in the version set out in the New English Bible:’ When all things began, the Word already was.’
That is a real catchy number to start such a lesson.
I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that you will be fortunate enough to have the Authorised Version, which contains the passage:’ There came wise men from the east to Jerusalem.’
The same passage in the New English Bible reads:’ Astrologers from the east arrived in Jerusalem.’
That is just like Russell Grant on a package tour.
Then we have the angels saying to the shepherds:’ Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes.’
The unlucky person will have instead:’ You will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth.’
The angels then sing:’ Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, good will toward men.’
That has been changed in the Revised Standard Version as follows:’ Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace among men with whom He is pleased.’
In the New English Bible we find these words:’ Glory to God in highest heaven and on earth his peace for men on whom his favour rests.’
Try asking angels to sing those words.
A vicar in Battersea told me the other day that when he went to the church festival of Christmas at the local primary school — one of the schools within his parish — there was plenty of Father Christmas and jingle bells, but not one reference to Jesus.
He was told that such a reference might cause embarrassment to some of the pupils.
If we ask children or students to recite their favourite passage or line from the Bible, we tend to get some pretty blank looks.
I believe that the reason for that is that when the Bible is used in school or in church it is nearly always in the form of a modern version, which is entirely unmemorable and unpoetic.
It is not surprising that phrases do not stick in the mind.
Yet we are talking about some of the greatest passages in English literature as well as one of the great ways of teaching in the Church.
There is, however, an exception.
Very few schools get away with teaching the Lord's prayer in anything other than something like the traditional way.
The first line —’ Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name’has not yet given way in children's parlance to’Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed’, or,’Our Father in heaven, may your holy name be honoured.’
Children the world over still repeat:’ Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.’
They do not repeat:’ Do not bring us to the test, but save us from the evil one’, or,’Do not bring us to hard testing.’
That sounds like something that they might have at the end of term or something done by an adult working in a steelworks.
It is not something that will bring them to the Church and to Jesus.
Mrs. Sylvia Heal (Mid-Staffordshire)
In principle, the Labour party welcomes this important Bill, which has the broad support of the professional organisations and the health unions whose members are affected by it.
The Bill will update and modernise the Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Act 1979 by remedying some of the defects that have become apparent since then, following the Peat, Marwick, McLintock review of the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting and the four national boards.
However, there are some matters on which we will seek clarification or assurance.
The Bill is largely uncontentious and we wish to facilitate its swift passage on to the statute book.
It seeks to streamline the bodies of representation and accreditation of the nursing professions by removing duplication of roles and removing confusing remits.
It will strengthen the representation of the professions and improve the accountability of the UKCC to them.
We welcome the move to make two thirds of the UKCC elected from the professions, as we believe that that will give nurses, midwives and health visitors increased control over their professions.
We agree that the centralising of elected representatives away from the national boards to the UKCC will improve the accountability of the UKCC.
We are concerned that the procedure for election to the UKCC, which will be approved by the Secretary of State, should ensure fair representation of all groups, especially minorities, and achieve a regional balance as well.
We understand that the UKCC is anxious to achieve that, but we seek an assurance from the Minister that that will happen.
We also want to ensure that provision is made for the representation of enrolled nurses on the UKCC.
Although an enrolled nurse can represent any group, it is important to ensure that enrolled nurses are represented as an interest themselves.
We are also concerned that the members of the UKCC appointed by the Secretary of State will include representatives of nursing, midwifery and health visiting from the four national areas.
It is equally important that appointments to the national boards include a registered nurse and a practising health visitor and midwife.
Baroness Hooper conceded in another place that, in practice, that will happen.
Therefore, we see no reason why that commitment cannot be included in the Bill.
Furthermore, we want to ensure that those whose appointments are made by the Secretary of State have the appropriate qualifications and experience to fulfil their functions.
We also want the interests of minorities, and consultation with them, to be given equal weight with the interests of the larger professions.
With the change of function and responsibility between the national boards and the UKCC, it is obvious that the joint committee and the national board standing committee of health visitors and district nurses are, de facto, abolished.
However, will the Minister assure the House that the new standing committees to be established by the UKCC will include committees for the minority professions so that their significant contributions to nursing are heard and they are consulted on the issues that concern them?
Minority or specialist groups are naturally anxious about their status.
They do not want it diminished by the Bill.
We want to stress that the term’ minority’is in no way a reference to the importance of the work carried out by health visitors and nurses in the community, such as district nurses, community psychiatric nurses, school nurses, residential care nurses, occupational health nurses, practice nurses, nurse practitioners as well as those nurses who are working in terminal care.
Those people may be a minority in number but they are not in stature.
The Labour party attaches immense importance to the role of primary care and to the nursing profession, which is at the forefront of health in the community.
The Labour party is fully committed to health promotion and prevention care.
The next Labour Government will have a vigorous public health strategy in which those groups of health workers will play a vital role.
Community nursing is the face of the NHS in homes and workplaces nationwide.
Nurses in that sector have to cope with the effects on their patients of poor housing conditions and a deteriorating social fabric.
They are the face of the NHS and they play the crucial role of promoting better health through advice on life style, a healthy diet, exercise, alcohol, smoking and drug addiction.
The work of midwives in helping mothers and young children and the work of the district nurse in clinical medicine are crucial.
Community nurses are witnesses to the everyday health of the population.
Their testimony on it represents crucial, first-hand experience of which those planning for the hospital-based sector must take significant account.
Through health promotion and the prevention of conditions that lead to ill-health, those nurses seek to lift some of the burden from their colleagues in the acute sector.
The nurses in that sector are the constant face of the NHS with patients in its care.
They observe and participate in every moment of a patient's time in hospital.
They have to cope with the constantly changing needs of patients, doctors and management.
Nurses are the linchpin of the NHS.
There are 500,000 nurses in Britain today on whom we depend for our good health at home, in hospital and at work.
I am extremely aware of the important and valuable role that nurses play in my constituency and I want to pay tribute to them.
The financing of the UKCC comes from individual nurses themselves who pay a fee of £30 tri-annually to maintain their names on the register.
In the past, questions have been raised about the publication of financial reports and the accountability of the UKCC for its use of funds to those who supply them.
We recognise that the fact that the Bill introduces a two-thirds elected representative element to the UKCC means that that accountability has been improved.
The UKCC itself has tightened up the process of disclosing its financial status.
However, it would be prudent and sensible to place the UKCC under the regular inspection of the Audit Commission as an assurance to the professions of the UKCC's commitment to sound and open financial management.
That would prevent such problems arising again.
The issue that is of most concern to the Labour party is the future of nursing education.
At a time when it is important to attract more women and men to the nursing professions it is vital that education facilities exist to offer excellent training and a career structure through pre and post-registration specialities as well as courses for those wishing to return to the profession.
Furthermore, it is crucial that those already in the profession — whether students, auxiliaries, enrolled, registered or specialist nurses — have the opportunity to seek the nursing career that they desire through adequate educational facilities, which must also take account of developments such as nurse prescribing and nurse practitioners.
Although short-term courses such as intensive care training, bereavement and other counselling, improvement of inter-personal skills, control and restraint — to name but a few — do not lead to specific qualifications, they are still significant aspects of a nurse's training and advancement and give nurses an opportunity to refresh their skills.
The UKCC has now made it mandatory for all nurses to attend a five-day refresher course every three years to maintain their registration.
It requires employers to meet the costs and plan the time for courses.
Under the Bill, responsibility for the administration of funding for nurses' education will be transferred from the national boards of Wales, Scotland and England to health authorities and health boards.
Opposition Members and the professional and trade union organisations fear that post-registration training and education may suffer.
Because regional health authorities will be concerned to prioritise resources, especially in the market-driven planning now prevalent in the national health service, they are more likely to be influenced by financial consideration than the clinical needs of a nursing staff trained in all specialties.
They need to ensure that staff stay within the national health service and do not become disillusioned by a lack of educational opportunity and thus career advancement.
Regional health authorities will now be responsible for planning nursing education and will be primarily concerned with their regional responsibilities.
They may be unable to assess or contribute adequately to national nursing education needs or desires.
Furthermore, they may be reluctant to invest in expensive post-registration education funding.
There will be no guarantee that their investments will see fruition in the regions because staff may move elsewhere to take advantage of opportunities created by improved training and qualification.
We welcome the Government's express commitment to ring-fence the funds that the regional health authorities will administer but we remain concerned about how long that will last.
Education is often the first to be squeezed at a time of cuts.
The pressures of the health market which the Government have created mean that balanced books and a worried look over the shoulder at the competition are the immediate concerns of NHS managers and accountants.
Longer-term planning, which is vital for education, will not receive the priority that is attached to praying that each financial quarter will be survived without having to close wards and hospitals, cancel operations, incur building repair expenses or experience increased waiting lists.
Many post-registration courses such as psychiatric nursing and health visiting do not last a matter of weeks but require years of dedication and training.
We are worried that regional health authorities may not have the necessary outlook required to ensure adequate long-term and national provision and that that will be reflected in the allocation of funding.
The pressures of long-term planning will affect not just post-registration courses.
Enrolled or second-level nurses are especially vulnerable when attempting to convert to first-level registration.
The implementation of the UKCC's Project 2000 educational reforms includes plans to promote opportunities in nursing by conversion to first-level registration.
The implementation of that policy will now be the responsibility of the regional health authorities.
Although I welcome the Minister's comments about increased funding, there are currently 96,000 enrolled nurses, of whom at least 35,000 seek conversion, with only 2,430 places available.
When the additional money is spent on training nurses, it is important that every effort be made to retain their services over a much longer period, which may involve making the terms and conditions more flexible for women returning to work.
We estimate that, given the current rate under Project 2000, it will take 14 years before all nurses have that opportunity for advancement.
The regional health authorities must be aware of and able to respond through their educational strategies to the problem of the national perspective.
The Government's assurances on ring fencing are welcome but, unfortunately, inadequate.
The commitment to ring fence for as long as necessary, as Baroness Hooper said in another place, will allow the Secretary of State arbitrarily to decide that, if he wishes to allocate the funds to some other project, he could deem the necessity to have ceased.
Ring fencing needs to be enshrined in the legislation to prevent the funds from being diverted by regional health authorities or the Government.
If the Minister believes that education in nursing is a vital investment in the profession and the nation, she will ensure that those funds remain for education only and will strengthen the Government's commitment to ring fencing.
The situation of nurses in opted-out trusts is of particular concern, as trusts are not obliged to provide for the education and advancement of their staff.
It will be up to trusts to decide whether to pay for training and permit time off for it.
If the Government's plans continue to force many more units to opt out of health authority control, training and standards are likely to suffer.
Trusts take a much narrower view on long-term needs than regional health authorities, and nursing education is not even an obligation.
Mrs. Bottomley
What evidence does the hon. Lady have for that suggestion?
All the evidence from the trusts is clear: their commitment to patient care and to their staff is at the forefront.
For example, Guy's is seeking to tackle the problem of junior doctors' hours.
It is a wild and mischievous allegation, for which the hon. Lady has not a shadow of evidence.
Mrs. Heal
Can the Minister give us that evidence?
The opted-out units are no longer under the direct authority of the regional health authorities but report directly to the Secretary of State.
The regional health authorities will now be responsible for education.
Mrs. Dunwoody
Will my hon. Friend explain to the Minister that, in the trust in my area, newly trained nurses were told that there were no jobs for them?
In addition, the existing nurses, who were given undertakings when the trust was set up that their posts would be protected, are now being told that all their jobs are up for re-examination and that anyone seeking extra education will soon be told that someone else is waiting to take her position —
Mrs. Bottomley rose
Mrs. Dunwoody
The Minister cannot intervene on me.
Mrs. Heal
My hon. Friend's comments echo the concerns that already exist.
Ministers regularly say that the opted-out units are independent, so the Minister cannot then argue that they are part and parcel of the structure.
The health service is being fragmented.
Mrs. Bottomley
The hon. Lady has failed to understand that the ring-fenced money held by the regions is for the trusts or directly managed units.
Therefore, if such a cynical interpretation of the motivation of those committed professionals who are carrying forward the first wave of trusts were to apply, it would be irrelevant because the resources are ring fenced by the region and the trusts would be at no disadvantage.
That cynical interpretation of the commitment of all those dedicated professionals who are carrying forward the first wave of trusts is so bitterly resented by the health service, which is why the Labour party has lost all credibility with the health professionals.
Mrs. Heal
Despite what the Minister has said, we are not embarrassed by our policy on health — far from it.
We are saying that, under the legislation for the trusts, there is no obligation for them to train, despite what the hon. Lady has said.
Mr. O'Brien
May I substantiate my hon. Friend's point?
I referred to the example of St. James's college in Leeds, which is a trust-funded college.
It now discriminates against trained nurses taking the Project 2000 scheme.
My hon. Friend has evidence.
A person who is prepared to be named — I shall give the information if called to do so — has told me about the discrimination on training in a trust hospital in Leeds.
The evidence is there and my hon. Friend is right to bring the matter to the attention of the House.
Mrs. Heal
I thank my hon. Friend for that helpful intervention.
Mr. Keith Mans (Wyre)
Where is the evidence?
Mrs. Heal
My hon. Friend the Member for Normanton (Mr. O'Brien) has already said that the information is there.
We are concerned about nurse education, which is why we believe that it will be crippling for the NHS and for the nation's health if, in years to come, we have poorly trained nurses who leave the profession because they are denied the opportunity of advancement and the capacity adequately to treat patients.
Training does not make cash as extra-contractual referrals do, but it is an investment in Britain's health.
The problem is that the Government will let opted-out units opt out of training and education.
That will not happen under a Labour Government because units will not opt out.
We welcome the Bill and support it in principle.
The desire to modernise the UKCC and the national boards, and to condition them for the 1990s is uncontentious and is supported by the Opposition, by the professional organisations and by the health unions.
The Bill is a commitment to nursing and to the esteem in which the professions are held throughout the country.
We are concerned about some issues and we may wish to raise them again later in the Bill's progress to safeguard the position of all nurses throughout the 1990s.
Point of Order
Mr. Iain Mills (Meriden)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker —— if hon. Gentlemen will allow me to speak.
Can I draw your attention to a matter of confusion on Thursday, 21 November?
I was shown in Hansard as voting, in the debate on the European Community, against a labour amendment in Division 14.
That was correct.
I was not shown as voting for the Government motion in Division 15.
Subsequently, before I raised this matter with the Clerks, this was corrected.
I am now shown correctly in Hansard as having voted for the Government in Division 15.
Interruption
This is most important, as I believe that the Government were completely right.
I can only suspect that the speed of my progress through the Division Lobby, as I was the second Member out that night, may have caused confusion.
That was due to my enthusiasm for the excellent achievements of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister at Maastricht.
I could not move fast enough to support him.
I congratulate the Clerks on having corrected this before I raised the matter.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member has now put the record straight.
Health Benefits
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
I beg to move, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to extend exemption from prescription charges to, and to make further provision for, persons in receipt of certain categories of benefit; to exempt from prescription charges the chronically ill and those over 60; and to exempt those over 60 from certain dental and optical charges.
If passed by the House, the Bill will reform fairly and effectively the forgotten area of the health benefits system.
The present system is unwieldy, unnecessarily complex, inconsistent and over-bureaucratic.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Will hon. Members please leave the Chamber quietly if they are not remaining for this ten-minute motion?
Mrs. Mahon
At present, health benefits are available to people who are eligible because they are exempt or who must claim on low-income grounds.
The benefits are free prescriptions, optical and dental charges and help with fares to hospitals.
In its report’ Health Warning’, the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux highlighted deficiencies in the scheme in four respects.
The first concerned simplicity.
The rules are inconsistent because, for example, pensioners are automatically exempt from prescription charges but will qualify for help with other charges only if they have low incomes.
Other people on incomes marginally above income support levels may get some help towards dental and optical charges but no help towards prescription charges.
The second deficiency concerned adequacy.
The scheme aims to cover the cost of health charges so that the poorer sections of the community are not prevented from receiving health care by the cost.
In practice, however, the scheme does not meet its objectives.
Many thousands are deterred from claiming because of the complexity of the scheme, so many people go without vital treatment.
There is also considerable evidence that even people entitled to, for instance, free glasses, must still contribute significant amounts to the cost, because the value of the benefit has not kept up with the cost of glasses.
The system has also failed on grounds of accessibility.
NACAB's evidence shows that the scheme is about as accessible as Fort Knox.
The relevant form is 20 pages long and contains more than 50 questions, and the 1 million people a year who labour to fill it in often fail to do so or are helped by relatives and friends; 100,000 go to the citizens advice bureaux for help.
Even so, about 35 per cent .
of those people — 361,000 — have their forms returned to them because they filled them in incorrectly.
When I challenged the Secretary of State for Health to fill in the form, he not surprisingly refused.
There is no comparison between this form and the one on which people claim for mortgage interest relief.
NACAB's fourth point is that the present scheme is deficient on grounds of equity.
Anomalies cause confusion and anger among claimants.
Often people entitled to free dental treatment find that they must contribute towards the cost of glasses, and the scheme cries out for reform.
My Bill will effect just that.
At a stroke, the need for 300 staff in the health benefit unit could end and they could be redeployed to improve other parts of the service.
This Bill proposes that health benefits be available free to all receiving means-tested benefits — for instance, the disabled working allowance benefit, due to begin in April 1992, could lead to claimants who take it up moving from income support to that benefit and thus losing the right to free prescriptions.
That would cause considerable hardship.
My Bill proposes that people in receipt of this benefit and in receipt of poll tax benefit, invaliditity benefit, long-term sickness benefit, the severe disablement allowance, and mobility and attendance allowances should be exempt from prescription charges.
Moreover, anyone categorised by his GP as chronically sick should be covered, as the list of prescribed illnesses is outdated.
People requiring regular medication would also be exempt from prescription charges.
That would cover people with cystic fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease, asthma, multiple sclerosis, cancer and a host of other long-term illnesses.
My Bill also seeks to right the serious and indefensible wrong brought about by the abolition of free eye and dental tests; and free prescriptions would be available to all over the age of 60.
The Minister for Health sought to defend the indefensible when she wrote in a recent letter to The Guardian about the abolition of the tests.
Her letter brought forth a torrent of rebukes from people far more expert than she — and far more caring.
Mr. Ian Hunter, Secretary General of the Association of Optometrists, wrote in reply to the Minister's letter:’ To restart national health service eye examinations for the over 60s would now cost about £25 million but the cost for not doing so will be two or three times as much because eye disease will remain undetected until treatment is less effective and more expensive.
The real social costs of blindness for some have also regrettably to be added.’
I can only add that the abolition of free eye tests is the worst false economy imaginable, and could only be contemplated by such a short-sighted Government.
The present scheme's inadequacies are best highlighted by a constituent, Mr. Russell, who wrote to me on the advice of his local DSS office, which also thinks that the system is unfair.
Mr. Russell lost out when he received a 6p rise which put him above the income support level.
He lost entitlement to free prescriptions; he also had to pay £24 for dental treatment, and he can no longer claim his hospital fares unless they cost more than £8.50.
He concluded his letter:’ The 6p rise I received means I am approximately £2.50 a week worse off.
Surely this can't be right.’
I agree with Mr. Russell.
Patients with mental illness are particularly vulnerable.
My Bill would exempt many of them from prescription charges.
Charges have gone up 17 times under the Government.
There has been a 600 per cent.
increase, from 20p to £3.40, since 1979.
They have created an intolerable burden on people on low incomes.
Many people now go without the necessary treatment because they cannot afford prescriptions.
Even the Government have recognised the need for reform, although the review which they commissioned in 1990, which has yet to report, appears to have been an excuse for inaction.
When it reports, it will address only the administration of the scheme and not the real solution, which would be to scrap the low income scheme and replace it with one based on exemptions.
The present scheme is bureaucratic, inconsistent and complex.
We need in its place a scheme which is simple, fair and effective, one which people can understand and which delivers help for those who need it most.
The scheme must be based on exemptions.
My Bill would provide for that.
Question put and agreed to.
Bill ordered to be brought in by Mrs. Alice Mahon, Mr. John Battle, Ms. Dawn Primarolo, Mr. David Hinchliffe, Mr. Jeremy Corbyn, Mr. Eddie Loyden, Mr. Bob Cryer, Mr. Max Madden, Mr. Harry Barnes, Mrs. Audrey Wise, Mr. David Winnick and Mr. Dennis Skinner.
Mrs. Alice Mahon accordingly presented a Bill to extend exemption from prescription charges, and to make further provision for, persons in receipt of certain categories of benefit; to exempt from prescription charges the chronically ill and those over 60; and to exempt those over 60 from certain dental and optical charges: And the same was read the First time: and ordered to be read a Second time upon Friday 6 March and to be printed.
[Bill 50.]
Mr. Hogg
I shall not give way.
I hope that the hon. and learned Gentleman will forgive me.
The hon. Member for Western Isles (Mr. Macdonald) made a point of considerable importance about the European dimension.
It is a sensible point, and we entirely agree that we need to develop a European element in our defence arrangements.
We foresee that role being adopted by the Western European Union.
It is not a role which is subordinate to the Twelve — the hon. Gentleman was mistaken in that — but nor is it a function which will be prejudicial to NATO, which is at the core of our defence arrangements.
However, it is certainly a role which will add to Europe's capacity in area and out of area.
The right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) made the type of speech that the House enjoys hearing.
Indeed, it was a pleasure for us to hear him champion the cause of unilateralism.
He said in terms that he did not think that the Soviets posed a threat to western Europe.
I fancy that he would not have cared to make that argument in Budapest or in Prague, and I find it difficult to make a distinction between the two.
Moreover, the right hon. Gentleman said in terms that neither Iraq nor Argentina was in any way deterred from attacking British interests by reason of our possession of a nuclear weapon.
That is not surprising, because it is inconceivable that we would have used a nuclear weapon in those circumstances, not least because of the negative security assurances which positively precluded their use in such circumstances.
Dr. John Reid (Motherwell, North)
In what circumstances would we use them?
Mr. Hogg
The hon. Gentleman is asking a question which he knows will receive no answer, because the nature of a deterrent is that it remains uncertain — the nation that has it might be prepared to use it.
I return to the language of the motion.
Dr. Reid
As far as I can make out, the hon. and learned Gentleman has just created a precedent by telling the House that, in the two wars in which we have been involved, it was — to use his word —’ inconceivable’that the Government would have used nuclear weapons.
In what other circumstances would it be inconceivable for us to use nuclear weapons?
Will he elaborate and tell us in what circumstances we would have used them?
Mr. Hogg
I am surprised to hear a defence spokesman ask that question, because he knows that the two cases to which I referred are covered by the negative security assurances which made the use of nuclear weapons in such circumstances inconceivable.
If he did not know that, I do not mind him admitting it, but it is extraordinary ignorance on his part.
I deal now with the motion on which the House is shortly to vote.
It endorses the long-standing commitment of the Conservative party to the concept of nuclear deterrence, to a nuclear-armed NATO, to Britain's own nuclear deterrent, to disarmament through negotiation on strength and to updating where necessary the weapon systems that the United Kingdom possesses.
All those commitments, which are broadly supported by the country, are expressly denied and excluded by the Labour party's amendment.
In every one of those commitments, the Conservative party and Conservative Government have led and reflected public opinion and the national interest.
The same cannot be said for the Labour party which fought the previous two elections on a programme that the hon. Member for Walsall, South (Mr. George) said was disastrous and should have been consigned to the rubbish heap.
I have already said that the success of a Government's defence policies depends on the conviction that those policies and their spokesmen carry in the eyes both of prospective opponents and of present friends.
It is therefore right that, when analysing Labour's current declared policy, we should look well at what, until a few months ago, that declared policy manifestly was.
The hon. Member for Clackmannan (Mr. O'Neill), when presenting Labour's nuclear policy in the House on 22 November, said:’ Throughout the 1980s the Labour party was committed to a defence policy which, with regard to nuclear weapons, required the Labour Government to renounce ownership of Polaris and to abandon the Trident programme.’
The hon. Gentleman was somewhat less than full in his description of Labour party policy.
In addition to the unilateral measures which I have just described, the Labour party's 1983 manifesto called for the rejection of any fresh nuclear bases or weapons on British soil or in British waters, and the removal of all existing nuclear bases and weapons.
The same manifesto committed a Labour Government to preventing the siting of cruise missiles in Britain and to the removal of any that were then in place.
Broadly similar commitments were repeated in the 1987 manifesto.
Seldom has the passage of time so swiftly, effectively and comprehensively destroyed the intellectual foundations of the main plank of a party's defence policy.
The truth is that, for the past 12 years, Labour has espoused a defence policy which never had intellectual validity and which, if implemented, would have exposed Britain to grave security risks.
Mr. Winnick
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Hogg
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will forgive me if I do not.
The House must now look with great caution at the policies that Labour now purports to espouse.
They have been most recently espoused by the hon. Member for Clackmannan, who is not even a member of the shadow Cabinet.
That caution is reinforced when one considers the close connection that exists between the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, the cause of unilateralism, and the Labour party.
The constitution of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament has one merit: it is clear.
The policies are silly and dangerous, but at least they are clear.
I quote from the declared aims and policies of CND:’ CND believes that British independent nuclear weapons and American nuclear bases and weapons in Britain do nothing to increase the security of Britain and should be unilaterally and unconditionally rejected and removed.’
The key elements of the Labour party manifestos of 1983 and of 1987 are to be found in the CND constitution.
It is not at all surprising that there should be a close identity of interest between the policy and constitution of CND and those of the Labour party, because many Labour Members have been or now are members of CND.
Let us begin with the Leader of the Opposition.
He joined CND 31 years ago.
For 30 years, he was a paid-up and apparently loyal supporter of its policies.
Until very recently, his public statements were unreservedly unilateralist.
In 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988 and 1989 — in seven of the past nine years — the right hon. Gentleman publicly and enthusiastically endorsed key demands and policies of CND.
Unilateral disarmament for Britain was the policy of the right hon. Gentleman.
The closure of nuclear bases, the decommissioning of Polaris and the cancellation of Trident were all his policies.
Then followed what was, for the right hon. Gentleman, a period of unaccustomed silence — until, in July last year, The Guardian reported that the right hon. Gentleman and Mrs. Kinnock had allowed their 30-year membership of CND to lapse.
What a way to disclose a change of strategic policy.
What had happened during the previous 30 months to cause the right hon. Gentleman to change his apparent convictions of 30 years?
Was it that he suddenly realised that his convictions of the past 30 years were false, or did he simply realise that the electorate could not stomach them?
What about the right hon. Member for Gorton?
Where did he stand in the past?
We certainly do not know where he stands today.
I can tell the House something about the right hon. Gentleman: he opposed the deployment of the cruise missile, and of Trident — something that he now says he supports.
As recently as 1987, he sacked his adviser, Mr. Richard Heller, for writing an article that stated in precise terms the Labour party's policy of today.
With what I can only describe as a cavalier disregard for the obligations of a good employer, the right hon. Gentleman issued a statement which said:’ Mr. Kaufman completely disagrees with the article’— which, as I said, stated in every respect the Labour party's policy, in so far as it is comprehensible, as now stated.
What about the rest of the Labour Front Bench?
There are 18 elected members of the shadow Cabinet, 14 of whom have been members of CND and a number of whom still are.
One of them is a vice-president of CND.
As late as 1989, three members of the shadow Cabinet signed Tribune 's appeal in support of British unilateral nuclear disarmament and the removal of the United States bases from Britain.
According to Ms. Marjorie Thompson, the chairman of CND, there are now between 100 and 130 Labour Members who support CND and are its members.
There is nothing immoral about being a member of CND, but we must understand that the principles and policies of that organisation are wholly different from the principles and policies set out in the motion.
They are completely incompatible with the defence policies of NATO, and cannot be reconciled with Labour's policy as currently declared.
I therefore approach Labour's declared commitment to a nuclear-based defence policy with great scepticism.
I do not believe that what we have heard today represents a settled statement of policy, or that it is founded upon solid conviction.
My scepticism is reinforced by a reading of the words of the hon. Member for Motherwell, North (Dr. Reid), who wound up the debate in November last year.
Seeking to explain Labour's defence policies in the 1980s, he said:’ I make no apologies for supporting that policy six or seven years ago.
It was a tactic, not a principle — and not an end in itself.’
I find that an extraordinary statement of policy, because I had always believed that, in so far as it had any justification at all, the Labour party's commitment to unilateralism, to the closure of bases, to the withdrawal from NATO, was based on a principle — on a deeply held conviction that those things were wrong.
That was, and appears still to be, the view of Labour Members; it is not the view, however, of those who shape policy on the Labour Front Bench.
For them the commitments which, as they now admit, would have destroyed our security were never issues of principle but bargaining ploys, chips on the table, mere tactics.
That brings me to the right hon. Member for Chesterfield.
We shall remember words that he used in an interview with The Independent:’ If we have changed our mind to win we can change our mind when we have won.
What is wrong with that?’
Mr. Derek Foster (Bishop Auckland) rose in his place and claimed to move, That the Question be now put.
Mr. Ashton
A one-pit future.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
It is not a one-pit future.
With 20: 20 vision, hindsight is very easy, but if only some of the things that are now happening at Asfordby had been accepted more readily a few years ago, we might well have been having a very different debate today.
Mr. Hood
The hon. Gentleman says that, with hindsight, things are easy.
He should bear in mind the fact that all mining legislation has been the result of hindsight.
Over the years, mining accidents have given rise to legislation.
The Government are now tampering with legislation that was put in place for the protection of miners.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman is making a point, but I cannot follow it.
Mr. Kevin Barron (Rother Valley)
Let the hon. Gentleman read the Official Report tomorrow.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
I am sure that the hon. Member for Rother Valley (Mr. Barron) will read the Official Report tomorrow.
I believe that, already, expenditure at Asfordby has amounted to about £300 million.
That facility will not come into operation until next year, but it already has a full complement of men — about 400.
The article to which I have referred points out that, because of the new technology, Asfordby, unlike any other pit, seems almost empty of people.
The future of British coal lies in a high-tech industry employing small numbers of people and producing coal at a competitive price.
Mr. Allen McKay (Barnsley, West and Penistone)
On the question of pricing, the hon. Gentleman is correct.
But that is the problem.
I should like to inform him of an exercise that is being carried out by Doug Bulmer, the president of the British Association of Colliery Management.
The chairman of British Coal was asked whether every colliery would remain open if it were to produce at 130p per gigajoule.
The chairman said that on that matter he could not give Mr. Bulmer an assurance.
The other question, which was put to every colliery manager in Great Britain, related to forward planning, forecasts, costs and delivery.
The managers were asked what would be the level of production in the year 2000.
Apparently, in the year 2000 only five collieries would be able to produce at a cost of 130p per gigajoule.
Let the hon Gentleman look at the Rothschild and BACUM figures — 14 and five.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
The hon. Gentleman will have to come to terms with the fact that there is an energy market to be supplied.
The amount of coal that is used is very much a question that is in the hands of British Coal as it negotiates with the current generating authorities.
Some people ask how much coal will be dug or how many pits will be open by the year 2000.
That is like asking how long is a piece of string.
We do not know how big a slice of the cake British Coal will be able to secure.
Nobody can say that by the year 2000 there will be five pits, 14 pits — or any number of pits.
However, I firmly believe in the ability of British Coal to win a big slice of the energy cake.
That — and not some Government decision — is what will determine how many pits stay open.
Mr. Allen McKay
The electricity industry says that it will buy its coal from abroad unless British Coal can produce at 130p per gigajoule.
A colliery manager who is actually planning and investing was asked how many pits would be producing at 130p per gigajoule.
The answer was five.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo indicated dissent.
Mr. McKay
The hon. Member for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo) need not shake his head.
The people to whom I am referring actually work the collieries.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
The hon. Gentleman is trying to guess what the market price will be in X years' time and what proportion of the market will be accounted for by coal.
It is simply impossible to make those judgments.
It seems that I have much more faith in the future of coal than does the hon. Gentleman.
Let us not constantly try to talk down the coal industry.
Asfordby expects to produce not much less than 2 million tonnes of coal a year with only 400 men.
That is an incredible target.
If it is achieved, the production costs will be not much more than half the current figure, and the undertaking will be able to compete with most of our opencast coal facilities.
It seems an almost impossible target, but the management people believe that they can achieve it.
People should stop indulging in doom and gloom and, instead, looks to the future.
I am very glad that in my area miners belong to the Union of Democratic Mineworkers under Roy Lynk.
Miners in Nottinghamshire and in the surrounding area want to work towards the future.
But the six-day week, the 7.5 hour shift and the other things that make Asforby possible would be impossible if things were left to the National Union of Mineworkers.
If it was up to the NUM, we would still be working under arrangements made years ago.
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
Does the Leader of the House agree that a debate compromising a review of the present arrangements for the government of Scotland and any proposals that the Government wish to put forward to improve them, the proposals for a Scottish constitutional convention and a review of Scotland's relationship with Europe would provide a full and comprehensive agenda reflecting all views on the Scottish constitutional debate, and would fit the great debate called for by the Secretary of State?
Will he table an appropriate motion next week to enable the Scottish Grand Committee to debate those important items?
Mr. MacGregor
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland has suggested that those issues could be debated in the Scottish Grand Committee.
I believe that that would be useful, because some aspects of the proposals that have been put forward, not least on the Scottish convention, bear a great deal of scrutiny and the real choices have not been put forward.
I shall discuss with my right hon. Friend whether it would be right for me to arrange a debate next week, as the hon. Gentleman suggests.
Mr. John Marshall (Hendon, South)
Will my right hon. Friend arrange for an early debate on the future of grant-maintained schools?
Is he aware that Hendon school, in my constituency, was under-subscribed when it was under the control of the local authority but is now over-subscribed?
He may remember his visit to that school 18 months ago.
Mr. MacGregor
I do recall that visit, and I remember the great enthusiasm with which the governors, head teacher and staff were embarking on grant-maintained status.
I also noted the way in which parents have responded.
My hon. Friend is right because many grant-maintained schools already have a high degree of support.
I cannot promise a debate next week, but I am sure that there will be opportunities to debate the matter in the coming months.
Mr. Harry Barnes (Derbyshire, North-East)
May we have a debate on early-day motion 458?
[That this House is deeply concerned that (a) in October 1991, the Inspectorate of Pollution issued an improvement notice plus additional requirements upon Coal Products Ltd., Avenue Works, Wingerworth, Derbyshire, arising from problems of airborne pollution,(b) in November 1991, the North East Derbyshire District Council rejected a planning application for the installation of a plant for the regeneration of active carbon on the same site and (c) in December 1991, the National Rivers Authority issued a report showing that following partial treatment at lagoons in a country park, 40 million gallons of toxic effluent is seeping into the ground near homes at nearby Grassmoor; and calls upon the Secretary of State for the Environment to undertake an urgent environmental audit of the plant and its neighbouring communities with an immediate project of protecting the health and well-being of both the workforce at Coal Products Ltd. and residents in the surrounding communities, whilst seeking ways and means of safeguarding jobs in an area of high unemployment.]
A serious problem has emerged in the area over a period of months, and a series of reports have been issued, concluding with a report by the National Rivers Authority on effluent that is poured into the lagoons at Grassmoor 40,000 tonnes of it a year.
The problem with trying to investigate such matters without an overall consideration by the Department of the Environment is that people are shunted between different authorities, such as the pollution inspectorate, the county councils, the district councils and the health authorities.
A drawing together of all those authorities is required, as well as a debate that would have some significance to environmental development generally.
Mr. MacGregor
I am happy to have debates at the appropriate time.
We have recently debated environmental questions generally.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, the Government recently produced a progress report on the first year following the White Paper which shows, on a wide variety of fronts, considerable progress on environmental matters.
On the hon. Gentleman's specific point relating to the early-day motion, Coal Products Ltd., like any other company, is governed by strict environmental regulations introduced by this Government.
I cannot, however, promise the hon. Gentleman a debate next week on the specific issue that he raises.
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley)
May we have a debate on junk mail as soon as possible, to discuss a mailshot sent to many of my constituents by an organisation that is partly funded by Maxwell money which is so full of falsehoods that it would make the average time-share salesman blush; which redefines the term’ junk mail’and peddles dodgy, old-fashioned and out-of-date remedies which have been banned in most countries and which have passed their sell-by date; and which bears the signature of an obscure Welsh politician, best known for losing his rag with Zimbabwean soldiers and for nutting people in public lavatories?
Mr. MacGregor
I have not seen the leaflet to which my hon. Friend refers, so I do not know the details.
I cannot promise a debate on it next week, but perhaps he will find his own opportunities to discuss it in greater detail.
Mr. Dave Nellist (Coventry, South-East)
Will the Leader of the House arrange for an early statement from the Lord Chancellor on the workings of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 following the collapse yesterday in Liverpool and Gravesham of several hundred poll tax cases because the Government have so far refused to introduce a commencement order to allow computer evidence to be used in the magistrates court under that Act?
I drew that fact to the attention of magistrates — albeit unsuccessfully in my cases in Coventry and Wandsworth.
What option do the Government now have?
If they do not introduce the commencement order, will they tell every council that there must be a council officer with personal knowledge of all the billing arrangements of every individual who is brought before the courts?
There are millions of outstanding cases.
If the Government do introduce the order, will that not mean that the 5 million liability orders already granted and the 200 imprisonments that have already been made are illegal?
Surely all poll tax cases should be stopped until the matter has been sorted out.
Mr. MacGregor
The Government are urgently considering whether there is any need to change the law governing proceedings in the magistrates court to deal with problems in the effective presentation of evidence in community charge enforcement cases.
However, there is no bar on the institution of enforcement proceedings by local authorities where evidence of non-payment can be brought before the court, and proceedings continue to be brought successfully in many other areas.
Nothing that has happened in the recent cases provides any reason whatsoever for people who are liable to pay the community charge failing to do so.
There is strong feeling among those who do pay the community charge about those who should pay but are not paying.
There are exemptions and benefits for people on low incomes.
There is very strong feeling about this issue and, although the Government are urgently considering the matter that has recently arisen, the vast majority of people expect those who are supposed to pay the community charge to do so.
Mr. Roger King (Birmingham, Northfield)
Will the Leader of the House find time next week to debate the issue covered in today's editorial in The Birmingham Post entitled’ So much for Buy British'’?
The editorial deals with the Opposition's topic of encouraging people to buy British and points out that the Opposition's deputy leader has just bought a foreign car.
Should we not, in conjunction with the very misleading Labour party political broadcast, call to account those who advocate buying home-produced goods but then buy foreign ones?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend makes a good point and I think that it would be legitimate to raise it during the debate next week on the motion to approve the autumn statement, when I hope it will be pointed out that that party political broadcast was a gross travesty of the facts of British manufacturing industry.
It was also a clear attempt to talk Britain down.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has written to the Leader of the Opposition drawing attention to the many ways in which it was a gross distortion and to the fact that, for example, one in 10 personal computers sold in the world — let alone in this country — is now made in Scotland and that no less than 85 per cent .
of the kitchens sold in this country are made by British firms.
The highly selective description of individual items in a kitchen which was contained in the broadcast did no credit to British manufacturing or to the enormous improvement that it has made, and it was a gross distortion of the facts.
Mr. Merlyn Rees (Morley and Leeds, South)
Will the Leader of the House bear in mind the fact that there has been no debate on Northern Ireland for a long time?
There are 10,000 British soldiers in Northern Ireland.
We are debating everything else in advance of the general election but not Northern Ireland, so will he answer two questions?
First, are talks taking place?
I am advised that the press says that they are but that in practice they are not.
Secondly, is it true that, in order to maintain a parliamentary majority, the Anglo-Irish Agreement will be ditched?
Mr. MacGregor
As the right hon. Gentleman will know, there will be a full day's debate on one aspect of Northern Ireland — not the talks, but electricity — a week on Monday.
We do debate Northern Ireland matters frequently.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland has expressed the view that, unless the outstanding issues are resolved in the near future, it is unlikely that political talks could begin before the election because of a lack of time; but the Government very much hope that the obstacles will be overcome and that the talks can then begin.
I can confirm that stories about meetings at the party-political level are pure invention.
Mr. Richard Tracey (Surbiton)
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that, in the debate on the autumn statement, it will be within the rules of order to constrast Government spending policies with the extravagant spending policies of the Opposition and to mention the taxes that will be necessary to pay for them?
My right hon. Friend will agree that there is great anxiety about higher taxation and increased national insurance contributions.
Surely it is right that the House should be able to question the shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer about his apparent differences of opinion with his hon. Friend the Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett).
Mr. MacGregor
I am sure that, subject to Mr. Speaker's ruling, it will be in order to discuss these matters — I know that they have been raised in previous autumn statement debates.
The country will certainly be looking to the Opposition to clarify their position on taxation and spending.
It seems as if the Opposition flounder almost every day in their responses to the charges and questions that we put to them, and I very much hope that they will clarify their position on national insurance charges on high and not so high incomes — and on whether any increases will be phased in.
If so, we should be told how they will meet their spending commitments on child benefit and pensions.
These are legitimate issues on which it would be perfectly in order for the House to spend a good deal of time next week.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
Will it be possible for the Lord President of the Council to ask the Department of Transport to make a statement or to initiate an early debate on the proposed review of coastguard services, a matter of serious concern to all of us who represent maritime constituencies?
Fears have been raised about a reduction in manpower, and we should like to explore the matter further.
Mr. MacGregor
I do not think it will be possible to have a debate in Government time, but I shall discuss the matter with my right hon. and learned Friend.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
Can my right hon. Friend arrange a debate on local government finance in London, so that we may discuss the growing evidence that Labour councils, far from struggling to provide services, cannot even be bothered to collect millions of pounds of rates and of community charge still owing to them?
These councils do not collect their rents and have lost control of their rented housing stock.
In short, they do not want to provide services; they just want to blame the Government.
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend draws attention to the fact that there is considerable maladministration among Labour councils, as witness the discovery of what went on in the council of Brent when it was under Labour control.
I should think that it would be in order to discuss these matters when we debate the revenue support grant orders for England.
Mr. Geoffrey Lofthouse (Pontefract and Castleford)
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that there is great concern in the mining industry because, in the midst of important negotiations between British Coal, National Power and PowerGen on the future contracts on which mining depends, British Coal's commercial director, Mr. Malcolm Edwards, has been sacked?
Given that it is only a few months since the Secretary of State appointed him under a two-year contract, will the Leader of the House arrange for the Secretary of State to make a statement to the House next week on the matter?
Mr. MacGregor
We had a full debate on the coal industry yesterday, as the hon. Gentleman knows.
I will raise the point with my right hon. Friend, but I doubt whether a statement next week would be appropriate.
Mr. Stephen Day (Cheadle)
Will my right hon. Friend find time next week to allow the House to debate health, specifically the recently published report which shows the great success of GP fund-holding practices and trust hospitals?
Could the debate be held in Government time to allow us to congratulate the people who work in those facilities and the GPs who are now strongly supporting the reforms?
A debate might allow the Opposition the opportunity to withdraw some of their more outrageous allegations about those reforms.
Mr. MacGregor
As my hon. Friend will have seen in the recent report on the first six months of the NHS reforms, substantial progress is being made by the NHS backed by our reforms and the record resources that we are making available.
The report also shows that the NHS is treating more patients than ever before and placing much more emphasis on quality of services.
I join my hon. Friend in paying tribute to all the staff in the health service.
The report clearly shows that Opposition warnings about what would happen after the reforms have proved to be completely false.
I would welcome a debate, but in the next few weeks many issues have to be fitted into the timetable, not least progress on Government legislation.
I shall look for an opportunity for a debate, but I cannot promise one next week.
Mr. Greville Janner (Leicester, West)
May we have an early debate on the Government's determination to prevent part-timers from having the same rights as people who work full time?
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that in Leicester almost a third of all women workers and almost 20 per cent.
of all workers are part-timers?
It is disgraceful that they should be refused even the residual rights that the Government have left for those who work full time.
Mr. MacGregor
I am also aware that the Opposition's proposal for a national minimum wage would destroy many part-time jobs.
Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)
Will my right hon. Friend arrange for an early debate next week on the principle and number of live animal exports which, we hear, have reached record levels in the past year?
Does he accept that the conditions in which live animals are exported must be humane?
There is considerable doubt sometimes about whether live animals are exported in humane conditions and a debate is urgently required.
Mr. MacGregor
I am sure that my hon. Friend welcomes the steps taken by my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in the Agriculture Council on this matter, especially in relation to the export of live horses.
I cannot promise a debate in the near future, but no doubt my hon. Friend will find opportunities to raise the matter further.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
Is the Leader of the House aware that, in the past four days, since we returned from the Christmas recess, I have heard more from Conservative Members about Labour party policy than I have heard on the national executive committee in 12 months?
Will he listen to the pleas of those who have occupied the Waterloo ambulance station, using it for 70 homeless people who in a blaze of publicity over Christmas were helped by the Government?
Now they need food.
By whatever means possible, will the right hon. Gentleman get in touch with Ministers to ensure that, if it is right for the Government to gain publicity over Christmas for looking after a few hundred homeless, it should be right to do something about them now so that they are not turned out on the streets?
Mr. MacGregor
I shall look into the hon. Gentleman's second point.
On his first point, I am grateful to him for his confession.
Now we know why Labour policies are in such a mess.
Mr. Bob Dunn (Dartford)
Will my right hon. Friend consider rearranging next week's business to enable us to have an urgent debate on industrial relations, bearing in mind that our reforms over the past 12 years have brought industrial relations to a new level of success?
The number of days lost through strikes is lower than at any time since 1979, and people ought to know that Labour policies would sweep all that away and bring back the sort of industrial anarchy that existed in 1978-79.
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend is certainly right about the number of days lost through strikes.
The figures announced today for the most recent month are the best for a long time and continue the trend of recent months.
They are certainly better than 1979.
In terms of the Government's general strategy on economic policy matters, it would be appropriate for some of those issues to be raised in Wednesday's debate.
Mr. Roy Beggs (Antrim, East)
Is the Leader of the House aware that the seventh report of the Public Accounts Committee on the privatisation of Harland and Wolff was not available to Members in the House until late yesterday evening and that it had been made available to others some time previously?
That enabled the Belfast Telegraph, for example, to carry a huge article on the real cost of the sell-off.
Northern Ireland Members were disadvantaged because they did not have the information and could not comment.
Will the right hon. Gentleman ensure that this sort of thing does not happen again?
As we are to have a debate on the Electricity (Northern Ireland)
Order, will the right hon. Gentleman seek to have the report of the Select Committee on Energy on the privatisation of the electricity industry in Northern Ireland available to us before the debate takes place?
Mr. MacGregor
I shall have to look into the second matter.
There is a need for a debate on the privatisation of the electricity industry in Northern Ireland fairly soon.
I shall look into the availability of the PAC report.
I am not clear about what was made available in the report last night and what was published in newspapers earlier.
I shall write to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Andrew MacKay (Berkshire, East)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that it is important that we have a debate soon on Kashmir, especially bearing in mind that the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), in his capacity as deputy leader of the Labour party, has pledged his party to support self-determination for Kashmir?
Many of my right hon. and hon. Friends take a more measured view, which I think would be much appreciated by our many Indian constituents.
Mr. MacGregor
I shall make the Government's position clear on Kashmir yet again.
We believe that the dispute can be resolved only by peaceful agreement between India and Pakistan.
That remains the best way to proceed.
We have offered help if both sides want us to intervene.
What the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) said is a matter for him.
Mrs. Ray Mitchie (Argyll and Bute)
Yesterday we heard a statement on environmentally sensitive areas in England.
I think that it is generally agreed that a positive way forward is to have a partnership between farming and environmental interests.
As the Scottish islands await progress on the matter, can the Leader of the House tell us whether the Secretary of State for Scotland will make a statement early next week on ESAs for Scotland?
Mr. MacGregor
I am grateful to the hon. Lady for her support in general for the policy.
I entirely agree with her in that respect.
The early experience of ESAs that I had when I was Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food showed the policy to be important, helpful and constructive.
As for a statement on ESAs in Scotland, I shall have to raise the matter with my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland, which I shall do.
Mr. Ian Bruce (Dorset, South)
Has my right hon. Friend had a chance to read early-day motion 316, which stands in my name and is supported by about 40 right hon. and hon. Members?
[That this House is appalled at the mistreatment and murder of street children in Guatemala; and calls on President Serrano and the Guatemalan Government to urgently deal with this problem and in particular to support the work of the Casa Alianza and other agencies working to bring education and support to these children.]
It is alleged that the street children of Guatemala City are being killed by police officers and others.
My right hon. Friend may know that one of my constituents, Bruce Harris, is in charge of the mission called Casa Alianza.
Even he has been threatened with death.
May we have an early debate on foreign affairs and aid and on the encouragement that should be given to President Serrano, who now says that he is keen to see the problem sorted out?
The United Kingdom's full attention should be focused on the problems in Guatemala City.
Mr. MacGregor
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for raising the matter.
I have read the early-day motion, and the Government share the concern that is expressed in it.
We and our European partners have made clear to the Guatemalan Government the importance that we attach to human rights, and expecially to the rights of street children.
I do not know when it will be possible to have a general debate on foreign affairs, but I shall bear in mind what my hon. Friend has said.
If we have such a debate, it will be possible for him to raise this matter, as he will be able to do on other occasions.
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
Obviously I welcome the opportunity to debate next week Ravenscraig and the Lanarkshire economy.
I hope, however, that it has not escaped the attention of the Leader of the House that one of the most famous companies in Scotland, Armitage Shanks of Barrhead, is facing closure because of the parent company's axe.
May we be given the opportunity to debate the economy of Renfrewshire, which has suffered 35,000 job losses since the Government came to power?
As I have said, we are facing the closure of a world-famous company in Scotland.
The Government are not lifting a finger to help the economy of Renfrewshire.
They are not investigating why the company wishes to move from Barrhead.
Why is it that the Government do not want to debate what is happening in Renfrewshire?
We have only their failed policies and an enterprise zone in Inverclyde.
They are not doing anywhere near enough for Scotland.
Do something now.
Mr. MacGregor
I was sorry to hear about the possibility of job losses at the company concerned, and I recognise the company's creditable history.
However, this is a matter for the company.
As the hon. Gentleman will know, the Government have done a great deal to assist the Scottish economy.
There have been particular measures in north Lanarkshire, but the matter goes way beyond that.
It is the Opposition's choice to confine next week's debate to Ravenscraig and north Lanarkshire.
Mr. Geoffrey Dickens (Littleborough and Saddleworth)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that high taxation is poor for inward investment and many other things?
Will he assure us that next week's debate will be far-reaching enough for us to explain that in the early days of the Conservative Government — 1979 and 1980 — we had to repay massive debts incurred by the previous Labour Government and that since then we have religiously cut taxation?
So, for high taxes vote for the Labour party, and for low taxes vote Conservative.
Mr. MacGregor
I am glad that my hon. Friend made that point; he is right.
I hope that there will be plenty of opportunity to debate those matters next week.
The hon. Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunningham) is laughing.
He knows that the country now recognises that his party has been, is and always will be a party of high taxation, because it cannot resist spending other people's money.
If the hon. Member for Copeland is complaining about the level of tax now, the country wants to know why he proposes to add considerably to it.
Laughter
Mr. Tam Dalyell (Linlithgow)
As it was tabled on 17 December, has the Leader of the House had time to reflect on early-day motion 424 in the name of a former Law Officer, a former Home Secretary, myself and 41 colleagues?
[That this House welcomes the public announcement by Her Majesty's Government of the identity of the new head of MI5; but calls on Her Majesty's Government to make a full statement about the role of Stella Rimington, in particular in connection with the activities of Mr. David Hart during the 1984 miners' strike.]
It welcomes the public announcement of the identity of the new head of MI5, but calls on the Government to make a full statement about Stella Rimington's role, particularly as it related to the activities of Mr. David Hart, during the 1984 strike.
Also, as the first signatory of the motion, may I say that since it was tabled statements have been made to me about the involvement of Stella Rimington and Mr. Roger Windsor of the National Union of Mineworkers.
The motion raises serious issues and calls for some sort of response.
Mr. MacGregor
As the hon. Gentleman knows, following the passage of the Security Service Act 1989, the Government judged that it was right to announce the appointment of a new director general of the Security Service and I am pleased that that has, rightly, been seen as a positive step.
The hon. Gentleman asked about the new director general designate's previous work.
It has been the long-standing practice under Governments of both parties not to comment on operational matters, and we do not intend to depart from that precedent.
Mr. John Browne (Winchester)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that, although nominal interest rates are falling, real interest rates are rising, causing even normally prudent businesses to fail, with increased job losses and mortgage foreclosures?
Is it not economic nonsense that our interest rates should be dictated not by our own grave economic needs but by the interests of the German economy?
In the absence of a revaluation of the deutschmark within the exchange rate mechanism, will my right hon. Friend accept that many of us are deeply concerned about our continued membership?
Will he please grant an urgent debate on the specific subject of the exchange rate mechanism?
Mr. MacGregor
No.
We have debated the exchange rate mechanism and general economic policy on many occasions and it will be possible to refer to that issue in the debate on Wednesday.
I would not wish to have a debate on only the ERM because many other matters need to be raised.
On the general principle, I believe that the vast majority of my hon. Friends are strongly in favour of the benefits that the United Kingdom economy and British business have received as a result of our membership of the ERM.
My hon. Friend will note that German interest rates and ours are closer than they have been for a long time.
I am sure that he will also welcome the reduction in mortgage rates announced by the Abbey National today.
Mr. Charles Kennedy (Ross, Cromarty and Skye)
Will the Leader of the House arrange for the Secretary of State for Scotland to make a statement next week on his handling of the planning process within Scotland in advance of the proposed local inquiry into the construction of a bridge to Skye?
In a written answer this week, the Secretary of State for Scotland has confirmed that, in advance of the local inquiry, he and the Scottish Office have entered into a commercial contract with the designated builders of the project.
That makes nonsense of the planning procedure and adds to the difficulties of the local objectors, which already include the 9 kg of paper produced by the roads directorate in Scotland, so that no proper analysis or preparation of arguments can be done in advance.
Will the right hon. Gentleman examine the handling of the process?
It is certainly undemocratic, and many people are beginning to feel that it borders on the unconstitutional.
Mr. MacGregor
I cannot comment on the details, and I certainly cannot promise a statement next week.
We have much important business to conduct, so I doubt whether a statement will be possible, but I shall draw the hon. Gentleman's remarks to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Mr. Patrick Nicholls (Teignbridge)
Could my right hon. Friend find time for a short debate on the question of Short money?
Does he agree that events this week have shown that there may be inadequacies in the funding of Opposition parties?
If we can examine the matter in detail, might we be able to find sufficient research funds for the Leader of the Opposition to be able to check the quotations that he uses against the Prime Minister before misquoting them?
Might it not also be possible to find the right hon. Gentleman a researcher who can at least draft a simple apology?
Mr. MacGregor
I do not think that that was a failure of finance; it was simply a failure to understand the issues and to do homework.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
Will the Leader of the House take into account early-day motion 452?
[That this House calls for publication of the Register of Members'
Secretaries and Research Assistants; notes that the Register includes information on, amongst others provided with access passes, the proprietor of private psychiatric nursing and residential homes, employees of political and economic consultancies, international law firms, company directors, representatives of parliamentary lobbying organisations (including Research and Information Services, Westminster Ltd., Chelgate Public Relations Ltd., Taylor Steingberg Associates, Westminster Communications, Decision Makers Ltd., Charles Barker Public Affairs and others), a parliamentary researcher for parliamentary agents, a Lloyds underwriter and the Managing Director of Charles Barker Watney and Powell; and urges the Leader of the House to place a Motion on the Order Paper to facilitate publication so that the public may be aware of who has such privileged access, and why.]
The motion calls for the publication of the Register of Members'
Secretaries and Research Assistants, and asks specifically that something be done about the business of the House — that is, that a motion should be put on the Order Paper to ensure that the register is published, as it contains an astounding cross-section of commercial lobbying organisations.
The managing director of one of the biggest of such organisations attached to this place is registered as a Member's secretary or research assistant.
Mr. Simon Hughes
The Bill is a step in the right direction, but it is also an example of the Government trying to tidy up their act after the dogma has bolted.
They rushed into a series of Bills which, it was alleged, would open monopolies to competition, but in many cases they simply changed a state monopoly to a private monopoly.
The philosophy has been entirely misconceived.
It is perfectly proper to say that, as a natural resource, gas is a state asset and to allow as much competition as possible in its exploitation.
We have argued for greater competition in the gas industry than the Government have ever sought to provide.
All the artificial constraints of maintaining a regulated monopoly mean that it is not in the best interests of the consumer.
Greater competition would require less regulation, but that will have to wait until after the election.
In the meantime it is better to have tough regulation than none at all, and the consumer must have someone who can intervene on his behalf more effectively than in the past.
The best intervention is that which is facilitated by information which places the remedy in the customer's own hands.
As the hon. Member for Newcastle upon Tyne, North (Mr. Henderson) said, the Bill has missed an opportunity by not allowing the customer to know more about the quality of services.
We had a debate earlier about the quality of water.
Information on that could have been supplied as part of the information on the accountability of the service.
An opportunity has also been lost in telecommunications; if the hon. Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis) speaks in this debate, I think that he will address that.
The Government are still lily-livered in that respect.
The Government could have scored a few points and won some political friends.
They lost the opportunity.
The great grey army out there, the growing number of pensioners, saw the legislation as an opportunity to lower unfair standing charges.
They also saw it as a chance to reduce the cost of the basic services on which they rely — the telephone, gas, electricity and water.
If the Government had wanted to make the Bill an election winner, they would have seen that political advantage.
They have lost that opportunity, and it will not come again this side of the election.
Perhaps they will live to regret that.
At best, the Bill is a marginal improvement.
To suggest that it is in any way a radical new Tory revolution for the 1990s is far from the truth.
Mr. Lewis
My hon. Friend the Member for Newcastle upon Tyne, North (Mr. Henderson) and the hon. Member for Southwark and Bermondsey (Mr. Hughes) were dead right when they said that the Bill is a lost opportunity.
That is certainly true in the context of telecommunications and, more specifically, in premium rate services.
Six years of misery have been caused by these utilities.
I have raised the matter many times and while Ministers agreed that legislation was needed, they said that there was no time for it.
The services should not operate under the present system, which is a blight on the industry.
The Government have consistently wrung their hands and said that in the past the services were awful.
Parliamentary time has been made for the Bill and for amendment of the 1984 legislation.
Ministers have consistently related the Bill to the citizens charter.
If any part of that charter could be addressed in that context, it would have to be the part that deals with choice and redress and various other such matters.
I have been sought redress for people damaged by the utilities, but over the years the Government have pushed my pleas to one side.
Choice has not been considered in premium rate services.
There are no more excuses for Ministers.
By allowing the Bill to pass through the House unamended in respect of premium rate services, they are condoning everything that is being done by those who for the past six years have been offering pornographic’ services’.
These so-called services will continue.
They will abate only slightly as a result of the recent rules that have been introduced by the Independent Committee for the Supervision of Telephone Information Services and by Oftel.
Real opportunities have been missed by rejecting our suggestion that a supervisory statutory committee should be formed, rejecting the idea of choice to opt into these’ services’, rejecting the proposal that the worst of these’services’should be removed and by rejecting the simple principle of direct billing.
My hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) got it right when he said yesterday that Ministers will be regarded as wearers of dirty raincoats before very long.
Since Second Reading, I have received 150 letters on pornographic telephone’ services’.
They have been written by organisations and individuals including the Women's Institute and the soroptomists.
I shall refer to one or two constituents, and the significance of them will not be lost on the Minister.
From Bury, North, I received two letters from organisations and four from individuals.
Two organisations and two individuals wrote from Bury, South.
From Bolton, West I received letters from two organisations and 11 individuals.
Two organisations and 17 individuals wrote from Bolton, North-East.
From Bath, I received one letter from an organisation and one from an individual.
From Oxford, West and Abingdon it was one and four.
It was three and six from Stockport.
One organisation wrote from Nottingham, South.
It was three and one from Wallasey and one and 12 from Congleton.
I hasten to say that the organisation was a Labour party branch.
The public recognise that there has been an opportunity to clean up what they regard as offensive and unnecessary’ services’.
Blame for the continuation of the’ services’will be pinned on the Minister and his colleagues.
Organisations and individuals in the many Tory marginals to which I have referred will know by the end of next week exactly who is responsible and where responsibility lies.
I shall ensure that their names are added to all the complaints that I have been making.
As I say, they know exactly who is responsible.
Mr. Morgan
It is always a privilege to speak from the Opposition Dispatch Box, especially towards the end of a Third Reading debate.
Relative to the other opportunities that I have had to speak on such occasions, however, this is a lower grade privilege because the Bill has been extremely boring.
It is one of those Bills about which it is said,’ Where is the beef?’
So many hon. Members, including Conservative Members, have told the Minister that the Bill is a great missed opportunity that he may, at last, have got the message.
If the Bill is meant to be the beginning of a revolution in the standard of public services to embody the Prime Minister's so-called big idea of a citizens charter, it is a pretty poor start.
The Minister must realise that the public are not that interested in boring details about procedures — for example, about whether a public utility is supposed to take a maximum of two weeks or three weeks to reply to a letter of complaint.
They are interested in why they are paying such a high price for a service and why the company or companies providing it are making enormous profits when they are in a protected monopoly.
It is the one-sidedness of privatisation of the monopoly public utilities that has been so apparent since the process started with British Telecom in 1985 that so deeply offends ordinary people throughout the country.
The Government have created what could be called Frankenstein private monsters.
They are not responsible to the general public.
They are not bodies against which, through the regulator, members of the public feel that they can secure redress.
If they dream up a bright profit-winning idea, even if it involves walking in the dirty waters of pornography as the 0898 service does, the Government are unable or unwilling to do anything about it, even over a six-year period.
The Government believe that, if an idea will reduce the profits of a privatised company, it should not be carried out.
I am afraid that the Government do not have straight in their head the idea that the public will be determined, through a different Government, to obtain proper redress for their complaints against excessive prices or dirty little ideas such as the 0898 service, which was introduced six years ago after the privatisation of British Telecom.
This is a sad day for the final part of the Bill to be passing through the Houses of Parliament.
It has been reported in the press today that gas regulation is in disarray.
It involves one of the few regulators that have shown some teeth in standing up to the powers that have been conferred by the Government on privatised British Gas.
That regulator, James McKinnon, was knighted on 1 January and kicked in the teeth on 15 January.
The Secretary of State for Energy has allowed British Gas to appeal over the head of the regulator, to his fury, because of the difficulty in sorting out the conflict over whether freeing up the industrial market for British Gas will create higher prices for domestic consumers.
Ofgas is furious about that, but the Secretary of State for Energy has said,’ Oh, that's all right.
If you have problems with Ofgas, come to me and I will sort them out.’
That is the atmosphere in which the Government are determined to work.
In the end they will have to give way to a Government who will not work in that way.
The Government's beer orders were intended also to create extra competition for drinkers, a better standard of service in pubs, more choice and lower prices.
They are now in disarray and landlords are being evicted, there is less choice, and beer prices are higher.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Bridgend (Mr. Griffiths) said, when Alaric the Goth attacked the Roman empire in 410 AD, he found that it was a piece of cake to sack Rome because the use of lead piping had softened the brains and determination of the Roman establishment.
As a result of the problems of lead piping and the other problems mentioned by my hon. Friend relating to the privatisation of the public utilities, the Tory empire will shortly fall and will be replaced by a proper representative Government of the British people.
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend the Member for Dorset, South (Mr. Bruce) spoke about British Telecom standards and service for business and other users.
I am sure that those remarks will be read by British Telecom.
I think that it was advice to BT, rather than to me.
My hon. Friend wanted to know about data transmission services.
Some of those will be covered by the proposals in this legislation.
Data sent by residential and very small businesses will normally be sent on the usual voice line.
Therefore, standards set for the voice line will apply.
Dedicated data circuits and private circuits, primarily used by large businesses, remain outside the scope of the Bill.
They are subject to much more competitve pressure.
The main data service used by residential and small businesses is fax.
That is already mentioned, and specific standards can be set for it.
Integrated services data network — ISDN — which provides more than one channel of communication via the same line, can transmit voice and data simultaneously.
It is still using a line that provides voice telephony, so standards set for the voice line will apply.
I hope that that goes some way to meeting my hon. Friend's points.
I am glad that the hon. Member for Southwark and Bermondsey (Mr. Hughes) thinks that our legislation is a step in the right direction.
I believe that it is entirely the right direction.
The hon. Member for Newcastle upon Tyne, North (Mr. Henderson) asked whether the regulatory powers are tough enough.
The answer is yes, they are.
The regulatory powers can and will do the job.
I give the House that assurance.
There is no shortage of measures in the legislation.
The new proposals on water competition were introduced following our discussion in Committee, and they go a long way to improving competition in the water industry.
There is also the response to our duopoly review, and many companies are now coming forward with sizeable investment projects and are seeking licences.
When those licences are granted and the investments are made, competition will build up and we will see choice in the marketplace improving and the benefits of competition coming through.
Many of the amendments tabled by the Opposition fail to recognise the duties and regulatory powers in existing legislation and in the licences.
Sometimes they even fail to recognise the powers proposed in the Bill.
I disagree with the hon. Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis) that this is a lost opportunity on premium rate services — although I hear a rumour that one of the more questionable 0898 lines — the Labour party line — has been withdrawn.
That may show that the new tougher regulation is biting.
I shall give way if Opposition Members wish to deny that, but I believe that it has happened.
The hon. Member for Worsley knows that many improvements have been made to the regulatory system.
Mr. Lewis
I do not know a great deal about the Labour party 0898 line, but I know that the complaints that I have made for many years to the Minister and his predecessors have been not about Neil Kinnock but about the serious pornographic messages that I believe have contributed significantly to the crimes of violence against women that take place outside on the streets.
I am convinced that the one-to-one services whereby perverts phone women at night have led to people going out and committing acts of sexual violence against women.
The Minister should be taking note of those services.
I am also convinced that the 10 million abusive calls that BT now admits are made to women every year are the overspill from the 0898 numbers.
The Minister should be dealing with that, not making cheap jibes about innocent telephone lines.
Mr. Redwood
The hon. Gentleman knows that hon. Members on both sides of the House share his concern about certain kinds of service.
Some such services are illegal, and many are against the rules in the toughened regulation.
What is needed is enforcement.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that, as and when abuses are drawn to the attention of the regulator or the prosecuting authorities, the correct action will be taken, as has been happening in recent months.
I resent the implication that we do not care about those disgraceful services.
We do care, and we have taken action.
More action will be taken on enforcement under the rules and laws set out.
If the hon. Member has more information about illegal services, he should pass it on to the proper enforcement authorities.
The hon. Member for Cardiff, West (Mr. Morgan) summed up the Opposition's position well.
In Committee and on the Floor of the House, the Opposition have made a series of spending pledges with other people's money, and pledges to slash the profits of industries that need profits in order to invest.
The Opposition have made pledges on free phones and loft insulation — and only today we heard that they proposed to cut the profits of the electricity industry by 37.5 per cent.
Mr. Henderson
May I bring the Minister back to the discussion that took place in Committee?
The Opposition have made absolutely no commitment to provide free phones or to increase public expenditure on telecommunications infrastructure in any way.
Our argument was that British Telecom and the other operators should be negotiating with the regulator to make sure that the necessary infrastructure commitments are met.
Mr. Redwood
Either public money will be spent, so there is a different policy among Opposition Members, or it will not — in which case they agree with our policy.
If the hon. Gentleman says that all the costs have to be borne by BT, that will simply mean an even bigger reduction in BT's profits and a bigger increase in its investment programme.
It is always the same with Labour Members — down with profits and up with investment, with no comment on where the money is to come from.
If they believe that by cutting the salaries of two or three people at the top of the operation they can pay for all those goodies they are living in cloud cuckoo land.
They are talking about investment programmes costing hundreds of millions of pounds, compared with salaries in six figures, not seven or eight figures.
The Bill does the job that it was designed to do.
It will deliver the promises made in the citizens charter to extend the powers of the four regulators of the privatised utilities.
It is the individual customer who is most vulnerable when competition is lacking, and the Bill concentrates on improving his position and on giving the regulator more powers to stand up for him when he has disputes with the regulated utilities.
The Bill puts the customer first by giving stronger powers to the regulators of telecommunications, gas, electricity and water.
It provides for the setting of guaranteed service standards and for customers to know the service that they will receive.
It provides for compensation where individual performance standards are not met.
Would not Opposition Members like to have thought of that idea and put it through in legislation?
The Bill ensures that there is a clear complaints procedures should things go wrong.
Fair competition offers the best guarantee of good services, low prices and choice.
The ever-increasing competition in telecommunications is a good example of that process at work.
The Bill builds on that by introducing greater competition in gas and water supply services.
The combination of greater competition and better regulation will provide the benefits that customers need.
The Bill is the right Bill for the job and I commend it to the House.
Question put and agreed to.
Bill read the Third time, and passed.
STAMP DUTY (TEMPORARY PROVISIONS) BILL
Ordered, That, notwithstanding the practice of the House as to the intervals between stages of Bills brought in upon Ways and Means Resolutions, more than one stage of the Stamp Duty (Temporary Provisions) Bill may be taken at any sitting of the House.
That, in respect of the Stamp Duty (Temporary Provisions) Bill, Notices of Amendments, new Clauses and new Schedules to be moved in Committee may be accepted by the Clerks at the Table before the Bill has been read a second time.
Child Abuse (Teachers)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. John Cartwright (Woolwich)
I am glad to have the chance at a comparatively civilised hour to draw attention to the particular problems facing teachers dealing with allegations of child abuse.
I should make it clear at the outset that I act as a parliamentary consultant to the Professional Association of Teachers and that much of what I shall say tonight will be based on the practical experience of PAT members.
I should also convey the regrets of the hon. Member for Ashford (Mr. Speed) that he cannot be present this evening.
He also advises PAT but is presently abroad carrying out his duties in the Council of Europe.
Nevertheless, he has asked me to make it clear that he strongly supports the case that I seek to make.
In considering the problem of child abuse, we all have the same starting point.
Nothing must stand in the way of the safety and well-being of our children.
Any acts of ill treatment, harm or abuse must be detected quickly and properly punished.
Teachers clearly have an important role in relation to child abuse.
They can become personally involved in any of three ways.
First, a teacher may discover evidence of non-accidental injuries or other abuse of a child at school.
Secondly, a teacher may witness, or be told about, an act of child abuse by a colleague at school.
Thirdly, and most seriously, a teacher may be accused of abusing a child under his or her care at school.
On the first issue, teachers are obviously in a crucial position to detect cases of abuse of children in their care.
They are well placed to see the changes of behaviour that may indicate abuse, as well as to observe any physical evidence.
Children see more of their teachers than any other adults, apart from their parents.
Teachers are often highly respected and children will confide in them.
Above all, teachers are trained to listen and to talk to children.
After all, that is their job.
Nevertheless, figures provided by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children suggest that the number of child abuse cases reported by teachers remains comparatively low.
Between 1983 and 1987, schools and educational welfare officers were responsible for initiating only 12 per cent.
of total registrations of child abuse cases.
From 1985 to 1987, only 10 per cent.
of all registered children, 14 per cent.
of physically abused children and 10 per cent.
of sexually abused children were initially referred by schools.
Clearly, the effective training of teachers to deal with child abuse issues is crucial.
The experience of PAT, which seems to be borne out by the NSPCC, is that, while some authorities provide excellent training, others seem to do virtually nothing.
There is a particular need for teachers with special responsibility for child protection to be trained in multi-agency working and procedures.
Many teachers simply do not feel integrated into local child protection networks.
The demands for in-service training generated by the many needs of the Education Reform Act 1988 may well have overshadowed the need for training in child protection.
There is a real concern that local management of schools will add to these pressures and that training in child protection will be given only low priority.
In 1989, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children published a’ Guide for Teachers’, which said:’A child sitting in class today could be tomorrow's tragedy'.
Teachers must be helped to recognise abuse and have the confidence to know what to do about any concerns.’
Sadly, that remains as true in 1992 as when it was written in 1989.
That brings me to the next area of concern.
A teacher who suspects that a colleague has acted improperly towards a pupil must not be deterred from disclosing his or her concern because of fears about the effect on employment prospects.
Protection against unfair dismissal is available only to employees with two years' continuous service; anyone dismissed before then has no recourse to an industrial tribunal —
It being Ten o'clock, the motion for the Adjournment of the House lapsed, without Question put.
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Cartwright
Anyone dismissed before then has no recourse to an industrial tribunal, either to claim unfair dismissal or to require the employer to provide written reasons for dismissal.
The Professional Association of Teachers has produced details of a particularly disturbing case in which a teacher in the independent sector was summarily dismissed very rapidly after making serious allegations against a colleague.
Despite the support of parents, of fellow teachers, of priests and even of two hon. Members, one from each side of the House, that teacher was refused a hearing before the school governors and had too short a period of service to seek the support of an industrial tribunal.
That may have been an extreme and, I hope, isolated case, but it underlines the need to ensure that teachers are not deterred from voicing concerns through fear of reprisals.
I now turn to the third and what I think is the most worrying issue, the position of teachers falsely accused of abusing children in their care.
PAT has drawn to my attention a number of cases of teachers whose professional and personal lives have been virtually destroyed as a result of allegations made against them by children, allegations either subsequently withdrawn or shown to have absolutely no foundation.
The comparatively limited publicity that this debate has already generated has meant that a number of other cases have been brought to me, and the factors in all those are very similar to the ones given to me by PAT.
The teachers' accounts of what happened to them make disturbing reading.
In two recent cases, the first that the teachers involved knew about the accusation was when the police arrived at their homes without warning, searched the premises and took away quantities of personal possessions.
That surely cannot be right.
I ask the Minister to consider what impact that has on innocent people and their families.
In every case that I have examined, the police were involved at a very early stage, before any serious attempt had been made either to assess the reliability of the allegation or to give the accused teacher a chance of refuting it.
In two cases, the matter was given swift local publicity.
I quote from the graphic account of the wife of a teacher who suffered a false accusation of this kind:’ An article about the allegation appeared in heavy type on the front page of the local newspaper and the headline was on the hoardings outside the newsagents.
The article gave no names, to protect the child, but my husband was quickly identified.
In a town twenty miles from the school the story was that he was guilty and had been sacked.’
In every case the accused teacher suffered a lengthy period of suspension before being told that the allegation had been withdrawn or that no proceedings would be instituted against them.
All the personal accounts that I have read convey a sense of isolation, an absence of professional support, and the sheer despair generated by this experience.
Northern Ireland (Security)
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Peter Brooke)
I have to report to the House with deep sadness that, shortly after 5 o'clock on Friday afternoon, seven construction workers on their way home from work were killed and seven were injured, five very seriously, when their minibus was blown apart in a massive explosion at Teebane Cross, on the main Omagh to Cookstown road in County Tyrone.
The police investigation is continuing, but it is believed that two plastic barrels containing some 300 lb of home-made explosive were placed beside the roadside hedge and detonated by command wire from a vantage point overlooking the scene.
The Provisional IRA has admitted that it carried out this mass murder.
In addition, in the first three weeks of the year, five other people — all civilians — have been murdered by terrorists.
I know that the House will join me in extending deepest sympathy to the families, friends and colleagues of all those killed or injured, and in utter condemnation of these attacks, which demonstrate the profound depravity and moral bankruptcy of terrorism.
All those killed or injured were working men going peacefully about their lawful occasions, yet the terrorists did not hesitate to murder or maim them.
In the face of such unmitigated evil, the reaction of the community and the Government is one of grief and of righteous anger; but I and my colleagues are absolutely determined that it must also be one of resolute and vigorous action.
No society which believes in democratic values can allow the ballot box to be overridden by the bomb and the bullet.
Violence has not brought, and will not bring, the terrorists any advantage.
The democratic path is the one that we shall tread, and we shall go where it leads, not where terrorists seek to direct.
The first task for Government is to ensure that the security forces have the resources — legal and material — which they need.
It is for the security force commanders to ensure that all the resources available to them are used with the maximum effectiveness.
Both the level of available resources and their deployment are constantly adjusted as necessary to counter the foreseeable threat.
When we judge that additional resources are needed, they are made available.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State announced on Saturday that extra troops would soon arrive.
They are already on patrol.
In addition, extra troops are also now in the Province in support of a specific operation to enhance the security and to improve the effectiveness of vehicle checkpoints in Fermanagh.
We know that the terrorists can kill, but they cannot win.
No democratic Government or society can allow such people to prevail.
Nor will we.
The security forces will continue to prevent or deter, as they are now doing, by far the largest part of planned terrorist activity.
They will also do everything practically possible to protect the public.
With the assistance that is increasingly forthcoming from ordinary members of both sides of the community, they will resolutely and successfully pursue not just those who carry out terrorist attacks but also those who plan them.
They will do so within the law; and they will continue to bring the criminals before the courts.
That is the only way for a civilised democratic Government to deal with terrorism.
I wish to add a personal word on a subject related to recent events, in which I played a personal role.
The decision to maintain the acceptance of a long-standing invitation to go on Mr. Byrne's show in Dublin on Friday night was prompted by the opportunity that it afforded to speak to the people of the Republic of Ireland about terrorism and the response of a democratic society.
Yielding to an unsignalled invitation to sing on the show was innocent in intent, for reasons which are personal to myself, but it was patently an error.
Through you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to apologise unreservedly to the families involved in Friday's bombing, to those who represent them in this House, and to all those in our wider society who would have taken wholly justified offence.
My commitment to Northern Ireland and its people is, I think, familiar to the House.
It is because of that commitment and my understanding of the values and decent opinions of the Province that I have placed my resignation at the Prime Minister's disposal.
I also advised him that if he were not to accept it on the spot he should defer any decision on it until after he had concluded his coincidental visit to the Province today.
Mr. Kevin McNamara (Kingston upon Hull, North)
I thank the Secretary of State for his statement.
On behalf of the Opposition, I join with him in extending sympathy to the families whose lives were shattered last Friday by the IRA's vicious murder campaign.
This afternoon, the House must demonstrate its united determination to resist terrorism.
We must give a clear and simple message to the IRA and other organisations which emulate its savagery.
There are no legitimate targets, be they members of the security forces or civilians.
We will not give way to those who mistakenly believe that power grows out of the barrel of a gun.
They can play no part in any inclusive dialogue which can create a genuine peace process.
The IRA should have no illusions that it can bomb and shoot its way to the conference table, for it cannot.
No one who seeks to impose his will by terror can have a constructive role to play in the resolution of the conflict in Northern Ireland.
No one who is responsible for massacring his fellow citizens will be accepted as a partner in the effort to bring peace to Northern Ireland.
There is a legitimate expectation that the Government will provide the resources, in terms of both personnel and finance, to ensure the security of all the people of Northern Ireland.
Can the Secretary of State therefore confirm, as he did in part today, that the Government will meet that expectation?
In this time of sorrow, when many people are close to despair, we must remember the many occasions on which the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the security forces have thwarted the evil enterprises of the terrorists.
In the words of Sir Hugh Annesley, it is slow, patient and incremental police work that will succeed in defeating this evil; there is no quick fix.
The people of Northern Ireland and, indeed, of Britain and the Republic expect their constitutional politicians to put aside their differences in pursuit of a peaceful political solution and to raise no false obstacles to sitting down to discuss matters among themselves.
We heard at the end of the statement a characteristically honest and courageous statement by the Secretary of State.
Those who have worked with him during the time that he has been in his present post have come to admire the hard work, courage and assiduity with which he has pursued the object of bringing the parties within the island of Ireland to sit down with the British Government and resolve their differences.
What happened on Friday night happened, but in my humble opinion it never was, nor should it be regarded as, a resignation matter.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman, not only for his robust statement about democracy but also for his very kind personal words.
I confirm that the Government will meet the expectation in terms of personnel and finance.
I agree that patient work by the Royal Ulster Constabulary, supported by the other security forces, is the key to these endeavours.
In the searches in Belfast over the weekend of 11 and 12 January, which on three occasions revealed a mass of destructive material, we had an outstanding example of that patient work.
Mr. William Ross (Londonderry, East)
The House will be aware that Ulster Unionist Members bitterly regret the need for the Secretary of State's statement.
It will be aware also that we have a long, deep and bitter disagreement with the Government over their whole political and security policy in Northern Ireland.
However, we believe that it was right that the statement should be made in the House, from which have come the decisions that, in our opinion, have done so much to encourage the IRA through the years.
I sometimes think that if the mutilated bodies of those who have been killed were laid out on the Floor of this Chamber the consequences of the decisions of those who sit here might be more effectively brought home to them.
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that a leading Northern Ireland member of his own party recently described security in the Province as a joke?
For the past 23 years Unionists have been saying exactly the same thing with regard to both security policy and political policy.
To the people of Northern Ireland the Prime Minister's’ no change’comment is simply a promise of more of the same.
If the Government are not prepared to tolerate a situation of continuing violence six years after the previous Prime Minister first uttered those words, let them forsake that which has failed.
Does the right hon. Gentleman understand that we very much welcome his commitment to taking the path of democracy regardless of where it leads?
Indeed, that was the policy espoused by two Members of this House — Airey Neave and Ian Gow — who were murdered.
If the Government were to decide to take that route, their decision would be very welcome in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for expressing his approval that a statement should be made today.
In reply to his observations about security, I should point out that in recent weeks the Chief Constable indicated that four out of five terrorist attempts are prevented and interdicted as a result of the work of the security forces.
It is, of course, a matter for concern that there should be the fifth.
The manner in which the security forces in Northern Ireland conduct themselves commands the admiration of all, and I am quite certain that the hon. Gentleman did not intend to impute any lack of commitment to them.
In reply to the hon. Gentleman's comment about the Government's policy since 1985, I should make the point that I have been Secretary of State for two and a half years of that period.
There are moments when I think that it may be that insufficient attention is paid to the coincidence of the Anglo-Irish Agreement with the upsurge in the supply of Libyan arms, which made a very considerable difference to the armaments of the IRA.
Mr. Clifford Forsythe (Antrim, South)
I should like to express here, as I have done outside the House, my deepest sympathy to the bereaved and to the families of those who were injured.
I assure the Secretary of State that the people in my constituency are no longer impressed by congratulations on their resistance to terrorism.
They want positive, active measures to bring these devils to justice.
My people feel that the right hon. Gentleman would have been better employed if he had rushed to comfort the bereaved rather than carry out a song-and-dance act among people in Dublin, or even watch a rugby match.
That is the opinion of the people I represent.
However, the right hon. Gentleman has shown that he is indeed a right honourable gentleman, and for that he deserves great credit.
What steps were taken to protect the employees of this firm following an explosion that took place some time ago and that could have killed as many as were killed this time?
Mr. Brooke
I recognise the force of feeling that prompted the hon. Gentleman to speak in the way that he did on behalf of his constituents.
There will be a thorough investigation, which will address all the circumstances, into this attack and that journey.
Mr. Peter Robinson (Belfast, East)
I express my sympathy, along with that of my two parliamentary colleagues who are at funerals in Northern Ireland, for the families of those who have been killed and send our sincere wishes to those who have been seriously injured for a speedy and full recovery.
I add my voice to the condemnation of the activity of the Provisional IRA which has pertained in Northern Ireland for more than 20 years and which in this case was clearly sectarian as it killed seven Protestant workers.
Actions of evil and barbarism are its stock in trade.
May I ask whoever may hold the Secretary of State's office, whether the right hon. Gentleman or his successor, to recognise that the policy in security has failed?
Its failure can be seen in the graveyards across Ulster.
We need not a tinkering with security policy — a change here and a change there — but a root-and-branch change in security policy so that it changes from a reactive one to a proactive one and becomes a policy of going after the IRA, of taking the fight to the IRA.
That will put us on the route to victory over terrorism.
Mr. Brooke
I join the hon. Gentleman in his moving remarks about graveyards across the Province and in his condemnation of sectarian attacks such as that which occurred on Friday last week.
I understand the feeling within his party that has given rise to some of the security recommendations which he conferred on my hon. Friend the Minister of State last week, and which he described as a root-and-branch policy.
However, I am not sure that everybody who looked at what can and should be done in the Province would necessarily agree with all the elements of the policy that he put forward.
Mr. John Hume (Foyle)
I join the entire House in utterly and unequivocally condemning the atrocity that led to the Secretary of State's statement.
Seven people, most of them young people and all from the Protestant community, were murdered, and murdered for exercising one of the most fundamental rights of all — the right to work.
They were also exercising their right in keeping with the loyalty with which they were born, as they were helping to rebuild a security station.
Presumably, those who murdered them were also born with loyalties.
The answer to divided loyalties and different loyalties is not murder; it is respect — respect for the differences and an accommodation of those differences.
Achievieng that accommodation is the challenge that faces the House, the two Governments involved and all the parties in Northern Ireland.
I ask both Governments to intensify their co-operation in order to achieve that aim.
If certain parties refuse to co-operate, we should get on with it anyway, and leave no vacuum to be filled by murders such as those which happened on Friday.
As to the Secretary of State's personal statement, as he knows, we do not always agree about everything, but we very much appreciate the efforts that he is making to bring everybody around the table.
If the process is to be continued, I hope that his Prime Minister will ensure that he is there to continue it.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his remarks, and not least his closing remarks.
He has been a doughty fighter over a long period in favour of the use of democracy and dialogue and in condemnation of the use of violence.
If this incident plays a part in intensifying the co-operation between the two Governments on security policy, I think that good will have come out of it.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman, however, that all of us who are engaged in the democratic affairs of the Province — that does not simply involve Governments; it involves also political parties — have a joint responsibility to see whether we can advance matters by way of dialogue.
Mr. James Kilfedder (North Down)
I know that it would be the wish of my constituents that I should convey heartfelt sympathy to the bereaved and the injured in their grief and agony.
For more than 20 years the IRA has been executing a horrendous campaign of genocide against the Protestant community, and in the names of the thousands of dead and injured I urge the Government to take the war to the terrorists.
That would need the full, undivided and unambiguous support of every decent person in Northern Ireland, and the support of the Dublin Government, who have equivocated too often in the past.
I repeat a suggestion that I made to the Secretary of State at the time of the last atrocity in Northern Ireland.
I asked the right hon. Gentleman to appeal to the Roman Catholic Church to excommunicate the terrorists — the evil gang of murderers, and their supporters and helpers.
I was interested to read in a Northern Ireland newspaper today that the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Tuam had considered the same proposal.
I wish to refer to the personal statement which the Secretary of State made.
I think that his decision was an honourable one and one which we would expect from an honourable man.
I pay tribute to the efforts that he has made since he has held the office of Secretary of State to bring all constitutional politicians together.
There is still hope that talks can succeed.
I point to the last Northern Ireland Assembly, of which I had the honour of being Speaker.
The Members of that Assembly worked for the good of everyone in Northern Ireland, regardless of religion or politics.
Mr. Brooke
I appreciate the personal remarks made by the hon. Gentleman.
When he talks of taking the war to the terrorists, I must reassert from the Dispatch Box that the actions of Her Majesty's Government, and of the security forces on their behalf, will be conducted under the rule of law and that the rule of law will not be thrown away, for that would be a concession to the terrorists.
It is at times suggested that the security forces are operating under a series of shackles, which it is sometimes suggested are of a political nature.
I know of no such shackles.
Mr. Alex Carlisle (Montgomery)
May I and my right hon. and hon. Friends join in expressing sympathy for those who died or were injured in the atrocity in County Tyrone on Friday?
It was murder of extreme wickedness.
May I also say on behalf of my party that the personal code of conduct of the Secretary of State is an example to us all?
I urge upon him that he should not resign.
If certain others were in tune with his message of peace, we should see much quicker progress in Northern Ireland.
Will the right hon. Gentleman agree that he should hold his nerve to the twin track of political progress and strong security?
Will he agree also that it would be a serious mistake to abandon the high standards of justice to which we try to keep as a reaction to these events and the evil in Northern Ireland that took place last Friday?
Does the right hon. Gentleman share with me the view that nobody should be allowed to bomb his way into any forthcoming general election campaign?
Surely all political parties would do well to agree that there is to be no political vacuum in Northern Ireland and that we are determined to fight for peace as the future of Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
I appreciate the hon. and learned Gentleman's personal remarks.
I confirm that the Government's nerve will hold in the context of the twin track of political progress and a robust security policy conducted under the rule of law.
In addition to what the hon. and learned Gentleman mentioned, the Government are preoccupied with social and economic development.
Dire though the attacks on Belfast have been during the past two months, it is a sign of just how successful economic development has been that the IRA should have felt it necessary to retaliate in the way that it has.
On the question of the period between now and the general election, obviously I cannot predict the exact course that events will follow.
I share the hon. and learned Gentleman's view that if we can avoid a vacuum, that will be in the interests of a democratic society.
Mr. John Biffen (Shropshire, North)
May I assure my right hon. Friend that, in my judgment, it is both correct and entirely characteristic that he should offer his resignation?
Whatever the outcome of that gesture, I hope that he will be reinforced and fortified by the knowledge that the whole House recognises the formidable qualities that he has brought to one of the most taxing posts in Government.
May I say, as every other hon. Member would wish to say, that we condemn that act of violence — indeed, that act of war, for that is what it was — and have great sympathy with the victims?
However, if justice and peace could be secured by this House passing ritual condemnations, Northern Ireland would be the most pacific province in Europe.
We are once again confronted with the fact that there can be no progress in Northern Ireland without greater military security.
Although I appreciate that no one should at present, and on the Floor of the House, talk lightheartedly about the deployment of military forces in Northern Ireland, will my right hon. Friend bear in mind the considerable virtue that many would feel if the border with the Irish Republic were more effectively supervised hereafter?
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for his generous personal remarks.
Of course, I endorse what he says about justice and peace and about the need for greater military security.
I hoped that I had made that clear in an earlier answer.
The fact is that everything else that occurs in Northern Ireland must be sustained by the quality of the security policy.
I agree with my right hon. Friend about the significance of the border in the campaign in which we are engaged.
There is no doubt that the scale of the weapons brought from Libya in the period before the Eksund was apprehended by French Customs has made a considerable difference during the past five or six years.
It is known that that material is stored in the republic and then brought north for use by the terrorists.
Of course, it is also used by those terrorists who choose to reside in the republic.
Better maintenance of the border is a central factor in our policy and it is very much at the heart of the arrangements and agreement that we have with the Irish Government.
Mr. Merlyn Rees (Morley and Leeds, South)
The right hon. Gentleman should not consider resigning over the affair in Dublin.
The strong views expressed on both sides of the House — which in itself is unusual, divided as it is in its political structure — on the way that the right hon. Gentleman has carried out his job should send a clear message to the IRA: that it will not bomb its way to the conference table; it will not affect us now; it will not affect us during the general election; and it will not affect us after the general election.
Such unanimity is unusual in this House, so the IRA should note that message.
There is no quick fix for security in Northern Ireland — and I know that the right hon. Gentleman does not think that there is — whether in dealing with last Friday's incident or, sadly, the tit-for-tat murders that follow.
There is no easy way and internment is not the answer.
Will the right hon. Gentleman study the battery of legislation available in the Province to determine whether it could be used more effectively by the security forces to interrogate people?
That is what people sometimes have in mind, but think that it should be done by internment.
I believe that it can be done without internment.
Mr. Brooke
I pay tribute to the quality of the testimony given by the right hon. Gentleman — the only Back-Bencher who has held my office — about the way in which democracy is defended against the forces of darkness in Northern Ireland.
I shall, of course, establish whether we can use elements of the legislative battery that is available to us in a different way from the way in which it has been used until now.
If the right hon. Gentleman wishes to make any suggestions privately, I shall be very grateful for them.
Mr. Julian Amery (Brighton, Pavilion)
I accept everything that has been said by right hon. and hon. Members on both sides of the House about the need for a stronger line against terrorism.
Does my right hon. Friend agree, however, that for 20 years he and his predecessors have pursued the will-of-the-wisp of power-sharing, devolved government; and that, for as long as it is pursued, the IRA will believe, rightly or wrongly, that it will get us out in the end?
Has not the time come at last— some of us have been saying this for a long time — for my right hon. Friend, or his successor, to consider seriously the alternative policy that many have advocated: administrative devolution, or short-term integration?
Is that not the only way to make it clear to the IRA that there can be no question of the United Kingdom's abandoning the Province?
As for my right hon. Friend's personal position, may I express my admiration for the frank and manly way in which he has offered his resignation?
Occupying, as he does, what is virtually a vice-regal position, only he can judge whether he can maintain his authority after the visit to Dublin.
That is above all a matter for him to decide; but I very much admire the way in which he addressed the House with his habitual frankness.
Mr. Brooke
I am most grateful to my right hon. Friend for his kind closing remarks.
I am aware that what the Government have latterly pursued has been periodically categorised as power-sharing devolution.
The Government's view has been that, if we are to have a system that will work and last in Northern Ireland, it must be a system on which agreement can be obtained around the table, and on which the endorsement and the thumbprints of all involved in constitutional politics in the Province can be secured.
We have kept an open mind about what that system might be.
In my opinion, the sooner that we return to serious discussion about the government of the Province, and about the other considerations that were invested in the earlier talks, the better the people of Northern Ireland will be served.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I appreciate that there is great interest in this serious matter, but we have another statement, and there is great pressure on the subsequent debate.
I shall allow three more questions from each side, but I am afraid that after that we must move on.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
I strongly disagree with the political intervention of the right hon. Member for Brighton, Pavilion (Mr. Amery).
What evidence is there, however, that, after nearly 22 years of sustained terrorist atrocities, the Provisional IRA is any nearer to achieving its objectives than when it started its activities in 1970?
If the country and the House have refused, since then, to give in to terror — despite all the horrors that have been inflicted against humanity on the mainland and, especially, in Northern Ireland — why should the leadership of the Provisional IRA and its fellow travellers, wherever they may be found, conclude that we shall give in to terror during the next 21 years?
Mr. Brooke
The hon. Gentleman's attitude to terrorism always does him immense credit.
I am grateful to him for what he has just said.
I confirm that no progress of any sort has been made by the Provisional IRA towards its objective.
If I may hark back to the answer that I gave to the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees), one of the areas on which there has been a significant concentration by the Government and the security forces in recent years is the financial resources available to terrorists — I hasten to say on both sides of the community.
There is not only anecdotal evidence but a fair amount of proxy evidence now that that is working.
Mr. Peter Temple-Morris (Leominster)
Does my right hon. Friend accept what is becoming obvious by now— that many of his hon. Friends, and Members in all parts of the House, have no wish or even thought that he should resign over this issue, or that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister should see fit to accept his resignation?
Does he recollect that during the talks last summer that he strove so hard to make successful the IRA, at least for a time, was marginalised?
Does he further agree that the best security for the people of Northern Ireland is in talks and an agreement between political leaders and parties within Northern Ireland so that they may govern their own Province in the interests of all its people?
Does my right hon. Friend think that, election or no election, the sooner they get on with it the better?
Mr. Brooke
It was, I think, common cause among all of us who were involved in the talks last year, and who, I hope, will be involved in the talks in the future, that they are not peace talks per se; they are talks about a political settlement, not only in terms of Northern Ireland but in terms of the relations between Northern Ireland and the republic and between Great Britain and the republic.
However, my hon. Friend is perfectly correct: if we can make constructive progress along those lines, one of the consequences will be that we shall marginalise the terrorist.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
I join with colleagues in all parts of the House in sending my deepest sympathy to the relatives of those who lost their lives in Friday's slaughter.
May the House not forget, through the Secretary of State, the workmates of those relatives who I am sure today, as they go about their legal business and pursue their employment, must have their own personal thoughts against the background of Friday's events.
I believe that I am right in saying that the Secretary of State is a direct descendent of the famous Scottish writer J. M. Barrie.
May I take the liberty of reminding the right hon. Gentleman of his relative's famous quote in relation to his own personal position: that each man's life is like a diary in which we set out to write one account and finish up writing something different and that our most humble moment comes when we compare what we have written with that which we intended to write.
In relation to the right hon. Gentleman's personal position, there is no hon. Member who believes that he intended any malice in what happened on the television show on Friday night.
In the presence of the Patronage Secretary and the Leader of the House, may I suggest to the Secretary of State that his personal position, because of the very sensitive job that he does in Government, should be cleared up before this day is finished?
Mr. Brooke
In responding to the hon. Gentleman's reference to Sir James Barrie, I should say that I do not, I fear, have a drop of Scottish blood, but he was my father's godfather.
The hon. Gentleman has introduced me to sayings of his in the House today that I had not previously appreciated.
As to what the hon. Gentleman said about those who worked for Karl Construction, the building firm that was decimated on Friday, let me pay here, on the Floor of the House, the most profound tribute to those in civilian employment in the Province who go to work to make it possible for the security forces to do their job.
Sir Giles Shaw (Pudsey)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that it is right that he should restate the Government's commitment to their policy in Northern Ireland, based on the rule of law?
Does not he equally expect the rule of law to be observed on both sides of the Irish border?
For a considerable time, at least some of us have questioned where the IRA is trained and where it comes from.
I should be glad to hear, therefore, what intensification of efforts are being made by Garda Siochana or Irish military personnel.
As regards my right hon. Friend's personal position, he is usually right and he is inevitably honourable.
Although the hard and stony-hearted would never be touched by his personality, anybody with a shade of warmth would respond vigorously.
I sincerely hope that he retains his position.
Mr. Brooke
I am aware, as we all are, that activities of a potentially terrorist nature occur in the Republic of Ireland.
I am immensely gratified that those who participate in the activities of co-operation between the RUC and Garda Siochana say that the quality of co-operation is at its highest point for 30 years.
In practical terms, it can always get better, and that applies on both sides of the border.
In our relations with the Irish Government and the Garda, we are determined to secure a further contribution to the ending of terrorism in Northern Ireland.
Of course, the Irish Government give us considerable co-operation, but in all these affairs — this applies to us as well — we can be still more effective than we are.
Mr. Frank Cook (Stockton, North)
I rarely comment on Irish affairs, not because of lack of interest but because the Irish communities would reject any opinion or suggestion if they considered it a’ Brit’suggestion or opinion, but, in this instance, the circumstances are so hideously distressing that I feel compelled to comment and to ask the Minister whether he thinks it a heavy irony that last Friday's incident followed successive discoveries of large caches of arms and whether perhaps it was a desperate attempt by the IRA to reassert some degree of authority.
Some people complain about security, but perhaps we can all agree with the plea of the hon. Member for Belfast, East (Mr. Robinson) for a proactive rather than a reactive response.
Does not the proactivity need to be politicians of all parties coming together and discussing and listening to each other rather than simply making pronouncements?
The Secretary of State is one of the few Ministers for whom I have any respect.
We have had enough casualties and it would be singularly unfortunate and quite improper to offer the IRA the additional victory of his resignation.
I hope, in common with the rest of the House, that the matter is resolved today.
Mr. Brooke
The Chief Constable of the RUC, both last July and, more recently, at the beginning of December, warned of the intensification of terrorist activity.
It was recognised that Tyrone was likely to be the area in which there would be activity subsequent to the activities in Belfast.
I cannot comment on whether last Friday's events were reactive to the security forces' recent successes, but the searches on 11 and 12 January were, by the standards of the hon. Member for Belfast, East (Mr. Robinson), proactive exercises in terms of their success.
I am not confident about how I should take the hon. Gentleman's concluding remarks, but I shall bear with equanimity what I suspect may be a poisoned chalice.
Mr. Ivor Stanbrook (Orpington)
Is not it now incumbent on all decent men and women in both our countries to sink their party differences and concentrate on destroying this evil?
To that end, will my right hon. Friend tell the Irish Government that their constitutional claim to Northern Ireland gives a spurious justification to the IRA's expressed determination to drive the British out of the island of Ireland?
Will he also point out to the Labour party that its constant and continual opposition to the prevention of terrorism Act will deprive our security forces of the extra powers that they need to destroy terrorism?
Mr. Brooke
In terms of articles 2 and 3 of the Irish constitution, I said when I addressed the Dublin chamber of commerce on Friday in conjunction with Co-operation North that the Irish Government had made it clear that articles 2 and 3 would be on the table with regard to any talks, and that is, of itself, a reason to seek to proceed with the talks.
As for the point my hon. Friend raises about the Opposition's attitude to legislation, it is up to the Opposition to speak for themselves — and I say that knowing that they will do so honourably.
European Fighter Aircraft
The Minister of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Alan Clark)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I will make a statement about the selection of the defensive aids sub-system, known as DASS, for the European fighter aircraft.
The House will be aware that the majority of contracts for the development of this aircraft have already been let, including the radar selection which my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State announced on 8 May 1990.
However, the selection of a DASS for the aircraft has remained outstanding.
This system is a key element of the integrated suite of capabilities for the EFA.
It will enhance the survivability and combat effectiveness of the aircraft in hostile electromagnetic environments by providing a self-protection capability, including warning of hostile missile attack and initiation of counter measures.
Our Gulf experience showed this to be a crucial requirement.
The DASS is thus required to meet a most demanding specification at the forefront of combat avionics.
Invitations to tender were issued to companies throughout the EFA partner nations.
The EURODASS consortium led by Marconi Defence Systems Limited offered a solution, and this has been subject to rigorous scrutiny to confirm that it meets the necessary technical criteria.
There have been equally difficult negotiations to satisfy the partner nations' demanding requirements.
I can now tell the House that, subject to the resolution of a number of detailed contractual points, we and our EFA partners, Italy and Spain, will endorse the selection of the EURODASS proposal.
The fourth EFA partner, Germany, has not yet completed its selection process, but the option to join its partners in the EURODASS solution remains open.
I am grateful to my ministerial colleagues in Italy and Spain and their officials for their constructive and helpful approach.
The Government remain strongly committed to the EFA development programme and to the provision of high quality equipment for the armed forces.
An effective DASS is essential for the EFA's survivability.
The EURODASS proposal illustrates the vitality and competitiveness of the British aerospace industry.
I am sure that the whole House will welcome this further evidence that the EFA programme continues to gather pace.
The EURODASS contract will be worth around £200 million with Marconi's share at just below £100 million.
It is expected to lead to the creation of some 500 new jobs, mainly at Marconi's Stanmore and Plessey Avionics' West Leigh sites, but also at a large number of sub-contractors throughout the United Kingdom.
The step that I have announced today represents an important milestone for British airborne technology, in collaboration with our partners, in a major international development project.
I commend it to the House.
Mr. Allan Rogers (Rhondda)
On behalf of all my right hon. and hon. Friends, I welcome the Minister's announcement of the contract.
I am pleased that, as with the EFA radar contract, it will go to a British-led consortium.
The whole House recognises the importance of the contract for the future defence needs of this country and we are pleased that the Minister has been able to lead the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
Like him, we are disappointed that Germany has not yet signed up and we hope that it finally will.
The implications for our defence industry and for those who work in that declining sector are substantial.
I am sure that the news will be most welcome to those whose jobs will now be safeguarded.
Although the news is positive, can the Minister now advise the House on the latest German position on the whole project?
He will know, as other hon. Members do, of the considerable doubts being expressed by politicians from all parties in Germany.
In the event of the Germans pulling out after the development stage is finalised at the end of the year, what will be the cost and quantity implications for the procurement of the aircraft by the Royal Air Force?
Everyone recognises Marconi's important work in support of our operations in the Gulf.
We congratulate Marconi's civilian employees on their work at that time.
We hope that the awarding of the contract will help to safeguard our national electronic warfare capability well into the next century.
Will the Minister tell us what progress has been made on the procurement of air-to-air missiles for the aircraft?
Mr. Clark
I am glad to get the hon. Gentleman's endorsement, especially in such positive and unqualified terms.
I take that as part of the Labour party's approach to defence procurement, which is to tick off each individual project, factory or programme whenever it comes before the House and to say that it fully endorses it.
As we all know, that is immediately reflected in the inconsistency of Labour's accounting programme.
There is nothing ungracious about that comment.
The sums are open to anyone who can add or subtract.
I welcome the commitment by the hon. Member for Rhondda (Mr. Rogers).
We can accumulate the figures and we can all do our sums.
I do not believe that my statement means that the Germans will not necessarily take the system into the aircraft that they order.
However, they could end up by having to buy the system off the shelf, in which case it would be more expensive for them.
The only alternative would be to put in an inferior system, which means that the German aircraft would be less capable than those in the other three air forces.
I recognise that periodic doubts are expressed about the overall German commitment to the project.
The hon. Gentleman is incorrect in saying that they are shared by all political parties in Germany, although they are shared by some of them, especially the socialist parties.
It is not too alarmist in looking to the future —
Mr. Bellotti
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Nelson
I shall not give way because of the time.
The cost to my constituents in terms of the average community charge is £170.
I advise the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) to go down the road to the district of Adur where, for similar services in a similar area, people pay £266.
That is the difference between Liberal and Conservative control in Sussex — £192 for a couple.
Mr. Bellotti
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Nelson
I have no time.
With regret, I cannot give way to the hon. Gentleman on this occasion.
Local authorities should not indulge in a dog-eat-dog attitude.
We should not put on their employees a blight of uncertainty pending local government reform.
I hope that, as soon as possible, the local government commission will spell out to local authorities and to the Secretary of State areas such as West Sussex in which no change may be preferable to radical reform.
However, in other parts of the country, change is much needed and there is no reason why we should adopt the same pattern nationwide.
I hope and believe that the local government commission will serve a real purpose in bringing forward reform which is now overdue, which is in line with Conservative party policies, and which will deliver value for money and improve the quality of services — the hallmarks of good Conservative control.
The Bill sets that process on its way, and I congratulate the Government on introducing it.
Mr. Terry Rooney (Bradford, North)
I speak as someone who until last May served as a councillor in a metropolitan district.
As such, I must be one of the few hon. Members who has seen the practical effects of the implementation of legislation such as this, and not simply the ideology behind it.
The council that I had the honour to serve was Bradford which, from October 1988, suffered the so-called’ people's revolution’.
That was the authority that caused so much scandal as a result of the compulsory competitive tendering legislation with such iniquitous dealings in the management buy-outs of the school meals service that the Audit Commission had to issue special guidelines for all future cases.
Against all advice and costings, the Conservative council awarded the catering contract for Bradford's theatres to an outside company that was even more expensive than the in-house team.
After three months, the contract had to be cancelled.
The Conservative authority also awarded the contract for vehicle maintenance to a company which, because of its failure to perform, was already in litigation with our neighbouring council.
Those are some of the practical effects of compulsory competitive tendering in which ideology takes the place of practicality and common sense.
The Bill refers to the requirement to publish certain types of information.
Perhaps we should consider publishing details of the many failures in Conservative councils throughout the country, and not least in the borough in which this House is situated which, while exporting its homeless to other authorities, appears to be guilty of the illegal sale of houses that were not its to sell in the first place.
Perhaps we should consider giving widespread publicity to the Audit Commission's account of the Government's failings.
That could be done by means of a supplement to the citizens charter and could be delivered to every household in the country.
There have been reports on poll tax collection, care in the community, housing benefit administration, the cost of providing bed-and-breakfast accommodation, and into the incredible disgrace of the state of school buildings throughout the country — not forgetting, of course, the report that praised the cost-effectiveness of direct labour organisations, contrary to the thrust of Government legislation.
Omissions from the Bill are perhaps as significant as its contents.
The legislation takes no account of the expense that is incurred when a council puts work out to tender.
It costs thousands of pounds to draw up the documentation.
People put together their bids only to find that the work invariably stays with the in-house team.
I am no great lover or defender of the legal profession.
Since the admirable legislation relating to guardians ad litem was enacted, and since the passing of the Children Act 1989, social services work has involved much extra legal work.
The going rate for solicitors in Bradford to work on such legislation is about £60 per hour, whereas the in-house price is about £14 per hour.
However, as a result of this legislation, somebody will no doubt have to go to the expense of drawing up tenders and specifications and of sending them out.
In the end, all that expense will probably be wasted.
The failure to recognise the difference between public concern about standards and public concern about price is what makes the Bill deficient.
If cost alone is to determine the level of service that is provided, we shall no doubt see Ministers trading in their Jaguars for Ladas —
Mr. McCartney
Or Trabants.
Mr. Rooney
Yes, or Trabants.
In Yorkshire, we have an expression,’ You don't get owt for nowt.’
Unfortunately, there is a price to pay for everything and, under this Government, that price is measured by what we call the poll tax and will soon no doubt be measured by the council tax.
If we had stuck with the fair rates policy the vast majority of people in Britain might have been able to bear that price and public services would remain public services, not sacrificial lambs on the altar of the ideology of the Conservative party.
As with a similar Bill that was around at about this time in 1987, this Bill is the product of the Government's imagination.
At the election it will undoubtedly turn into a nightmare for them.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
In view of the shortage of time, my speech will be rather more in note form than I intended, but I hope that the points that I make will be clear.
I join in the general welcome for the Bill among Conservative Members.
When examining the structure of local government and establishing the local government commission, one could not make any better start than the appointment of Sir John Banham as the chairman of the commission if one wants common sense, quality decision making and a tough-minded approach.
There is a strong feeling, certainly among Conservatives in local government, that we need to appoint people with direct local government experience to the commission.
That has been reflected among Conservatives in Parliament to some extent.
When that aim is interpreted, or at least when it comes out of the other end of the machine, it results in the odd ex-chief executive being appointed.
That is not what I mean.
Of course, there is a place for one or two chief executives, but I can think of several names, which I will not mention, of former Labour and Conservative council leaders who could make an enormous contribution.
I hope that some of those names will be borne in mind by my hon. Friend the Minister.
I have a preference, and a preference is shown in the spirit of the Bill, for unitary authorities.
Let us make one comparison.
If West Yorkshire can manage without a county council and manage well, and the West Yorkshire district councils can carry out the necessary functions, why does Derbyshire have to be encumbered with a county council?
There is a strong feeling in Derbyshire that the county council is an encumbrance and that the sooner that it goes, the better.
However, I do not intend to get embroiled in the arguments between the districts and the counties.
If I do, I may find myself kebabed between the two.
They can sort out their own arguments.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State was right about the public relations campaigns being run by the counties and districts.
They are a complete waste of taxpayers' and charge payers' money.
The councils should understand that the campaigns will have no effect.
Even Humberside county council is launching a campaign to show the people that they have been wrong all these years and should have loved it.
Some campaigns are doomed to failure from the start and that one will certainly be a waste of time.
The question to be asked is how the popularity of the final proposals is to be tested.
We should not go so far as to hold a referendum, but the people must have the final say.
I wish to say a few words about what measures we would be considering if we had the misfortune to have a Labour Government.
Rather than moving towards unitary authorities we would be considering the re-establishment of the Greater London council — a new, larger and uglier version.
One would not think that that was Labour's intention from reading the document’ London United’issued by the Labour party, but one would know it from reading the draft of that document which the Labour party did not dare publish.
If it had published the full document as originally written, we would know that there are some real nasties in it.
For example, housing strategy would go to the GLC.
The hon. Member for Carlisle (Mr. Martlew) rightly told us that it would be impossible for a county council to run housing strategy.
Yet that is what the Labour party promises for the new GLC.
It wants to give tourism back to the GLC, yet the only contribution that the GLC made to tourism was to destabilise and almost destroy the London tourist board.
Despite the GLC's lack of success with London buses and the London underground, the Labour party wants to give back to the GLC not only the buses and the underground but Network SouthEast.
That would not go down well with my constituents or with many people in the south-east of England.
To crown it all, it is people like the extremists — in some cases, frankly, nut cases — who run some Labour authorities in London that the Labour party wants to see running London's police.
The Labour party's draft document, which it did not dare to publish, refers to London policing functions.
No wonder the party did not dare publish that document.
The Audit Commission must be free to cause discomfort.
Of course it says things that are uncomfortable for the Government and for local authorities.
Howard Davies has done a very good job there.
I wonder how long he would last in the emasculated Audit Commission about which the Labour party has talked.
The Labour party has form in standing up for secrecy in local government, in opposing the publication of school results or of any other kind of league table.
That is why the party opposes this part of the Bill.
Its approach to cost comparisons is to say that they are not fair, whereas the Conservative approach is to ask,’ How can we do better?
How can we provide a better service?’
The hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould), in a half sentence that he perhaps did not mean to utter, let the cat out of the bag.
He said that the real problem was a failure of local government funding.
In other words, like all of his Labour colleagues, he is promising paradise when he should be talking about priorities.
Labour makes promises: a new council house building programme, more money for community care, more money for roads and pavements, more for teachers, better schools, extra equipment, new capital expenditure, leisure centres and sports facilities — and all of this to be funded without a general increase in taxation.
Labour's deputy leader has been saying to the councils,’ You may not get as much as you want, but you will certainly get more.’
This is a deeply cynical exercise in uncosted but attractive promises.
It is not so much a programme to improve services as a Labour gimmick to gain votes.
Mr. David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside)
The hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) has just done a first-rate job on behalf of the Labour party.
We congratulate him on spelling out the good things that we shall be offering.
We also pledge that when we are drawing up the membership of the commission we shall take into account his earlier suggestions about widening the membership.
We shall even consider him in whatever new role he has at the time.
If ever there was a wolf in sheep's clothing this Bill is it.
It pretends to be about local government when it is nothing of the sort.
It pretends to be in favour of the user, the customer, although it does not mention quality at all.
That being the case, we are right to ask what the Bill's objectives really are.
Clearly, they have nothing to do with extending local democracy or with bringing local government closer to the people or about accountability.
They are not even about the accessibility of services, and they are certainly not about the development of economic and social policies — something that is so often ignored in the scramble to fragment and disintegrate what was built up over the last century by local government people of all political persuasions.
It is certainly not about quality, and it is not about service.
The words’ public service’are, and for the past 13 years have been, anathema to Conservative Members.
The content of the Bill, despite its presentation in this House and in another place as being innocuous, is, in fact, a reflection of the views of the No Turning Back group of Conservative Members.
Unlike the council tax legislation, its provisions can be embraced with genuine enthusiasm by the Minister of State.
Instead of having to stand on his head, he is runing hard and pushing his shoulder to the wheel because, of course, he is a member of the No Turning Back group.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside)
Hon. Members who are shouting’ Hear, hear’indicate the support that the No Turning Back group commands in this debate and in the Conservative party.
Members of the Conservative party were nurtured — nay, bottled — on the heady milk of Margaret Thatcher's version of Conservatism.
The pamphlet’ Choice and Responsibility’, which was supported by the Minister of State, spelt it out.
It said:’ Local authorities, like central Government, should become enablers rather than providers Compulsory competitive tendering should be progressively phased out and replaced by compulsory private tendering Only public health, civil defence and local amenities need to remain an integral part of local government.’
That is the agenda of the No Turning Back group.
That is what it stands for and that is what the Bill embodies.
Part I, which deals with the tendering process, makes the values clear.
Instead of what we would consider to be a reasonable programme for the provision of services, and an increase in control by local people over such provision by holding to account those whom they elect, we have the Conservative party slogans of privatise, centralise and neutralise.
Cost, not quality, ideology not competence, delivery for profit rather than service for people — those are the slogans that we have had from this regime.
Those who read the Bill, the comments in press releases and the local government commission's guidelines will be able to see that.
The Secretary of State talked about cost, economy, efficiency and effectiveness but not about quality or service.
If the Conservative Government were serious about a genuine effort to reach a consensus about the way in which we should mirror what is taking place in the rest of Europe — east, central and west — and in the United States and Canada with the devolving and decentralisation of services, we should be happy to reach an agreement with them.
What is needed is not compulsion or dictation from the centre but people working together in the best interests of their local community.
Interestingly, the message spelt out by the ideological right in the United States is rejected by the ideological right in Britain.
While they both preach the supremacy of the market and the inalienable rights of the private sector, the Americans preach a pragmatism in the provision of local services.
More importantly, they advocate removing the overwhelming power of the central state to dictate, and leaving states, counties and cities to decide matters for themselves.
That message is being fought within the Republican party between Pat Buchanan and George Bush.
Here, we have a strange, enforced market economy.
If a local authority wins a tender, the Government try to take it away.
They invent strange reasons for doing so, saying that it has used anti-competitive practices.
One cannot expect the Government to accept European Community rules about the’ economically advantageous’projects that should be accepted when any scheme goes out to private tender but one can expect consistency.
Three times in the House of Lords spokesmen contradicted themselves when asked whether that phrase should be applied.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) said, the spokesmen got themselves into an even bigger twist over the question whether cost should be the primary basis on which to judge a contract, or whether then to introduce another element so as to ensure that white collar services can be won by the private sector.
In other words, they have an enveloping scheme under which there has to be a basic threshold over which people must pass before getting into the realms of simply accepting the lowest possible tender.
All of the contradiction comes because when the citizens charter was announced and the Prime Minister increased the costs of the Cabinet Office by £800,000 to pay for the work to be done on it, bringing the cost of the Cabinet Office to £22.5 million, it was announced that the PA consultancy report had been commissioned.
At paragraph 1.4, the report states:’ It can be argued (and indeed many of our case study authorities did argue) that, given the problems with the application of CCT in the corporate service sector described above and the current existence of strong pressures to reduce central costs (described in section 2), it is neither desirable nor necessary to extend CCT into this sector at all.
There is some substance to that argument.’
The PA report was supposed to justify the Government's programme and ensure that they could press ahead with what they wanted to do.
Every professional body that had been consulted has rejected the programme and the proposals attaching to it.
The winner of the Queen's gold award for the best architectural projects of the year, Mr. Stansfield Smith — for Hampshire county council schools as it happens, an authority that is proud of local provision by an in-house organisation — has described the programme as being as much about’ cheap politics as about cheap buildings’.
He referred also to cheap tendering.
My right hon. and hon. Friends could not describe it any more succinctly than that.
The programme is intended to ensure that people can make profit out of public service rather than to achieve the goals that we see as important for ourselves.
We, the Opposition, do not have only those who are in public service to support what we believe to be right.
We have, for instance, the former comptroller of the Audit Commission, the new chairman of the local government commission, John Banham.
At the conference of the Institute of Housing at Harrogate in 1985, Mr. Banham praised the authority of the city of which I had the privilege to be leader, describing it as the most efficient authority in Britain.
Mr. Portillo
He did not always do that.
Mr. Blunkett
I think that once was enough, Mr. Banham said that Sheffield was a shining example.
He added — this is the importance of the statement — that privatisation was the last resort of a management which had given up.
That is about the ticket.
There are local government officers who are engaged in management buy-outs and others who decide to work in the private sector and pretend that they can deliver services better while being paid more than in the public sector.
Alternatively, they can get some rewards from shareholdings.
We have Whitewater Leisure, Contemporary Leisure and all the controversy about those who used to work for the Glasgow authority.
They go off and tell untruths about the organisations for which they are working — in fact, downright lies — or for which they worked.
I shall say that outside the House if there is anyone who is worried about privilege.
The examples that I have given show that there is a fundamental myth, which is that public service is incompetent and that the private sector is always right.
It is not always in the right and we know that it is not.
We know, for instance, that 76 per cent .
of the services that have been put out to tender have been won in-house despite the fact that in-house organisations cannot develop the capital investment and lease equipment in the same way as the private sector.
Everything that they borrow has to be put against basic credit approvals.
They are bound and gagged when it comes to extending services by engaging in competition with the private sector outside the local authority.
Some of us were interested to hear the Secretary of State espousing or advocating cross-boundary tendering.
I say to the hon. Member for Harrow, West that I think that the right hon. Gentleman's words will have reached the chairman of the Audit Commission.
They might even have reached the legal officer, Mr. Tony Child.
If that has happened, his view will change overnight.
I hope so, because it would be nice to integrate — to subsume — the Audit Commission, in an orderly fashion, into our quality commission.
That would provide quality for people and ensure that league tables mean what they should mean, which is a comparison of the delivery of services to people.
They should show, for example, how many home helps per thousand of the population are being provided.
They should show up Tory authorities for not providing nursery provision.
It is 20 years since the previous Prime Minister, when she was Secretary of State for Education, promised universal nursery education for all three to five-year-olds whose parents desired it.
Promises fulfilled — people standing on their heads by the dozen.
I shall cite one league table comparison that might be worth considering.
Earlier today the Secretary of State chided me and said that in some way I was an advocate of his system because I used the example of refuse collection and its cost to show that his system was simple and that we were in agreement on it.
He should ask Chiltern, the Buckinghamshire district that I quoted, and whose refuse collection costs a great deal, why that should be so.
It is because collecting the refuse of houses in close proximity, such as terraced houses in the city of Sheffield, costs only one third of what it costs to collect the refuse of houses in the posh south-west of Sheffield, where the houses are spaced out and the collection men have to walk up long drives.
In Sheffield, householders do not have to carry refuse to the end of their drives — how do we construct league tables to reflect that?
Conservative Members might like to think about the league table that I am about to cite.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is keen on people reading books.
We are all keen on that.
I am desperately in favour of my children learning to read books.
What about the number of books issued?
I am not referring to The Sunday Times cocked-up, distorted version, which CIPFA denounced after it had been printed.
I shall give the figures for the number of library books issued per hundred of the population across a sample of authorities.
For Manchester, it is 537.
Who controls Manchester?
It is Labour.
For Hammersmith and Fulham, the figure is 382; for Lewisham, 371; for Merton, 366; for Greenwich, 346; and for Islington, 345.
For Suffolk — a Tory authority — the figure is 129.
It could manage only just over one book per person per year.
For Berkshire, it is 134; for East Sussex, 149; for Cornwall, 153; and for West Sussex, 167.
What a fantastically literate lot they are in Tory authorities.
People talk about reading and about literacy, but they do not spend the money to enable people to achieve that.
The Labour party believes in service and in spending money wisely on providing that service.
We believe in a local government structure and a set of functions that enable that to happen.
The hon. Member for Spelthorne (Mr. Wilshire) found himself in an interesting ideological twist on whether function or structure came first.
He denounced function as an irrelevance and said that we needed to set up a structure.
Presumably, we could invent anything that we liked.
Local government could meet in a telephone box because function is not important.
However, we all know that it is important and that it is the driving force of structure.
We need the right finance and the right structure, but above all we need the right objectives.
We need to know what we are setting out and why.
We need to know the principles behind what we are doing.
If we believe, and many of us do, in unitary local government — one door to knock on and one set of people to hold to account — we must give them something to do other than riding around in a civic car pretending that they are important and delivering nothing, responsive to no demands, not aspiring to change and improvement, and not even doing what the Conservatives of old did in the Chamberlain era when there was the sort of socialism that is now anathema to the Tory party.
Instead, according to the Tory party, and as spelt out in the guidelines to the commission, we have a structure that accords with the aims of the right hon. Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley).
He is ill, and I hope that he is now improving.
In one of his speeches, the right hon. Gentleman spoke of a council that met once a year to put out contracts, had a good lunch and then went home.
I am sure that all Conservative Members are in favour of a good lunch; but it simply will not do.
Let me spell out what the commission's report is supposed to do.
The guidelines do not talk about developing a structure that is crucial to the quality delivery of services.
This is what they say about housing:’ Authorities also own and manage 4 million houses nationally.’
Referring to assessment and monitoring, the guidelines continue:’ Their role in these areas of housing will be passed over to housing associations and the private sector.’
They speak of opting out in the primary, secondary and further education sectors; as for social services, they speak of monitoring and enabling rather than providing.
Every part of appendix A talks about disabling local government, rather than enabling it to perform.
We offer something very different.
We offer a decent finance system that can sustain the functions that we give to local government, and a structure that is not piecemeal, but is based on identifiable communities — that is geared not to numbers alone, but to the ability to provide a decent level of service.
What the Bill offers is not local, nor is it government.
It is dictation from the centre; it is administration rather than government.
What is not privatised will be centralised.
All that the Bill contains, and the ideology behind it — the values and principles that it espouses — must be rejected tonight in favour of genuine local democracy, and a Labour Government who will implement real policies for the people whom we represent.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
I thank the many Conservative Members who have spoken so well in support of the Bill.
My hon. Friend the Member for Spelthorne (Mr. Wilshire), who is one of the most thoughtful Members of the House in this context, described it as historic.
It is indeed historic, not because reforms of local government have not taken place before — they have done so often — but because it offers a reform of the structure of local government.
That structure can now be diverse, based on local choices, and it can place tremendous emphasis on community identity.
Different solutions can be adopted in different places, solutions that are suited to the different needs of different people.
My hon. Friend the Member for Gloucester (Mr. French) was particularly strong on that point.
It struck me as extraordinary that the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) should attack us on that point.
To him, the idea of different solutions in different places seemed untidy — chaotic, he said.
It did not meet the socialist ideal of being able to impose the same solution from Whitehall on every part of England.
It appears that, over the past 20 years, the hon. Gentleman has slept soundly.
The Labour party has learnt nothing about the deep-seated wish of the British people for local government structures that reflect what they feel about their local communities, and units of government that mean something to them and are not imposed on them.
Mr. John Maxton (Glasgow, Cathcart)
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Portillo
I am sorry; I will not give way.
Something very funny must have happened to the hon. Member for Dagenham on his way to the Chamber.
Last year, when the Government announced the proposals, Labour appeared to be in favour of the reform of local government structure and the establishment of a local government commission.
The hon. Member for Dagenham must have been speaking out of turn at that time; he has certainly been nobbled since.
It may well be that the policy was agreed by the shadow Cabinet, but some chance remark made by the Leader of the Opposition at Luigi's restaurant threw the whole thing into disarray.
The Labour party is certainly in opposition now.
I am not sure whether I am more appalled at the prospect of the Labour party being in government than I am at the prospect of having the support of the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) and the Liberal party.
Diversity is the point of the Bill.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Reading, West (Sir A. Durant) said, backed up so eloquently by my right hon. Friend the Member for Southend, West (Mr. Channon), we do not want this reform to result in lines being drawn on a map that will be imposed upon people.
There is no need for a minimum size.
There is no Whitehall model that could embrace the Isles of Scilly and the demands of Yorkshire.
There is no reason, as the right hon. Member for Halton (Mr. Oakes) and the hon. Member for Eastbourne were concerned to know, to presume the need for joint authorities.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Southend, West asked me a number of specific questions.
The chairman-designate of the local government commission, Sir John Banham, is in place.
I hope that soon, bearing in mind what my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) said, we shall make more appointments to the shadow commission so that the commissioners can begin to plan their work in order that the commission can start its work shortly after Royal Assent.
The Bill specifies a maximum of 15 commissioners.
That number is enough to operate on a regional basis.
It should be possible for the local government commission to consider four or five different areas throughout England at any one time.
The areas will differ in size.
I believe that the smallest area that will be considered by the commission at any one time will be a county, with the possible exception of certain islands.
However, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Southend, West said, it may be appropriate in some cases to consider a group of counties if clear cross-boundary issues are likely to arise during the discussion period.
The order in which we put the various parts of England under the local government commission's microscope will be for the Government to decide.
It will take some years to complete that process, but that is a necessary price to pay for the flexibility that the legislation gives us.
It enables us to tailor our solutions to suit the needs of different places.
We are predisposed towards unitary authorities.
We believe that there are strong arguments in favour of unitary authorities.
My hon. Friend the Member for Hyndburn (Mr. Hargreaves) spoke eloquently about them in general and about how they would apply in his particular case.
When there are two tiers of local authority, people tend to become confused about who is doing what.
Accountability suffers.
People do not know which authority they are paying for particular services.
It leads people to believe that there is excessive bureaucracy and overlap and the potential for waste.
We do not want to be dogmatic.
When he spoke about north Yorkshire, my right hon. Friend the Member for Selby (Mr. Alison) said that it would be unwise for any Government to impose the same pattern on every part of England because the differences between one part of the country and another are so great.
At the beginning of his speech the hon. Member for Dagenham said that no one disagrees with the Government's wish to introduce simplicity into local government, but the fact is that the Labour party profoundly disagrees with that wish.
It wishes to impose an extra tier of regional government upon the country.
It does not matter to the Labour party that the regions are unpopular, or that they cannot be afforded, or that they are unwanted.
The Labour party still favours introducing another layer of government, imposing it upon the people of this country and raising taxes to pay for it.
What clearly are wanted are the links that people cherish with their traditional counties.
Even if the units of government are not based upon the counties, people still hark back to the links that they had with the traditional counties.
They are still keen on those links.
There is no reason why the traditional counties should not emerge as part of the process, even if they are counties that have no administrative functions in certain places.
The Opposition laugh at their peril.
It matters very much indeed to the people of Wirral whether they live in Cheshire or Merseyside.
It matters very much to the people of Coventry whether they live in Warwickshire or in the west midlands.
Laughter
My hon. Friend the Member for Bolton, West (Mr. Sackville) is in his place.
It matters a lot to many people in Bolton whether they live in Manchester or Lancashire.
Many of my constituents are deeply concerned about Middlesex.
To the people of England, it is more than a question of who administers local government: the lines on the map, the cricket teams, the Lords Lieutenants and signposts are important.
To the Labour party, they are untidy matters, which is why it not only opposes these changes but laughs when they are mentioned.
The hon. Member for Dagenham wants not only to recreate a GLC but, as my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West said, for it to be bigger and for it to control the police, which the old GLC never did.
He warned us that we would pay the price.
He said that a Labour Government would create a new GLC.
Labour will pay the price: there will be no Labour Government because of the London effect.
Once again, we shall win marginal seats in Lambeth, Haringey, Lewisham and Waltham Forest, where people are fed up with Labour government.
We shall win in Brent and Ealing, where we have already turfed out the Labour party, and marginal seats in Wandsworth and Westminster, where people have seen the benefits of Conservative government.
The London effect will again work in favour of the Government.
One has only to look around to see Labour government in action in London.
I appreciate the courtesy of the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) in giving notice of the details that he wanted to raise.
We shall address those points in Committee, and my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary and I will be happy to deal with them in correspondence.
However, it would be unrealistic to do so in replying to the debate.
We have sought evidence that the de minimis rule is inappropriate.
In England, no such evidence has come forward, but it is for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland to decide whether he is convinced by the evidence.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow raised a number of other important issues that we shall want to consider in Committee and, I hope, in response to consultation.
Mr. Dalyell
Will there be a decision on de minimis fairly soon?
Mr. Portillo
That is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland, who will have noted the points that the hon. Gentleman made.
The hon. Member for Makerfield (Mr. McCartney) mentioned the fire service.
I do not share his view that it is inappropriate for it to be excluded from compulsory competitive tendering.
None the less, we are in a consultation period and the Home Secretary will want to take account of all the points that are made to him.
As the hon. Gentleman said, the opinions of chief fire officers will obviously weigh with the Government.
There has been a change in the approach of local government to compulsory competitive tendering, but it appears to have been lost on the Labour party.
Local government is anxious to provide better value, to improve management, and to seek competitive bids for many of the services that it provides.
My hon. Friend the Under-Secretary and I received representations from local authorities about their standard spending assessments.
Hardly a single Labour or Conservative-controlled authority failed to mention the strides that they are making in improving the competitiveness of services and in putting services out to competition.
The Labour party is almost alone in the world in questioning the benefits of competitive tendering.
My hon. Friend the Member for Reading, West and my right hon. Friend the Member for Southend, West gave good examples of the way in which it is improving services.
My hon. Friend the Member for Bournemouth, East (Mr. Atkinson) made an eloquent speech about compulsory competitive tendering; and I was heartened by the fact that my hon. Friend the Member for Chichester (Mr. Nelson) also realised that we were talking not about compulsory contracting out but about compulsory competitive tendering, which means that there is an opportunity for the in-house team to make a bid.
Many local authorities have moved ahead and are putting many of their services out to competitive tender.
They are already investigating the scope for putting some more services — management services, computer services and the collection of moneys — out to the private sector.
In compulsory competitive tendering the Government are merely bringing up the rear and ensuring that local authorities that have not yet taken advantage of those techniques are brought up to the level of the best.
How the House will have valued yet another statement from the hon. Member for Dagenham, this one to the effect that he would do something only in extremis.
On this occasion, he said that if he were Secretary of State he would introduce compulsory competitive tendering only in extremis.
That is yet another case of the hon. Gentleman not being able to make up his mind about his policies and he must therefore reserve the right to do precisely what is Government policy.
I thought that my hon. Friend the Member for Bournemouth, East was extremely eloquent about the importance of levelling the playing field between the private and public sectors.
There have been far too many cases of abuse in which local authorities have contrived a system of competitive tendering under which only the direct service organisation could win because special conditions were imposed.
Those practices must be brought to an end, and I know that my hon. Friends will strongly support the Government when we say that enough is enough and that if we are to have a compulsory competitive tendering regime, it must be one under which the private and public sectors are able to compete with absolute equality.
The hon. Member for Dagenham said that the citizens charter had been ineffective, but how wrong he was.
Here we are, just a few months after the announcement of the citizens charter, legislating to improve the services provided to citizens.
We are already halfway through a Bill which is a major step forward in that respect, and it is breath-taking nonsense for the hon. Gentlemen to suggest that Labour authorities were pioneers in the provision of better services to their constituents.
We know that Labour authorities in London and throughout the country have become bywords for poor and expensive services, for litter-ridden streets, for badly-managed housing estates, for miserable conditions and for high levels of taxation.
The hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) raised the question of how much it cost to collect a tonne of rubbish in one place as opposed to another.
It is expensive in Wandsworth because the streets are swept every day.
I suspect that it would be cheaper to collect a tonne of rubbish in Lambeth on the basis of an annual sweep of the streets because, to pick up a tonne of rubbish there, one would hardly have to stir from the spot.
That is the experience of many people living in Lambeth.
We shall introduce a system of measurements so that people in different local authority areas will know precisely to what standard their local services are being provided.
The hon. Member for Glasgow, Maryhill (Mrs. Fyfe) criticised the Government for not slavishly following the advice given by consultants.
In this Government it is the Ministers who decide on policy, not the consultants.
It gave us a good insight into a Labour Government.
A Labour Government would bear the impression that the last consultant laid upon them.
The Opposition have no philosophy of their own.
Presumably, they would set out on one course of action, receive a consultants' report which would blow them off their course, the journalists would then be summoned to Luigi's restaurant and policy would once again be changed.
Labour is offering to people who are presently enjoying the benefits of compulsory competitive tendering a promise to scrap it.
It offers to those who demand quality the abolition of the Audit Commission, something to which it is pledged.
Labour offers to all those who want simpler local government a new tier of expensive regional government.
We offer higher quality services brought about by competition, we offer better information to the public about the standards of service which they will receive, and we offer to reform local government to reflect wishes and natural communities.
For those reasons, I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr. Corbyn
First, I must apologise to the House for not being present in the Chamber for some of the earlier speeches.
Unfortunately, however, I did hear the speech of the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit).
Given that he served in Cabinet for many years, I should have thought that he would be more objective and would not simply take as his evidence two cases from the front page of the News of the World.
The right hon. Gentleman cannot even be bothered to pass on his information to the Home Office or the police, yet he extrapolates from that that there is a massive amount of fraud and a refugee and immigration racket.
For one moment, when the right hon. Gentleman first rose to speak, and given that he will not be standing at the next election, I thought that Daniel had come to judgment and that the right hon. Gentleman was going to show some concern for those who seek asylum in this country and who have fled from oppressive regimes that were supported by the Government of which he was happily a Cabinet member for so many years.
Those people have suffered torture and all sorts of indignities and have missing family members.
However, the right hon. Gentleman chose instead to use the race card, which his party is determined to play in the run-up to the election, by extrapolating from those two cases that there is massive fraud in matters relating to refugees, thereby smearing the character of all those who seek asylum in this country, without any thought of the conditions from which they have come.
I might have thought that the right hon. Gentleman would draw the attention of the House to his views on the two new clauses, but I do not recall him even mentioning them.
Perhaps he has not read them.
Indeed, he does not appear to have a copy of them with him.
That seems a strangely ill-prepared way to attend such a debate — without a copy of the Bill or of the Hansard of the Standing Committee, with Mr. Speaker's selection of amendments or copies of those amendments.
Mr. Madden
The right hon. Gentleman has the News of the World.
Mr. Corbyn
As my hon. Friend has pointed out, the right hon. Gentleman came with a crucial piece of information — the front page of the News of the World.
We all know where he gets his information.
These new clauses are crucial ones about the right to independent legal advice.
I should have thought that the right hon. Member for Chingford, who believes, apparently, in freedom of choice in all matters, would have supported the right of freedom to choose independent legal advice.
But he does not do that; instead, he supports the Government's curtailment of that right.
He supports the curtailment, apparently, of green-form advice, which I believe is largely motivated by the embarrassment which the Government have suffered from a number of very successful cases that have been mounted against Home Office decisions by law centres and legal aid practices throughout the country.
That, I believe, is the motive behind what they are doing.
I believe that an important part of the first of the new clauses tabled by my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) is the independence of interpreters.
While I am not denigrating individual interpreters working for the immigration service or the Home Office, many of whom work extremely hard and do a very good job, it is essential that those seeking political asylum have an absolute guarantee that the person doing the translating is independent, is fully aware of the importance of an asylum application, is fully familiar with the cases and is somebody whose background has been inquired into to make sure that he or she is not in a position to infiltrate the immigration service and pass information back to the regime from which the individual may be fleeing, thus putting their family at risk.
These are extremely serious matters.
Anyone seeking political asylum is taking a major step.
People arriving in this country for such a purpose have to go through a long interview procedure to process their claims.
While that is being done, their families at home, in Zaire, Somalia, Iran, Iraq, or wherever it may be, are in great danger if the authorities in those countries find out that an asylum application has been made in Europe or anywhere else.
We need to know that all those who are taken on as interpreters by the Home Office are responsible people and will not pass back that kind of information.
I heard what the hon. Member for Beckenham (Sir P. Goodhart) said and I share his disappointment and that of my hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, West (Mr. Madden) that the amendments relating to the rights of the child have not been selected.
When a child arrives in this country unaccompanied and seeking political asylum — in some cases, it is extremely obvious why they are seeking political asylum — it is very important that the child is treated properly, as any homeless or friendless child should be treated.
We discussed these matters at some length in Committee.
I have had experience of children arriving in this country unaccompanied from Somalia, Ethiopia and Eritrea.
They are desperately sad cases.
They have come from a war-ravaged country where their parents or friends have thought the best thing to do is to get them on a plane to some safer place.
That is not an unreasonable thing to do when one considers the circumstances in which they might be living.
They turn up on church doorsteps in inner London hoping that the Church will be able to help them out in some way.
Then there is a rather unseemly scramble, with London social services authorities passing the children from one place to another until somebody finally accepts our responsibilities under the Children Act 1989.
What we were looking for in Committee, and what the children's legal aid centre was looking for, was a declaration that the Government's signature to the United Nation convention on the rights of the child would be enshrined in the spirit of law in this country and that there would be independent panels that could look after the welfare of the children to ensure that their welfare was the primary consideration.
That surely ought to be what we are discussing today.
These two new clauses are important, and the Government should be able to accept them, because they would ensure a right to independent legal advice and a choice of that advice.
I am not condemning the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service or the people who work in it.
I am saying that, as an organisation, it cannot cope with the work it has to do at the present time.
No organisation could expand as quickly as the new organisation that is to be set up is apparently expected to expand to take on all this work.
I know from first-hand experience about the excellent work that is done by a number of legal aid practices and law centres in supporting asylum applicants.
It could well be that the right hon. Member for Chingford and others are so offended by the success of those organisations and the ability of those individuals that they wish to curtail the right of people to seek that independent legal advice.
That seems to me to be completely wrong.
We should be supporting the right to seek independent legal advice in support of an asylum application.
Nobody who seeks political asylum does it lightly.
It is a very serious step to take, with implications for the individual, his family and the rest of his life.
It is not something that people easily embark upon.
I think it is time that the House took the issue seriously and guaranteed the right to independent advice.
Mr. Ashby
I do not support the new clause, but I want to bring one aspect of it to my right hon. Friend's attention.
It is the need, when an application for asylum is being considered by the special adjudicator, for a second interpreter.
Denmark, which I visited to explore this very subject, uses this process.
The Danes have made it quite clear — and I accept the arguments and the evidence that they have produced — that a second interpreter is absolutely necessary in the case of an application for leave.
The application for leave is a much more beneficial ground than most other countries in Europe give; it is a much freer ground.
In this respect, we are much more generous in this country.
But it is really important that there should be another interview with another interpreter, and that it should be before the adjudicator in the application for leave.
I see my right hon. Friend shaking his head, but I hope that he will take into account what I have said.
Mr. Vaz
I, too, wish to apologise to the House for not having been present at the start of this debate.
I was attending elsewhere to an immigration problem which was based on a misunderstanding between the Home Office and the Foreign Office.
That is why I had to spend the last half an hour intervening and telephoning both Departments to try to deal with the problem.
I want first to say something nice about the Under-Secretary of State and, on the record, to thank him for his decision in the case of Younis Patel, who was in prison in Leicester for a number of months.
The case was reviewed by the Minister and Mr. Patel was allowed to stay.
That is the only nice thing that I propose to say about the hon. Gentleman.
That is the only case of the thousands of cases that I have raised with him to which he has said yes.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
Not true.
Mr. Vaz
Well, perhaps we can count them on the fingers of one hand.
I want to comment briefly on the Government's proposals and to support wholeheartedly the new clauses and amendments tabled by my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley).
I believe that it is a fundamental principle that people should have access to independent legal advice.
I make no mention of the crisis with the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service, except to say this.
I have referred many immigration cases to that organisation.
I believe that until very recently it operated perfectly properly.
I have no great attachment to solicitors earning large sums of money dealing with immigration cases.
I believe that there are many examples of people having to pay large sums to solicitors who are not experienced in immigration matters to deal with such matters.
But until we have a system that allows properly resourced public access to organisations such as UKIAS, we cannot have a system that precludes people from seeking independent legal advice from private firms of solicitors.
The right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) may find this surprising, but I deplore the fact that some people who work in counselling services set up those services specifically to rip off people.
That is utterly deplorable.
If the right hon. Member has the evidence, he should place it before the Home Secretary, the police and other appropriate authorities rather than come here, in the time off that he has from his interviews on Sky, to make wild accusations about everyone involved in immigration matters.
Mr. Winnick
Does not my hon. Friend consider it surprising that the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit), who always wants to lecture us about the rule of law although we certainly need no lectures about it from him, comes to the House with, I think, two cases where crookedness was involved?
Instead of taking the cases to the police, as he should have done and as any other hon. Member would have done, and certainly to the Home Office Minister, he found it more appropriate to come to the House and read from The News of the World to get as much publicity for himself as he could.
Mr. Vaz
I agree wholeheartedly with my hon. Friend.
Photocopies or even originals of the News of the World, if they remain from last Sunday, are no substitute for evidence being placed before the Home Secretary so that appropriate action could be taken.
Hon. Members who are present all have a constituency interest in immigration.
We know from our weekly surgeries the amount of work that immigration problems generate.
In many respects we act in the shoes of solicitors and legal advisers because we have gained great experience in dealing with these matters.
Rather than refer them to other people, I find myself, as I am sure my colleagues do too, making the basic applications for citizens who come to me in order to save them time, effort and money.
Mr. Ashby
Has not my right hon. Friend the Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) made a powerful case for the use of fingerprints under clause 2?
Was not that the main thrust of his observations?
There is a very powerful case when a body like the British Refugee Council could be fooled.
Is not the hon. Gentleman concerned that the true asylum seeker should be protected so that he is free to make his claim for asylum unhindered by the illegal actions of others who misuse the process?
Mr. Vaz
We are all here to support genuine asylum seekers; that is why we tabled the new clauses.
If the new clauses are accepted, we will make sure that genuine asylum seekers will be treated decently and will have access to proper independent legal advice.
Before I was elected to the House, I worked as a solicitor in a law centre in Leicester where I dealt with many immigration cases.
Because of my constituency, since election I have continued to deal with them.
The anxiety, hardship and distress suffered by people as they wait for decisions from the Home Office are obvious to anyone.
We feel very strongly that people should have access to solicitors who have knowledge of immigration law, and who can protect people by explaining the difficult legislation and regulations dealing with immigration policy.
Over the past 12 years immigration policy developed by the Government has become more restrictive and hurts many people.
When the Government introduce complicated legislation, it is only right that people should have access to those with basic information about it.
UKIAS or another body should be developed on a national basis, with branches in all parts of the country.
Certainly I should like to see a branch in Leicester.
I do not see why my constituents should have to go to Birmingham or elsewhere to get effective legal advice.
If we had such a network, we would be able to withdraw the support which we currently give to private practitioners, but the Minister knows that we cannot do so at this stage because there is no body of effective legal advice and opinion to benefit people.
I make no secret of the fact that we should have a public legal system in Britain, funded by central Government through law centres.
Under that system, which we will begin to have under the Labour Government, we would not have to worry about dispensing public funds to private solicitors.
As to interpreters, I do not speak every language of the Indian sub-continent.
I need interpreters in my surgery who can speak Punjabi, Urdu and Gujarati, otherwise I cannot understand fully what my constituents are saying when they have complicated immigration problems.
It is only right that we should put forward modest proposals to ensure that there is access to interpreters.
I understand that even the The People has started to produce certain pages in Urdu.
If that newspaper recognises the importance of doing so, Parliament should recognise its importance and it should be enshrined in the legislation.
I hope that the Minister will realise that we have made sensible suggestions.
They would ease his load by giving people access to proper and effective legal advice.
If they had access to interpreters, it would enable his Department speedily to deal with immigration cases.
Mr. Nicholas Soames (Crawley)
I should like to intervene only for a moment because I have an important constituency interest in that Gatwick, a major inter-national airport, is within my constituency.
I agree with the hon. Member for Leicester, East (Mr. Vaz) about the anguish and anxiety caused to people by immigration problems.
Inevitably it takes a great deal of time to go into these cases.
It is right that they should be dealt with in a humane and honourable manner.
In my view, the steps that the Government have taken, and are proposing to take, will in no way diminish the handling of the cases; indeed, I hope that they will speed it up and make it more effective and efficient.
May I pay a tribute to the Under-Secretary, my hon. Friend the Member for Fareham (Mr. Lloyd), from whom I have always had the greatest courtesy and the most enormous amount of help in dealing with constituency cases.
He takes great trouble over a seemingly endless stream of difficulties.
I am grateful to him.
I do not recognise in what the hon. Member for Leicester, East said about my hon. Friend any vestige of truth.
My hon. Friend has been a staunch ally in trying to resolve difficulties as they have arisen for my constituents.
I should like also to pay tribute to the work of UKIAS at Gatwick.
I have absolutely no doubt about its independence.
I understand that the statistics show that UKIAS ranks ahead of other people in its success rate at tribunals — not that that is necessarily a good or bad indication, but it is fact.
The House need have no anxiety about the independence of UKIAS.
I understand the concern that people may feel about the proposed change, but I am content that it should go thus.
As to the unfair and entirely predictable venom that was poured on the head of my right hon. Friend the Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) a moment ago, it is increasingly impossible to have a sensible talk about sensitive matters without such abuse.
My right hon. Friend was correct and was entitled to raise the case that he did in the House just now.
We all saw it in the newspaper and there is great public concern.
Many constituents write to me regularly, expressing themselves strongly and loudly of the opinion, or in some cases the fact, that there has been serious abuse of the immigration laws.
We all know that it goes on.
All of us who have immigrant populations in our constituencies have become more adept at identifying dodgy lobbying.
Over the last nine years, as I have dealt more and more with these matters, I have gained more experience.
My right hon. Friend was right to air on the Floor of the House a matter which, however specific — no doubt it is being looked into by the authorities and by the police —
Mr. Vaz
Is it?
Mr. Soames
I am sure that it is.
Mr. Tebbit
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for what he has said.
It enables me to say that I was accused of racism by Labour Members although I had not mentioned the race of the individuals in the two cases to which I referred.
Mr. Vaz
What is it?
Mr. Tebbit
I shall tell the hon. Gentleman a little more about the two individuals, if I may, in a brief intervention.
One gentleman has fled the country of his own volition, using yet another identity.
The other gentleman to whom I referred, Mr. Williams, was deported some little while ago, it being cheaper to deport him than prosecute him for the gross fraud that he has perpetrated against the United Kingdom.
Mr. Soames
My right hon. Friend makes his own point.
These matters, however disagreeable they may be to raise in an individual context, are discussed in the pubs in my constituency, as they are discussed and debated at the Eton College debating society or the Liverpool polytechnic.
Why should they not be aired on the Floor of the House?
My right hon. Friend is right to raise in front of the —
Mr. Vaz
We are merely suggesting that if the right hon. Member for Chingford has information he must place it before the appropriate authorities.
That is what he should do.
Mr. Soames
As I have said, I have no doubt that, given the scale of the fraud, the matter is being investigated vigorously.
I have no shadow of a doubt about that.
I am aware of cases in my constituency — of course they are rare — where the investigating authorities have gone into matters extremely carefully and at great length while being most careful to ensure that there is no publicity that would be likely to lead to prejudice one way or the other.
The only point that I seek to make —
Mr. Boateng
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Soames
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will forgive me if I do not.
I wish only to make the point that I think it wrong that Opposition Members should seek to criticise my right hon. Friend the Member for Chingford, who has fairly raised a matter that carries with it considerable concern in all strata of society.
It is right that it should be raised on the Floor of the House.
Mr. Boateng
The objection is not that such matters are raised but to the poisonous or venomous manner in which it is done.
Mr. Soames
That is precisely the point that I am trying to make.
I have seen my right hon. Friend the Member for Chingford being poisonous or venomous, but neither poison nor venom did I detect when he raised a fair, sensible and extremely important matter that needs to be debated frankly and fully on the Floor of the House without the sort of ignorant, absurd and childish platitudes that we have so recently heard.
I have had regular and extensive contact and dealings with the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service as an ordinary Member who has regularly to deal with immigration matters.
I am confident that when I recommend a constituent to see UKIAS he or she will be dealt with in an entirely independent and completely honourable and decent manner.
I commend the work of my hon. Friend the Minister in that respect.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
I start by agreeing with the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) that asylum seekers should be guaranteed good legal advice and representation.
I have considerable sympathy for what the two new clauses seek to do.
Before any fluttering expectations begin to arise in the minds or breasts — I do not mind which it is — of Opposition Members, I should say that I cannot advise the House to write the two clauses into the Bill, because they deal, for example, with administrative matters such as a once-off requirement for a report to be made to Parliament — new clause 2 — and the keeping of a custody record — new clause 10 — that should not be set down in primary legislation.
They do so — this comment applies especially to new clause 10 — in language that is more absolute then justified or practical.
For example, new clause 10 provides an asylum seeker with the entitlement’ to consult a solicitor or advisor of his choice privately at any time.’
That would be unexceptionable if’ at any time’were changed to’any reasonable time’.
The right of the asylum seeker to be informed’ in the language of his choice’is too sweeping, though I accept the general direction of that which is sought.
There are some languages that require interpreters to which we do not have ready access, though we always make every effort to ensure that we find an interpreter who speaks the applicant's language or at least one in which he or she is comfortable.
I have given some of the prosaic reasons why the new clauses should not become part of the Bill —
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Minister give way on the provision of interpreters?
Mr. Lloyd
I shall not give way if the hon. Gentleman wishes to ask about that.
I shall take up the matter more fully later in my remarks.
Mr. John Fraser (Norwood)
The Minister has referred to what he described as administrative matters that he thinks are not amenable to legislation.
He has said that he is in agreement, but with some reservations, about the keeping of custody records and access to a solicitor of the applicant's choice.
Will he give an undertaking that he will make administrative arrangements that will equally well put into effect the entitlements that we seek in new clause 10?
Mr. Lloyd
I can give the hon. Gentleman the undertaking — it is of the sort that I gave him in Committee — that I believe that many things should be done with the extra resources that we shall have, and in the context of administrative matters the care of records is relevant.
We shall be able to undertake that task more fully and in a better manner in future.
It is a matter of priorities.
I undertake to examine all these matters to see what we might do.
I cannot say that in an administrative context we shall take up every item that appears in the new clauses, at least not in the way that is implied.
I am not against the general tenor of that which is sought.
I have set out some of the reasons why the new clauses should not become part of the Bill and now I shall say something about general intention.
It is right that, for example, the House should be well informed of the arrangements for advice and representation.
It is open to the House to ask for reports, and it can pose questions at any time.
I believe that I am being asked a question on my meeting yesterday with the UKIAS executive council, and I have no doubt that other hon. Members have tabled questions.
It is my intention to keep hon. Members informed of the temporary arrangements that will be made for the UKIAS refugee unit.
This will be done by the best and most helpful means that are available to us, so that the House is kept informed at each stage.
I shall deal with that matter more fully in my later remarks.
I look to the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook when I say that I am not clear about the precise intention that lies behind the phrase in new clause 2, which refers to’ satisfactory access to advice and representation’— this is for applicants —’from advisers and representatives of their choice’.
Of course applicants may continue to have advice and representation of their choice; we place no limit on either.
The present arrangements for representations are as they were under the Labour Government, which means that publicly funded representation, as opposed to advice, is available only from the UKIAS.
Does new clause 2 envisage that legal aid will be extended to representation before the special appellate system takes effect?
That would be a fundamental change from the practice of Labour Governments of which the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook was a member.
Mr. Hattersley
I do not know why the Minister is making such heavy weather of this matter.
I suspect that he is doing so because he believed what the Home Secretary said when he intervened.
The statement made by the right hon. Gentleman on 2 July included the following two sentences:’ At present advice and assistance but not representation are available to those whose means qualify them under the legal aid green form scheme.
We propose that in future advice and assistance, and where necessary representation before the immigrant appellate authority, should instead be provided by the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service.’
That can mean only that UKIAS was to be made the exclusive provider of legal advice.
We are opposed to that.
We wish to return to the scheme which was operated and was intended to operate until the Home Secretary made his statement on 2 July.
Mr. Lloyd
The purpose of my question was to extract from the right hon. Gentleman what he thought was meant not by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Home Department but the new clause.
When I intervened in the right hon. Gentleman's speech he replied in such confusion that I thought it best to give him time to reflect, and to ask my question again later.
Does the right hon. Gentleman intend to abandon the arrangement with which Labour was content when it was last in power?
I hope that the right hon. Gentleman can answer that now.
Is he saying that free representation — as opposed to advice — paid for out of public funds would continue to be a monopoly of UKIAS or some other similar organisation?
Alternatively, is the right hon. Gentleman implying — as I thought that he was in some of his remarks — that legal aid would be generally available to those appearing before adjudicators or tribunals, and that they could secure representation from any part of the legal profession?
Mr. Hattersley
I was not arguing — and never have argued — for the hypothesis that the Minister irrelevantly introduces.
I want to see the status quo— the preservation of the system that the Home Secretary said on 2 July that he intended to abandon.
I understood from the Home Secretary's intervention that the total abandonment of the green form scheme was never in the Home Secretary's mind.
There is confusion throughout the House about the Under-Secretary's intentions.
Does he or does he not propose to abandon the green form scheme totally and completely?
Mr. Lloyd
I am trying to tease from the right hon. Gentleman what he thinks is the meaning of the new clause that he invites the House to adopt.
I understand that it would leave the situation exactly as it is now, with green form advice available from a legal practitioner or free from UKIAS — but with representation confined only to UKIAS or any successor body.
As to the Government's position on the green form scheme, my noble and learned Friend the Lord Chancellor and my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State said that instead of an arrangement unique to the immigration appellate system, whereby public funds finance two sources of free advice — UKIAS and green form — they were considering concentrating the provision of free advice through UKIAS, so that only that organisation would be publicly funded to give advice.
My noble and learned Friend and my right hon. Friend made it clear that the green form scheme would not be withdrawn until a full, free, prompt, and convenient form of professional advice was available to every asylum seeker.
They made it clear also, as they had to do because of the rules by which we work, that no such change could be put into effect without formal consultation and the consent of both Houses.
Parliament will decide.
The right hon. Gentleman will have ample opportunity to speak his mind and to record his vote if and when my noble and learned Friend the Lord Chancellor brings forward considered proposals on the green form scheme.
Until then, green form professional advice will continue to be available.
Mr. Hattersley
It would be churlish of me not to say how much I welcome that statement, and how much I rejoice in the fact that to add to the four climbdowns that I announced at 4 o'clock, there is a fifth — the abandonment of the proposal announced by the Home Secretary in column 167 of Hansard on 2 July.
Mr. Lloyd
That proposal is still under serious consideration.
We would not make such a large change without formal consultation.
The right hon. Member for Sparkbrook may laugh.
That is how he may see himself operating as Home Secretary and Lord Chancellor, but it is not how this Government's Home Secretary and Lord Chancellor operate.
As to the climbdowns to which the right hon. Gentleman referred, they merely reflect the Government's success in putting in writing — and I agree that this was needed in some cases the Government's intentions, using words that even the right hon. Gentleman could understand.
Laughter
The timing of yesterday's meeting with UKIAS was not occasioned by either the imminent general election, as was suggested by the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland (Mr. Maclennan), or today's Report stage of the Bill.
Colliery Closures
Mr. Geoffrey Lofthouse (Pontefract and Castleford)
I beg to ask leave to move the Adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 for the purpose of discussing a specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration, namely,’ the announcement by British Coal of the loss of 13,000 jobs at the Prince of Wales, Sharlston, Kellingley and Whitemoor collieries and the closure of the topping cycle plant at Grimethorpe.’
This matter is specific, because it follows the loss of 20,000 mining and support jobs in west Yorkshire since 1985 without any attempt by the Government to provide replacement industry and it includes the lack of RECHAR.
It is important and urgent because the work force, with an average age of between 32 and 33, are being blackmailed by British Coal.
If they do not accept voluntary redundancy by the end of March, they will lose £10,000.
Some of those men have been transferred from other collieries and promised long-term employment.
They have been encouraged to purchase houses with high mortgages, and they are now desperate and worried.
They have been portrayed as Europe and world beaters in coal production in recent months.
The Grimethorpe plant has played a leading part, with a lack of finances, for many years in producing clean coal technology.
The closure of the plant is a retrograde step, as that technology is very much needed.
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to grant my request to allow the House to consider this serious matter.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member for Pontefract and Castleford (Mr. Lofthouse) asks leave to move the Adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 for the purpose of discussing a specific and important matter that he believes should have urgent consideration, namely,’ the effect on unemployment of the announcement by British Coal to further run down the coal industry in his own and in neighbouring constituencies.’
I have listened with care to what the hon. Gentleman has said about the matter.
As he knows, I have to decide whether his application comes within the Standing Order and, if so, whether a debate should be granted which would take precedence over the business set down for today or tomorrow.
In this case, I regret that the matter that he has raised does not meet the requirement of the Standing Order.
I therefore cannot submit his application to the House today.
Shops (Amendment) Bill
Mr. Ray Powell (Ogmore)
I beg to move, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to provide for certain descriptions of shops in England and Wales to be open for trade on Sunday, subject to their being registered with the local authority; to impose a general prohibition on the opening on Sunday of other shops, extending this prohibition to certain business premises which on week-days are open for the service of customers; to provide protection for persons employed in or for the purposes of a shop which is, or is to be, registered for Sunday opening, where they have conscientious or other objections to working on Sunday; to make consequential and other repeals in the Shops Act 1950; and for connected purposes.
Seldom has the time been more appropriate or the need more urgent for a Bill of this kind.
You, Mr. Speaker — indeed, the whole House — will know that the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster, the Moderator of the Free Church Federal Council and the Chief Rabbi drew the Prime Minister's attention to the pre-Christmas law-breaking, which they said’ will determine the institution of a nationally observed day in the week substantially set apart for activities which are other than commercial in nature.
We believe that all peoples need to have one day in the week which is different, and which provides an opportunity for varied forms of community life and activity.
Divine worship is an important but not the only concern here.
The progressive abandonment of such a nationally observed day poses a real danger to family life and social relationships and especially to the welfare of many workers in the retail industry.’
My Bill seeks to address these concerns, which are shared by millions, in a very constructive way and is entirely based on the Keep Sunday Special proposals on rest — meaning recreation, emergencies, social gatherings and travel.
I place on record appreciation to David Blackmore and his staff for all their efforts in addressing these problems.
Early-day motion 291, which has been signed by 124 right hon. and hon. Members, illustrates the measure of cross-party support that these proposals have.
The economic evidence of the failure of Sunday trading is summarised by the trade magazine Supermarketing, whose latest research shows little evidence that seven-day opening helped to increase overall grocery spending.
Instead, market share has been stolen from law-abiding retailers and the smaller shops, many of which have lost and are losing up to 50 per cent.
of weekly turnover.
Small shops cannot survive for long under these conditions.
The House needs to take note of the fact that, in 1961, there were 147,000 grocery stores in Britain, whereas in 1990 there were just 44, 700.
Indeed, the trade paper of the independent stores — Independent Grocer — now gives the figure as 41,000.
The market share of these stores dropped from more than 50 per cent.
in 1961 to less than 12 per cent.
last Christmas.
On the other hand, the share of the five big superstores rose from 50 per cent.
in 1961 to a massive 62 per cent.
of this £44 billion sector of the retail industry.
Sunday trading is raising prices and reducing real freedom of choice.
The consumer, especially the disadvantaged consumer, is the loser.
Losers too are local residents, who have to contend with traffic, noise and litter and all the other types of disturbance.
So are the food producers and the transport companies, who face the exercise of near-monopoly market power by over-dependence on the five big supermarket chains.
The most telling evidence of all that Sunday trading is a costly mistake, for which the whole nation is paying a heavy price, is not the new year phoney price war by the supermarket chains but their savage attack on the living standards of the employees.
I have a copy of a letter from the retail director of Sainsbury's confirming that all staff contracts will’ have to be reviewed’.
The letter continues:’ and details will be announced in late January of changes to be made effective from 15 March 1992.’
I am given to understand that this will apply to Scotland also.
There is no doubt that this will mean compulsory Sunday work for little or no premium payment.
Such ruthless, unacceptable pressure, which closely follows that already applied by Woolworth's Gateway, Asda and others, is a callous and cruel deception upon thousands of vulnerable, low-paid, mainly part-time and largely female workers and their families.
I have been involved in the retail industry all my life.
It is a people business or it is nothing.
I have always found the staff honest, trustworthy, intensely loyal and hard-working, generally very tolerant of all extremes of consumer behaviour, and therefore the best asset and advertisement any business can have.
While I am proud to acknowledge my sponsorship by the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers and my commitment of faith as a Methodist, I address the House today as merely one voice in a large and growing all-party coalition ranging from all the Churches to trade unions and consumer groups, all seeking a genuine consensus solution to the Sunday trading shambles.
Much of the shambles is of the Government's own making, because of their singular inability and unwillingness to enforce the law of the land or to show any real leadership in promoting reform.
Instead, they have allowed a small group of directors of retail stores — Woolworth, Sainsbury, Tesco and the like — to dictate a fundamental change in our way of life for their own self-interest and to the benefit of fewer than 5 per cent.
of the population.
It is remarkable that our Ministers have failed in their responsibilities, claiming that European Community law prevents them from acting.
A fellow member state of the EC, France, is doing just that, however, against Mr. Richard Branson's Virgin plc megastore in Paris, and to the tune of a £100,000 fine.
France has also publicly stated that this year it will introduce moderate reforms to its laws on Sunday trading.
Mrs. Beckett
We do not believe that most ordinary families in this country could afford to pay any more tax.
They have been hit by the present Government, under whom the tax burden has increased.
Taxes are higher than they have ever been in this country's history, and the burden falls disproportionately heavily on lower-income families.
That was so even before the introduction of poll tax.
Everyone has had to pay VAT increases and increased national insurance contributions.
People cannot afford to bear a heavier burden, and we shall not put a heavier burden on them.
As I have said, the only way to help pensioners is Labour's way — by giving them an increase in the state pension.
Millions of children belong to families whose income is at or below income support level.
Half of these children belong to the families of the unemployed, and many belong to families who have work but at a desperately low rate of pay.
The best way to help them all is Labour's way — by increasing child benefit to £9.95 for every child, to reflect 1987 value.
We shall fulfil the pledge given by the Prime Minister in 1987 and abrogated every year since then.
Under Labour, child benefit will be paid’ as now’.
The package of tax and national insurance changes that we actually propose will include lifting the ceiling on national insurance contributions, which will affect only those on individual earnings of £405 a week, or £21,000 a year, from April; introducing a new top rate tax of 50p in the pound, which will affect only those on individual earnings well above £30,000 a year.
This package, set against our pension and child benefit changes, will leave 96 per cent.
of families better off.
That figure was produced by the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies.
From our package, we could readily cover not only the proposals I have just described but also our anti-recession measures to kick-start the recovery.
It is a package with measures to promote investment and provide capital allowances similar to those that industry and commerce are begging for — pleas that are falling on the deaf ears of the Chancellor.
We would also introduce measures to support training, provision for which is still being cut, as both the autumn statement and the Chief Secretary's evidence to the Select Committee have revealed, while unemployment soars.
We shall begin to release some of the money that local authorities already have to stimulate construction and help the homeless.
There will be a pilot scheme, in partnership with the private sector, to put new rolling stock on Network SouthEast — rather more useful than name badges for the guards.
We know we can fund all that, because we know that we can raise the additional revenues we need, and we have told the British people where they will come from.
That package is what the Chief Secretary the other day called’ socialist spite’, a typically graceful phrase from the right hon. and learned Gentleman.
In April 1988, in this Parliament, the Government implemented the changes pushed through when the Prime Minister was a Minister at the Department of Social Security.
They cut benefits to pensioners, the severely disabled, widows, the unemployed, those with industrial injuries and families with children, in or out of work.
There are still a few thousand of the biggest losers who have not had a single penny increase in income from that day to this.
What sort of spite was that — or was it just Conservative callousness?
Mr. Quentin Davies rose
Mrs. Beckett
I am confident that these issues are something about which the hon. Gentleman knows absolutely nothing.
What we have promised in our’ most urgent’package we know we can deliver.
We are constantly asked by Conservative Members to state our highest priorities.
We have.
We are constantly asked to say how we will pay for them.
We have.
We can identify areas of spending where different choices and priorities can be exercised — for example, using city technology colleges funding to provide nursery places.
We can identify areas where money is wasted, such as the poll tax.
Any attempt to draw up a wider programme would have to rely overwhelmingly on the only information available to the Opposition — the autumn statement in its present form.
As the Select Committee pointed out, last year's autumn statement was out of date by March.
This autumn statement was in doubt when it was published.
We can rely neither on what it says about the state of the economy nor on the little that it reveals about the state of the public finances.
The Chief Secretary said yesterday that he wanted a serious debate about the economy, yet the ridiculous, but no doubt expensive, campaign that the Government are running is designed to do the very opposite.
The Government wish to discuss neither where we are on the economy nor what we can do about it.
All the sound and fury of the past few days has been a desperate diversion designed first to draw attention away from the unemployment figures, the inflation figures, and the figures for businesses closed and homes repossessed; and, secondly, to draw attention away from what the Labour party is actually saying, and for the simplest of all reasons — they know it makes sense.
Let us indeed debate the choices before the country; this is the forum for that.
However, let us not pretend that there cannot be a choice.
The form of the autumn statement makes that debate more difficult, and in 13 years the Government have done little or nothing to improve it.
It must be redesigned so that it illuminates the choices facing the country — not, as now, obscures them.
We believe that the final public spending decisions and the Budget should be brought together, so that people can see clearly where the money that is raised will actually be spent.
We want the capital and revenue spending of Government more clearly identified, so that we can judge the balance of investment for the future and what we spend today.
We want far greater clarity in what we get for our money, measuring output and value for money, not just input.
Most essential of all for the future assessment of public finance, we must establish a truly independent source of economic statistics to ensure that judgments are not distorted — as they have been under this Government, by political interference in their collection or presentation.
Although information can do much to foster debate, it cannot replace judgment.
Perhaps the most extraordinary of all the peculiar things that the Chancellor has said during his period in office was his comment on, I believe, 8 January:’ the policy would not have been different had we known the outcome’.
The right hon. Gentleman and all his colleagues have constantly reiterated the view that there is no need for a change of policy, that there is no alternative to present policies and that, if re-elected, the Government would pursue the same course.
Now we have their final assurance that things’ would not have been different had we known the outcome.’
I wonder what the thousands of people who have lost their jobs, homes, businesses or all three thought when they read that.
I believe the Chancellor when he says that, and that is why the Government have to go.
A fourth Tory term would mean a fourth Tory recession as surely as night follows day.
It is not true that there are no alternatives to their policies.
It is not true that there are no choices to be exercised differently; and because there are choices, there is hope.
It will not be easy to turn this country's economy round, but it can be done.
The Conservative party ignores the economic policies that we propose, although many independent commentators identify that they would be not only successful, but more successful than the Government policies —
Mr. Greg Knight (Lords Commissioner to the Treasury)
Name one.
Mrs. Beckett
I can, indeed, name one as it happens — Oxford Economic Forecasting refers to’ The better long-run growth picture in the Labour case…arises from better productivity gains’.
Interruption
In other words, there would be better growth under Labour.
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research has stated that, in the longer term — I am giving the hon. Member for Derby, North (Mr. Knight) his answer.
He and his hon. Friends should listen.
The national institute stated that our policies’ could raise the sustainable level of output in the United Kingdom and might also bring about a lasting reduction in unemployment’.
Interruption
Goldman Sachs has referred to our’ extra training provisions’while James Capel has stated that there can be little doubt that our’supply-side measures would improve the United Kingdom's long-term sustainable growth rate and expand the supply-side of the economy’.
Hon. Members
More, more.
Mrs. Beckett
I am so glad that the hon. Member for Derby, North asked me that question —
Mr. John Townend
Ask her another one — ask about policy.
Mrs. Beckett
Now to our policies for benefits and taxation.
I have referred to our policies on the economy and to many independent views of them.
We often hear one phrase in particular from Conservative Members about our policies on benefits and taxation.
They talk about the’ politics of envy’— a revealingly ugly, negative phrase that sets one person against another.
We have described the policies that we advocate as the’ ethics of community’— as something that calls on what is best and most generous in the human spirit.
That is the essence of the choice that the people will face in the election.
It will be a choice between the politics of envy, as advocated so often by the Conservative party, and the ethics of community.
When the Prime Minister has the guts to call the election, we shall be ready.
The Chief Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. David Mellor)
This has been a debate about two documents, only one of which has been tabled.
I refer to our document, the’ Autumn Statement’, which sets out clearly the Government's spending priorities for the next three years.
To pick up the point that the hon. Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) made at the end of her speech, that document makes substantial additional provision for a range of public services, such as the national health service, social security and pensions.
This is an autumn statement of which my right hon. and hon. Friends and I are proud.
It is the autumn statement of a Government who have been able to increase public expenditure, in a well-targeted and specific way, by 20 per cent.
in real terms during their lifetime; under Labour, it fell by 2 per cent.
in real terms.
However much Labour may talk about public expenditure, it normally makes such a mess of the economy that there is little benefit to be found in the longer run.
The House ought to be given the opportunity to see another document: the document that sets out Labour's programme, and presents the alternative that Labour Members are well able to encapsulate in amendments to motions but always fight shy of actually producing.
That document will tell us Labour's spending priorities, and how it will balance those priorities.
Up and down the country, Opposition Front-Benchers have come out with protestations about what they will give this, that and the other interest group; the document will make clear the order of priorities, and will begin to explain how the expenditure will be paid for.
It is not only the Conservative party that has asked for such an explanation; Labour supporters and sympathisers have done so as well.
What about Mr. Hugo Young, who wrote in The Guardian yesterday?
Ah, Mr. Young has been disavowed, has he?
Whenever we quote anyone, Labour Members seem anxious to become an even smaller group: they want to disavow even those who write for The Guardian, if what they say does not suit Labour.
Mr. Young wrote:’ But we need to know more about priorities.
An outline Labour public spending white paper would not be impossible to produce.
Is it schools before hospitals, or houses before anything, after pensions and child benefit?’
Interruption
We have heard two extensive speeches from the Opposition Front Bench, but they did not devote a single minute to answering that basic, common-sense question.
Because nature abhors a vacuum, we have had to produce the second document for today's debate —’ Labour's Public Expenditure Plans’.
That document sets out Labour's views.
It reveals all that has been said in the many policy launches and the speeches that have been made all over the country.
Let me say this to Labour Members: if for one moment they feel uneasy about the document, let us have the alternative that they have tabled; let us know where we stand.
Mr. Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield)
Awful!
Mr. Mellor
What is the matter with the hon. Gentleman?
He has not been seen in the Chamber throughout the debate, and now he comes in shouting’ Awful!’
It would be encouraging to believe that he was capable of listening as well as jeering.
Perhaps if he listened for a bit and then jeered, he would at least be able to jeer from a better-informed position.
We have not just heard what the official Opposition have to say, or what the Government have said in the autumn statement; we have heard what the Opposition's opposition suggest, in the form of the amendment tabled by the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn).
I did not agree one bit with his speech, but I will say this for him: at least he has political integrity.
At least he states his beliefs as they really are, and does not mould them to electoral advantage.
The right hon. Gentleman pointed out exactly what has happened: a substantial body of opinion in the Labour party supports his amendment.
Twenty-five Members — more than 10 per cent.
of the parliamentary Labour party — support the amendment.
I wonder how many others would have liked to sign it but did not feel that they should.
Mr. Peter Snape (West Bromwich, East) rose
Mr. Mellor
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman is one of those who would have liked to sign the amendment.
I give way to him so that he can enlighten us.
Mr. Snape
Does the Chief Secretary remember the October 1974 general election when he was my opponent in West Bromwich and then described me as a militant?
Is he sure, all these years later, when he makes remarks about my right hon. Friend the Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) that he could recognise one now?
Mr. Mellor
I am not sure that militant was a word in common parlance at that time.
I think that I accused the hon. Gentleman of being a member of the Tribune group, which was then a significant force in the Labour party.
Then it moved a great deal leftwards and left the hon. Gentleman looking quite bourgeois compared with some of the later entrants to the Labour party.
I do not begrudge the hon. Gentleman his moment of happy, nostalgic reflection.
As he knows, he got the biggest majority he has ever had in his constituency against me.
Things have become much more difficult since then.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that there should now be a little less militancy.
Come on, please.
Mr. Mellor
The right hon. Member for Chesterfield and 24 other Members of Parliament have put their names to a return to the alternative economic strategy — a return, once again, to the longest suicide note in history.
It is all very well for Opposition Members to say’ Oh!’but all of them were happy to fight the 1983 election on exactly that manifesto.
Those who think that the Labour party has become a safe party — a party that it would be safe to elect because it has learnt all its lessons — should not forget that it is a pretty wild dream to imagine that the Labour party would get a majority in the House.
It is an even wilder dream to imagine that it would get such a majority that it could escape from being held to ransom by the 25 Members who signed the amendment.
That is another blow to the credibility of the Opposition Front-Bench spokesmen who speak on Treasury matters.
Why otherwise would the right hon. Member for Chesterfield feel the need to table such a motion and why would 24 other Members sign it, if they had real confidence in what they were being told by the Opposition Front-Bench spokesmen and agreed with them?
Mr. Radice
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman give way?
Mr. Mellor
I do not seem to be able to make a speech without an intervention from the hon. Gentleman.
Has he been taking lessons from the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) in arm movements, or perhaps he is auditioning for a part in’ Thunderbirds’?
Mr. Radice
I was just wondering when the right hon. and learned Gentleman was going to tell the House how his Government intend to get out of the recession that they have created.
Mr. Mellor
As it happens, my right hon. Friend the Chancellor devoted most of his speech to doing precisely that, but I did not detect a great deal of interest on the Opposition Benches in what he had to say.
I am dealing with rather more interesting matters.
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor has made it clear where we stand and we now want to know where the Labour party stands.
It is clear that, if the Labour party were elected, the position in which we find ourselves today would become dramatically worse.
The right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) knows that, even if some Opposition Back Benchers do not.
That is why the right hon. and learned Gentleman keeps quiet about interest rates.
He no longer talks about 1 per cent.
off.
He knows that the organisations that the hon. Member for Derby, South said commend Labour party policy and many others are arguing amongst themselves about only one thing — how much the Labour party would have to put up interest rates in order to establish its credibility if it were elected.
What is the Opposition's alternative to the autumn statement?
Even if Opposition Members are not interested, plenty of people in the wider community are interested.
About 60 per cent.
of people in that wider community told a Harris poll that they believed that Labour would raise the basic rate of tax, 57 per cent.
told a Gallup poll that they believed that they would pay more tax under a Labour Government and 59 per cent.
told an NOP survey that they thought that their take-home pay would be hit.
Even more interestingly — this may interest the hon. Member for Huddersfield (Mr. Sheerman), who has resumed shouting — a survey of Labour Members of Parliament done by Access Opinions Ltd. —
Interruption
Mr. Sheerman
When?
Mr. Mellor
That is hardly relevant, but the survey took place last week.
Access Opinions Ltd. asked a number of Labour Members for their views on taxation and what the Chancellor should do in the Budget.
A total of 5 per cent.
said that they would want the basic rate increased by more than 2p, 40 per cent.
said that they would want it increased by 2p and 11 per cent.
want it increased by 1p.
That is Labour's hidden agenda.
Mrs. Llin Golding (Newcastle-under-Lyme)
How many Labour Members were polled?
Mr. Mellor
Such questions should be directed to Access Opinions Ltd.
I dare say that if the hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Mrs. Golding) wishes to challenge the integrity of Access Opinions Ltd. it would be delighted to consult its lawyers.
Interruption
I understand that it was a sample of 100 Members of Parliament.
Mrs. Beckett
Has anybody told the Chief Secretary that that survey also questioned Conservative Members and revealed that more than half of those surveyed did not think that there should be a cut in income tax in the Budget?
Mr. Mellor
What is the Labour party's view on that poll?
Does the fact that half of the sample of Conservative Members said that there should be no change in income tax in this Budget invalidate a survey in which well over half the hon. Lady's colleagues who were consulted said that the basic rate of income tax should go up?
It is not our credibility on tax matters that needs to be proved, but the Labour party's.
The Labour party is not trusted on tax matters, and that is small wonder when its Members of Parliament say things like that.
Mr. Battle
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman give way?
Mr. Mellor
No, I want to push on.
I wonder whether —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to calm down.
We have only 15 minutes left.
Mr. Mellor
Commenting on Labour's public expenditure plans, The Economist said:’ It has tried to respond to its familiar dilemma — of wanting to be a high-spending party without being a high-taxing one — by splitting itself in two.
Mr. Smith reassures the City and voters generally about his tax plans.
But shadow spending ministers pander to health workers, teachers and the low-paid with a different tune.
By harping on Tory underfunding', they deliberately create the impression that a Labour Government would spend far more.
Yet unless taxes were raised substantially, it could not.’
It is absolutely clear that many Labour Members want taxes to be raised but are not prepared to say so.
They want taxes raised that have an impact on ordinary people.
Labour Members say that they want to have a debate, yet because they have been discomfited in other debates they have come in to the Chamber to start shouting and jeering.
If they think that the public will be impressed by that, all well and good.
We listened to the hon. Member for Derby, South when she gave us the present status of Beckett's laws — a pledge to increase pensions and child benefit, to which the new manufacturing package has been added.
In addition, there are all the other measures included in this document.
Labour Members may jeer in a debate in the House, but do they believe that they will get through an election campaign with the inconsistencies that are revealed in this document?
Mr. Peter Hain (Neath)
Will the Chief Secretary give way?
Mr. Mellor
No.
I had enough of the hon. Gentleman when I increased my majority against him in the past two elections.
Let us see if Labour Members have an answer to one of these pledges.
In 1990, the hon. Member for Cynon Valley (Mrs. Clwyd), who leads for Labour on overseas development, said:’ I want to see Britain reach the UN aid target of 0.7 per cent.
of GDP as top priority.’
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Mellor
The support that that quotation received proves the point.
The hon. Member for Derby, South appeared on’ On The Record’on 19 May last year.
She said:’ No, that is a goal and it's explicity set out as a goal.
That's what we're aiming for.
Nobody is absolutely able to put their hand on their heart and say we know we can get there.’
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) told the Labour party conference —
Mr. Robert Sheldon (Ashton-under-Lyne)
Will the Chief Secretary give way?
Mr. Mellor
No, I shall complete the point.
The right hon. Member for Gorton told the Labour party conference:’ Over our first Parliament we shall increase Britain's aid budget to the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent.
of GNP.’
Those words are significant, even to Labour Members who want to open their mouths and close their ears.
The right hon. Gentleman said:’ That is a firm commitment, costed and clear that I pledge our Labour Government will carry out.’
Mr. Sheldon rose
Mr. Mellor
I shall give way in a moment.
We have an atmosphere reeking of deceit — the unmistakable whiff of under-arm aspirations.
When the hon. Member for Derby, South is pressed, she makes a clear statement that it is nothing but an aspiration.
But no less weighty a person than the shadow Foreign Secretary gives the clear statement that it is’ a firm commitment, costed and clear’.
If it is, the hon. Lady should tell us how Labour will pay for it.
Mr. Sheldon
I may have minority tastes, but I came here to find out what the right hon. and learned Gentleman would say about the autumn statement.
I am interested in the method of recovery because we have the highest levels of unemployment, the highest real rates of interest and a deplorable balance of payments.
When the recovery comes — I suppose that whatever Government are in power, even one as incompetent as this, some sort of recovery will come eventually — what will happen to the balance of payments?
I want to hear the right hon. and learned Gentleman's answer.
Mr. Mellor
I am dealing with how we can save the country from the kind of economic muddle that existed when the right hon. Gentleman was a Treasury Minister.
He was the Financial Secretary to the Treasury when Lord Barnett was Chief Secretary, and we know what he had to say.
This will be a trip down memory lane for the right hon. Gentleman.
Lord Barnett said:’ The 1974-79 Labour Government had a difficult economic and financial task rendered impossible by pledges foolishly made without any serious thought as to where the money would come from.
You name it, we were pledged to increase it.
The crucial lesson for all political parties must be that we cannot take growth for granted, and above all, we should not plan in advance how to spend it.
Even if we manage growth of 1 or 2 per cent.
a year it will largely be needed to meet demographic changes.’
The Labour party's document makes it clear that Labour has forgotten every word, and that is why the country needs to be saved from a Labour Government.
Another reason why the country needs to be saved from a Labour Government is that it is bad enough to have the type of nonsense that went on in Luigi's restaurant happening when the Labour party is in opposition, but it would be especially ridiculous if it happened with the Labour party in government.
I want to ask the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East a thing or two.
If a week is a long time in politics, two days were a long time in the right hon. and learned Gentleman's life last week.
It all seemed so clear when he appeared on the Frost programme two days before the Leader of the Opposition's visit to Luigi's restaurant.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman was asked extensively by Mr. Frost — I have the transcript here and it goes on a fair bit — about Labour's policy.
He set out clearly —
Mr. Battle rose
Mr. Mellor
I shall not give way.
I am dealing with the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East.
He told Mr. Frost about Beckett's law and Mr. Frost asked him several times whether the level of taxation that would then result —
Mr. Battle rose
Mr. Mellor
The hon. Gentleman is trying to disrupt my speech because he does not want to hear what the country wants to know.
For the avoidance of doubt, Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to give way to the hon. Gentleman and, if he persists in intervening, it is merely because the Labour party's grasp of democracy cannot survive a week such as the previous one.
It does not want to know.
Mr. George Foulkes (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) rose
Mr. Mellor
Things are really bad when the buffoonish tendency has to come out.
Mr. Foulkes rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
What is it?
Mr. Foulkes
The debate is entitled’ Autumn Statement’.
The Chief Secretary has spoken for 22 minutes but has not mentioned the autumn statement.
We have heard only advertisements for Luigi's restaurant.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Since I have been in the Chair, the Chief Secretary has been interrupted so often that there has not been much opportunity for him to do that.
Mr. Mellor
Has the hon. Gentleman, who reads with his lips so much that he could almost give lessons to the Leader of the Opposition, read the amendment which deals with precisely this issue?
It is pretty disgraceful if I cannot put to the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East the points which have been the centre of debate in this country for the past 10 days, but I shall do so.
Interruption
David Frost put it to the right hon. and learned Gentleman no less than three times that it would be an unfair burden on many people who are not rich if he were to carry out immediately his proposed taxation arrangements to pay for Beckett's law — the abolition of the upper earnings limit for national insurance contributions and the 50 per cent.
increase in the top rate of tax.
He had endless opportunities.
The transcript goes on for pages and pages, and not a single word was said about any of those increases being phased in.
Indeed, finally, David Frost asked:’ I mean in the situation that if you find that those two moves, the tax at 50p and the National Insurance contribution raised £4.5 billion or £4.8 billion’— which David Frost said was more than the right hon. and learned Gentleman needed —’you wouldn't adjust what you're going to do, downwards?’
That gave the right hon. and learned Gentleman every opportunity to say that the increases would be phased, but what did he say?
He said:’ I reserve my position on that because I have not only got to find money for the welfare changes.
I want to see the National Health Service properly financed’.
This noise is worse than the Shed at Chelsea football club.
Is this really what Parliament is all about?
Is this what Parliament is coming to?
Interruption
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Mellor
We can take it —
Interruption
Mr. Rhodri Morgan (Cardiff, West) rose
Mr. Mellor
And we can take all that, as well.We can certainly take this point: on David Frost's programme the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East did not have a thought in his head about the phasing in of any of those changes.
I asked the right hon. and learned Gentleman whether he knew that his right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition would go to Luigi's restaurant and say what he said about phasing.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman, who smiles at the idea, did not answer the question.
We know why he did not answer.
It was because he did not know.
If he did know, he would say so.
Will he say so now?
Will he say that he knew what was going on at Luigi's?
Mr. John Smith
The right hon. and learned Gentleman has spent a great deal of his speech talking about the Labour party's spending plans.
Last night, on’ Newsnight’, Mr. Brendan Bruce, the former director of communications for the Tories, said:’No-one sensible in the Tory Party actually believes the Labour Party would put up public spending by £37 billion’.
If no one in the Tory party believes that, why should the public?
Mr. Mellor
The right hon. and learned Gentleman could have made the shortest speech that he has ever made in the House.
He could have said,’ Yes, I knew what was going on at Luigi's restaurant.’
We know that he did not know, and we know that the Leader of the Opposition went to Luigi's restaurant and achieved what, even for him, was a famous first.
He became the first man in history to walk into a restaurant and trip over a ceiling.
When the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East went on television that night to clean up the mess that his right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition had put him into again, he did not look pleased about it.
He looked like a man who had just found that his tax returns had been filled in by Ken Dodd's accountant, or that Kitty Kelley was going to write his biography.
He had his revenge today, though.
He started talking about individuals' opinion poll ratings.
I wonder why he made such a thing of that.
Was it to say that his right hon. Friend's opinion poll rating was 20 per cent.
below that of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister?
Was that a way of getting his own back?
We heard what the Leader of the Opposition had to say about that.
Interruption
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to listen in reasonable silence for the next two minutes.
Mr. Mellor
The Labour party does not like to know that it has been rumbled.
Labour Members know that, whatever they may bray and shout in here, the public outside distrust them.
The public know full well that the Labour party taxes and spends, taxes and spends.
We will not give Labour the opportunity to do so.
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley)(seated and covered)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
May I on behalf of my right hon. and hon. Friends point out that the disgraceful barracking and shouting which came from the mob opposite during the reply was clearly an exercise orchestrated by the Labour Whips?
It was because they are afraid of the public learning the truth about Labour's taxation policies.
Mr. Speaker
The noise in the Chamber tonight did not do the House great credit, but I do not think that it came from one side alone.
The House having divided: Ayes 233, Noes 320.
Mr. MacGregor
I have already said that the Government are considering the matter urgently.
Nothing that has happened in some recent cases provides any reason for people who are liable to pay the community charge failing to do so.
Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)
Will my right hon. Friend arrange an early debate on education, and especially on the local authorities' responsibilities and their relationship with Government in terms of school organisation, so that I may highlight the need for an early decision on proposals to reorganise schools in Ealing, where parents, teachers and children will be greatly affected by those decisions?
Mr. MacGregor
I cannot promise my hon. Friend Government time for that matter.
However, he is aware that he can seek to find time to raise it in the House.
Mr. Ray Powell (Ogmore)
Will the Leader of the House look at early-day motion 291, which has been signed by 124 right hon. and hon. Members from both sides of the House?
[That this House regrets the Government's failure to deal with the imminent threat of wholesale breaches of the law on Sunday trading; expresses concern that Ministers appear to be running away from their responsibility to uphold the law as soon as one or more large commercial organisations express their intention to ignore the law; greatly regrets the way that this situation puts pressure on responsible and law-abiding retailers to open on Sundays simply to protect their market share; further regrets the damage that is likely to be done to small shops and family businesses as a consequence; considers that sensible progress to modernising the law should be made on the basis of the REST proposals put forward by Keep Sunday Special; and calls on the Government actively to pursue the regulation of Sunday trading in a way which deals fairly with employees, their families and with community and commercial interests.]
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware of yesterday's decision by the House, by 224 votes to 4, to do something about the shambles about the operation of the Shops Act 1950.
Surely some time should be given next week so that we can debate this issue, especially when, today, in answer to Question 4, the Minister of State, Home Office told the hon. Member for Liverpool, Mossley Hill (Mr. Alton) that it would be a couple of months before we had the report from the law courts in Europe.
That does not answer the burning problem of law-breaking on a Sunday, especially when the House has not been afforded the opportunity even to debate the matter in full so that a consensus of hon. Members can be taken.
The Leader of the House should make time next week for this urgent matter to be discussed.
Mr. MacGregor
But the Government have already made clear their position on this matter.
We had a full statement on the case that is now in the House of Lords and on the general discussion in relation to the reform of Sunday trading.
The hon. Gentleman has been here sufficiently long to know that yesterday's decision by the House was simply to give leave to bring in a Bill.
The House did not take a decision on the Bill or express a view on it.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that there are many views in the House about exactly what any reform of Sunday trading should involve.
It is unlikely that the House will be able to consider a Bill on this matter in the remainder of this Session, given the amount of business that we have to do.
Mr. Speaker
Statement — Mr. Secretary King.
Dr. Cunningham
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
No, I cannot take a point of order until after the statement.
I must apply the same rules to those on the Front Benches as to those on the Back Benches.
This is taking up time, but if hon. Members are alleging that I took a point of order from the hon. Member for Surbiton (Mr. Tracey), I did so because the Chair has to hear the point of order if it is alleged that something unparliamentary happened during the course of Question Time.
Nothing had happened.
Dr. Cunningham
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
No, I am not taking it.
The shadow Leader of the House cannot ask me to hear a point of order from the Front Bench when I am not prepared to hear them from those on the Back Benches.
Dr. Cunningham
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
No, I am sorry but I am not taking it until after the statement.
Dr. Cunningham
It arose out of business questions.
Mr. Speaker
It may have done.
Type 23 Frigates
The Secretary of State for Defence (Mr. Tom King)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a statement on a further order for type 23 frigates.
The type 23 frigate will form the backbone of the Royal Navy anti-submarine surface force in the future and is, in addition, a highly capable all-round warship.
Four are already in service and six more are under construction.
In June we invited tenders for up to three more frigates.
The benefit of our competitive tendering policy was clearly shown in the extremely keen prices offered, which are significantly lower in real terms than previous ships.
The benefits of privatisation of the yards and the greatly improved productivity now ensure better value for money for our own defence expenditure and help the yards themselves to compete once again overseas, as the opportunities with Malaysia and Oman have shown.
Before I turn to the outcome of the competition, I remind the House that the contract with the shipbuilder is for less than half the total estimated cost of the frigates.
The larger part is made up by the host of specialised equipments that such a frigate contains.
For some of those, contracts have yet to be awarded.
But some are already known; for instance, the ships' 4.5 in gun will be ordered from VSEL — Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Limited — in Barrow, the machinery control equipment from Vosper Thornycroft in Porchester, the vertical launch Sea Wolf missiles from British Aerospace in Bristol.
The two Spey gas turbine engines for each ship will be ordered from Rolls-Royce at Coventry, main gearing from GEC, Rugby and diesel generators from Paxman Diesels at Colchester.
The shipbuilder will itself also have many sub-contractors.
Hundreds of firms across the United Kingdom, large and small, will benefit from this order over the next few years, and its value will approach about £400 million.
On the results of the competition, I can tell the House that the tenders produced a winner by a very clear margin.
We have accordingly decided to place a fixed-price contract for three type 23 frigates with Yarrow Shipbuilders on the Clyde.
The construction of the first ship will start in the second half of this year.
These ships will join the Duke class and will be named HMS Somerset, HMS Grafton and HMS Sutherland.
This is very good news for Glasgow, for Scotland as a whole, and for all the companies involved throughout the country.
I recognise that it is, equally, a disappointment for the other yards which had tendered for the work, and for the people in those areas.
However, this type 23 order is but one part of a substantial on-going programme of vessels for the Royal Navy.
This will include a new anti-air warfare frigate, a second batch of Trafalgar class submarines and other significant vessels to ensure that we maintain a modern and effective navy in the future.
This order brings to 13 the number of type 23 frigates ordered since 1984, and the number of vessels ordered for the Royal Navy since 1979 to 71.
It is yet more evidence that the Government are committed to ensuring the capability of the Royal Navy's fleet and to the wider aim of ensuring that our forces of the future have the modern equipment that they need.
Mr. Martin O'Neill (Clackmannan)
I thank the Secretary of State for his welcome statement, made with great promptness, given the time scale.
I offer my congratulations to the workers and management of Yarrow, who have picked themselves up after the bitter disappointment of losing the last order, despite having built the first of class and many of the subsequent ships.
Can the Secretary of State give the fabrication start date, an important issue for the progress of work for the yard and for the timetabling of entry into service?
What does the right hon. Gentleman consider to be the size of the fleet?
It has been postulated at’ around 40’.
Perhaps he is now in a position to be more precise.
When will the tendering process be opened for the craft to which he referred in his statement?
That must be of great concern to the yards which were not successful in the tendering process, whose problems will become similar to those that confronted Yarrow until this afternoon.
When does the right hon. Gentleman expect the next tranche of type 23 orders, to which he did not refer in his statement, to be in the pipeline and when can we expect the next round of tendering to start for those?
Mr. King
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for those comments.
He recognises this for what it is — solid confirmation of the Government's determination to invest in the defence of our country.
I will not go further than to say’ around 40’, but we certainly intend to implement the programme that we set out in’Options for Change’.
I can confirm that other ships are under way.
We have a project definition of the landing platform dock.
At present, other matters are proceeding, but I can tell the hon. Gentleman — I am grateful to him for seeking clarification — that in respect of a further order for type 23s, I expect that to be at a broadly similar interval comparing this with the previous order that was placed.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I say again what I said before business questions, namely, that there is heavy pressure on the next two debates.
I shall allow questions to continue until 4.30, after which we shall have to move on to the debate.
Mr. Peter Viggers (Gosport)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the fact that the machinery control order is to be placed with that fine company, Vosper Thornycroft, will be very good news in south Hampshire?
Does he further agree that the fact that 71 vessels have been ordered by the Ministry of Defence since 1979 confirms what my hon. Friends and I have always believed — that under the present Government the Royal Navy will continue to play an important role and provide a fine career in the foreseeable future?
Mr. King
I certainly confirm my hon. Friend's comments about the quality of the work at Vosper Thornycroft, which is the basis of its competitiveness and why it has achieved the order placed directly by my Department.
It confirms our commitment to a substantial number of ships in the future.
Hon. Members could easily have been misled by referring to a previous Hansard which shows that a substantial number of ships are on order but fails to reflect the Government's commitment to naval shipbuilding.
An unfortunate misprint in Hansard says that the value of the ships on order is £4.6 million whereas the correct answer should have been £4.6 billion.
Mr. Menzies Campbell (Fife, North-East)
It would be churlish to do anything other than welcome unreservedly the Secretary of State's announcement, and I willingly do so.
He will appreciate that there will be not only a sense of relief at Yarrow, but a great sense of pride that the company has been entrusted with that order.
The Secretary of State mentioned in his statement the disappointment that others might feel.
When will he be in a position to make a firm announcement about the placing of an order for the fourth Trident submarine?
Mr. King
I am grateful to the hon. and learned Gentleman for his comments.
My announcement is a tribute to the shipyard's competitiveness and productivity.
I remember walking round that shipyard some 30 years ago.
A transformation has taken place in the productivity of British shipbuilding because of privatisation, because there was no bottomless pit to which shipyards could turn, and because of the sheer reality that none of those yards would exist unless there had been a quantum change in working practices.
The competitive procurement policy of the Ministry of Defence has been good news not only for the Ministry and the taxpayer but for the yards.
A discussion is currently taking place on the contract for the fourth Trident boat.
We intend to proceed and shall resolve the contract at the earliest possible date.
Mr. Neville Trotter (Tynemouth)
It is clearly in the interests of the Royal Navy and of the taxpayer that there should be competitive tendering to obtain the lowest price.
Will my right hon. Friend give me a categorical assurance that that order was decided solely on price?
Would the cost have been significantly higher if the order had been divided?
Finally, is it still the Government's intention to proceed with ordering a large helicopter carrier, known as an aviation support ship?
Swan Hunter's experience of shipbuilding for the navy makes it well placed to win a contract.
Mr. King
I can confirm my hon. Friend's first point.
Nobody has fought harder than he for the interests of the shipyards of the Tyne and for Swan Hunter.
I know that today's announcement will be a disappointment for them, and that those on the Tyne recognise that the response to all that they asked for previously was fair play.
Yarrow was a clear winner in the competition.
I also confirm that a clear benefit is that of batch ordering.
We did not merely see three ships come sailing by: ordering in threes has shown significant benefits and economies.
Furthermore, we intend to invite tenders for the building of an aviation support ship shortly.
That is of great interest to my hon. Friend and to other hon. Members, and Swan Hunter will clearly be one of the real contenders for that.
Mr. George Galloway (Glasgow, Hillhead)
As Yarrow is the flagship in my constituency and the biggest private employer in the whole of Glasgow, I hope that the Secretary of State will accept my sense of relief and — yes — gratitude that the Ministry has made that decision today.
I am also grateful for the Secretary of State's confirmation that the order was won on merit and is a testament to the ability and dedication of the management and work force at Yarrow Shipbuilders.
When the Secretary of State worked in Glasgow in a previous life, he grew to know the value of the stamp,’ Clyde-built’.
Today's order confirms that.
When is the work likely to start?
Notwithstanding the good news, many hundreds of the workers at Yarrow Shipbuilders have already gone down the road and it would be helpful if we could proceed quickly.
I have just one quibble: could we not consider naming the ships HMS Stewart, Lang and Forsyth in memory of three Ministers who, notwithstanding that good news, are likely not to be in office much longer?
Mr. King
I am appalled at the flippant way in which the hon. Member addresses the serious matter of the continuing equipment of the Royal Navy.
I can confirm, however, that the company would not have won this order except as a private sector yard which will have to incur the costs if it makes losses.
Such losses will be borne, not by the Government, but by the company.
I do not think that it is in any way insulting to say that the epithet,’ Clyde-built’, which was a badge of quality in the last century, was getting somewhat tarnished during the post-war years.
The efforts of the management and the work force now in the shipyards on the Clyde and in Yarrow's have done a great deal to restore that badge of quality, which was in danger of slipping away.
Sir Hector Monro (Dumfries)
Does my right hon. Friend appreciate that this is wonderful news for Glasgow and for Scotland and a great tribute to the work force and management, some of whom were in the House this week to meet an all-party group?
As we have had some rather rough news in the past few weeks, it is a real shot in the arm and the country will be grateful for the announcement.
Mr. King
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and he is right to recognise the importance of the announcement.
He is right also to say that the value is not just for Yarrow.
Hundreds of subcontractors, in Scotland as in other parts of the country, will benefit from this announcement.
My hon. Friend will also know the value of the more competitive and effective approach of the yard.
It is currently in the final stages of negotiations for a very important order from Malaysia which, had it not been the competitive and effective yard that it now is, it would have had no chance of getting.
Mr. Frank Field (Birkenhead)
The Secretary of State said that he was mindful of the atmosphere in yards which had competed and failed.
Will he share with the House his thoughts about the atmosphere that he thinks will now prevail in Cammell Laird, which finds itself unable to compete for naval orders?
Is he aware that, under British Shipbuilders, Laird's was classified as a naval yard, and other yards not so classified were given intervention funding?
Laird's now has to go into battle without any chance of getting either naval orders or intervention funds.
Does the Secretary of State believe that the action of the board of Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. in disqualifying us from competing for this work is fair to Cammell Laird?
What does he think that that does for the Government's competition policy?
Mr. King
I understand very well the point that the hon. Member raises, having worn another hat previously when a major shipyard was one of my biggest concerns.
The question whether one had a naval involvement or access to the intervention fund was very critical indeed.
That yard, privatised and sold to a new owner and with access to the intervention fund, now has a substantial number of new orders.
I would rather not answer across the Floor of the House the serious point that the hon. Member has raised, but I will certainly look into it and come back to him.
Mr. Cecil Franks (Barrow and Furness)
While the Secretary of State's announcement is good news for Yarrow and the Clyde, it is none the less a disappointment for the other three shipyards that submitted tenders, not least VSEL in Barrow, although the order for the 4.5 inch gun would be welcome.
The Secretary of State referred to Trident.
To pursue the question put by the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East (Mr. Campbell), the Secretary of State will be aware that the long lead orders for the four Trident submarines were placed some time ago and that construction is quite well advanced.
Is he able to elaborate on the answer that he gave to the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East?
Can he say how evaluation of the tender is progressing?
I understand that progress is good.
Can he give some sort of time scale, given good will on both sides, and when the order may be expected to be placed?
Mr. King
I obviously understand the disappointment.
There is no question but that VSEL strived genuinely to compete for the order, and put in an effective bid.
Unfortunately, from the company's point of view, it was not so competitive as that from Yarrow, but it was certainly a very responsible offer.
I am pleased that the hon. Gentleman acknowledges that the outstandingly successful 4.5 inch gun produced by VSEL is a source of further valuable orders for it.
As my hon. Friend rightly said, the construction of the 08, the fourth boat, is currently under way and authorities have been given for the long lead items.
The contract is being evaluated.
The House will understand that, although we prefer these matters to be resolved by competitive tendering, in this case we are effectively talking about a single supplier, so it is vital to get the contract right.
That is why we must ensure that the contract is properly dealt with — otherwise, the Public Accounts Committee, among other bodies, will have a lot to say.
We must deal with the matter carefully.
I am anxious that the question should be resolved as soon as possible.
Although I cannot give a date, we intend to proceed just as soon as we can resolve the question of the contract.
Mrs. Maria Fyfe (Glasgow, Maryhill)
As a Glasgow Member, I add my own expression of delight and relief, and I congratulate the Yarrow management and work force.
They certainly deserve their success.
Anyone who has spoken to them recently knows of the problems with which they have had to cope.
May I add one small point?
I was surprised to hear the proposed names for the three frigates.
As the memory of the clearances lingers in Scotland, I suggest that the Duke of Sutherland is perhaps not the most popular name that could have been chosen.
Mr. King
Given that the announcement is outstandingly good news for the hon. Lady and her constituents, it is unfortunate that she should wish to introduce a divisive note.
Mr. James Hill (Southampton, Test)
I congratulate Yarrow on its good fortune in securing a contract for three ships at once, but I must express some dismay on behalf of Vosper Thornycroft, Southampton, which has built many naval ships in the past.
I have a query about the fibreglass minesweepers.
I understand that my right hon. Friend has just been to Oman, so perhaps he can give the House some information.
Vosper Thornycroft, Southampton, is anxiously waiting for confirmation of the order from the Sheik of Oman for a fleet of minesweepers.
Mr. King
I confirm that I returned from the Gulf late last night.
I spent some time in discussion in Oman, not about the minesweepers but about the much more valuable corvette order that the Omanis are seeking to place, and I was given very satisfactory assurances by His Majesty the Sultan about those orders.
Details remain to be resolved and I hope that it will be possible to resolve them quickly.
Mr. Nicholas Brown (Newcastle upon Tyne, East)
When the Secretary of State listed the areas that would benefit from today's announcement, he made no mention of Tyneside.
He has now ordered 13 type 23 frigates, four of which either were or are under construction at Swan Hunter on Tyneside.
I understand that type 23 frigates are grouped in fours around the fleet auxiliaries.
AOR1 is the first auxiliary oil replenishment vessel and AOR2 is currently being constructed on Tyneside.
As the Secretary of State has now ordered 13 type 23 frigates and has only two AOR vessels, does he not need to order another AOR vessel?
When will he make an announcement about AOR3?
Mr. King
I do not have any comment to make on that ship at the moment, but the hon. Gentleman will have heard what I said to my hon. Friend the Member for Tynemouth (Mr. Trotter) about the aviation support ship, for which Swan's is obviously one of the real contenders.
That could be an important ship for Swan's.
I took the trouble to look at what the hon. Gentleman said last time, when Swan's was successful.
He said magnanimously,’ All that we ever ask for is fair play.’
I can assure him that fair play is what he has got in this case.
I am sorry that he is disappointed that the order did not go to Swan's, but I can assure him that there was fair play and it has gone to Yarrow.
Mr. John Pawsey (Rugby and Kenilworth)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the order and the announcement will be widely welcomed, particularly by the work force and managment of GEC, Rugby?
It is good news for jobs and it is good news for the town.
Can my right hon. Friend say what is the global worth of the contract, and does he agree that it represents a vote of confidence in British engineering?
Mr. King
I can confirm that.
This statement differs from previous statements in that it spells out the main contractors.
There is a tendency for people to approach this matter as though it were one entirely for the shipyard concerned.
In fact, the larger part of the value of the contract is not in the hull itself but in the components, a significant proportion of which will be provided by GEC in Rugby.
Obviously, for commercial reasons, I cannot disclose individual contract values.
However, I can confirm that the overall value of the ships with equipment that I have announced today approaches £400 million.
Mr. Peter Archer (Warley, West)
Will the right hon. Gentleman ensure that his Department takes an adequate interest in the subcontracts?
Is he aware that the chain and cable industry in this country is widely accepted as being the best in the world in terms of both technology and workmanship?
Will he ensure that it is not unfairly excluded as a result of the foreign dumping of inferior chain?
Mr. King
I am interested to hear that, and I will certainly look into it.
Mr. Jonathan Sayeed (Bristol, East)
My right hon. Friend will be aware that HMS Norfolk — the first of the Duke class — has been accepted into the fleet and has been completing work-up at Portland.
Past colleagues of mine who are still serving in the Royal Navy tell me that she is an outstanding success and a tribute to British shipbuilding.
Indeed, she is a foretaste of what we shall be getting in these other ships.
Is my right hon. Friend aware that his announcement about vertically launched Sea Wolf will be most welcome to British Aerospace in Bristol?
I know that in this regard my feeling will be echoed by my hon. Friends with responsibility for Bristol constituencies.
It is regrettable that, yet again, the Labour Member for Bristol has not bothered to turn up.
Mr. King
I did notice the absence.
I know that my hon. Friend, who takes a close interest in these matters, understands the importance to Bristol and to British Aerospace of this decision and this order.
Bearing in mind his experience and his information, I am pleased to hear his tribute to the quality of HMS Norfolk — as it happens, the first of class, built at Yarrow.
The news that my hon. Friend has given the House is encouraging.
Mr. Dick Douglas (Dunfermline, West)
Does the Secretary of State accept that this news is very welcome indeed?
It is a tribute not only to the management at Yarrow but to the workers, who have spent a long time removing ill-considered demarcation practices — and it is as a shipbuilder that I say that.
Will the Secretary of State concede that one of the things that this will enable Yarrow to do is to keep its essential design capability, illustrated by the fact that it produced the first of class?
Will he continue to allow it flexibility in respect of other markets?
Mr. King
I note what the hon. Gentleman says, but I have to make the point that it will not be possible to keep any design capability, any warship-building capability or any manufacturing capability for the sort of defence components that we need unless the Government are prepared to fund the defence programme at a sensible level.
While I am far too gentle and decent a person to criticise any Opposition Member who has joined in the expressions of appreciation of this action, I have to say, in the kindest possible way, that if the defence policies to which the Opposition subscribe — I include all the Opposition parties — were implemented, we should not be ordering a rowing boat, let alone three frigates.
Mr. David Martin (Portsmouth, South)
I am grateful for my right hon. Friend's statement because it demonstrates the Government's commitment to a better equipped fleet for the future, even though the fleet manpower is contracting, and because jobs will be provided in the Portsmouth travel-to-work area.
Many people wish to write down the opportunities which exist, but under the present Government there is a future for many of the defence-related industries in my area.
Mr. King
I am grateful to my hon. Friend who, I know, appreciates the situation very well.
We have announced changes, including some reductions in numbers.
It is true that the new type 23s, because of their greater capability and efficiency, will operate with smaller crews.
They show very clearly that the Government are ensuring that, while we may reduce the personnel numbers in our armed forces, we are increasing the relative proportion of funds spent on their equipment to ensure that in the future they have the equipment that they need to perform the tasks that we set them.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
I join the whole House in paying tribute to the work force and management at Yarrow on winning this vital order against such stiff competition.
Can the Secretary of State confirm that the competition was won on price?
And can he reveal whether the tendering process says anything about the level of profits being made by VSEL in the manufacturing and construction of Trident submarines?
Mr. King
No, I cannot comment on that, but it is relevant to the contract negotiations for Trident 08 — we must protect the public Exchequer precisely from the problem of a monopoly single buyer.
I can certainly confirm that the contract was placed on merit; it was won by a clear margin in a competitive tender.
Mr. Lewis Stevens (Nuneaton)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that this is good news for the Ansty Rolls-Royce plant in my constituency which manufactures Spey engines?
This is welcome news for the employees and management of that company.
Will he also accept that his demonstration of confidence in the plant's high quality power unit is most important for the company when it seeks orders abroad?
Mr. King
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
It is certainly true that the Spey engines have proved an outstanding success.
The Royal Navy has great confidence in them and they were chosen for their quality, flexibility and efficiency.
They have stood the Royal Navy in good stead.
It is because of our defence programme's ability to maintain an effective ordering programme that we can also attract interest among overseas countries.
What we invest in is always of great interest to such countries.
They know that if an item has the Royal Navy's endorsement it is bound to be of good quality.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I will certainly look with compassion in days to come on the three hon. Members whom I have not been able to call on the statement, but we have a busy day ahead of us.
Points of Order
Dr. John Cunningham (Copeland)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Earlier, the House heard the hon. Member for Dartford (Mr. Dunn) make wholly untrue allegations about Labour's policies with respect to the savings and income from savings of pensioners.
We have come to expect the premeditated dishonesty of Conservative Central Office to be reprinted in the Daily Mail, but we do not intend to allow it to go unchallenged in the columns of Hansard.
The hon. Gentleman should withdraw his allegation.
Mr. Speaker
I cannot be expected to monitor these statements.
I am not a member of the Conservative party, so I do not receive this literature.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Shortly before yesterday's debate on the economy you told the House that in your opinion the general election campaign started when we came back from the Christmas recess.
Of course, in these difficult circumstances you seek to keep order, but I ask you to reflect on one problem and to see what you can do about it.
I refer to what I regard as the Labour party's organised disruption of yesterday's debate.
The example that I wish to mention is drawn not only from the delayed start of the debate but from the organised barracking of the Chief Secretary to the Treasury orchestrated from the Back Benches by a Labour Whip.
So now we know that a member of the Labour party Whips Office was organising the disruption.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member, and others, do not receive letters about this from the general public, but I do.
When I have to answer them I have some difficulty defending Members of the House, for whom I have a high regard and affection, if they behave badly, but such bad behaviour does not always come from the same side of the House.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
This all takes up a lot of time; we are under great pressure today.
Mr. Ewing
I am delighted to learn that you are a floating voter, Mr. Speaker.
On behalf of the Labour party, I invite you to join the vast majority of people in this country at the next election and to vote Labour.
Mr. Derek Conway (Shrewsbury and Atcham)
On a slightly more serious point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You were right to point out that from now until polling day, whenever it may be, will be somewhat tortuous not just for the watching public but for Members who sit in this Chamber.
You will no doubt be concerned for the reputation of this House.
As we may have to wait even until the summer, tempers may get a little tetchy, as last night's closing session proved.
Would it be worth your while to consider sending for the chairman not only of the 1922 committee but also of the parliamentary Labour party so that the leaders of the respective parties in Parliament can discuss with you the conduct last night?
The Chief Secretary was undoubtedly unable to explain his case fully because of the obviously organised baiting.
That does not augur well for the reputation of the House.
Mr. Speaker
I do not think that it is necessary for me to send for the chairmen of Back-Bench committees.
The behaviour of the House is in the hands of hon. Members themselves.
They surely do not need to be told by the chairmen of the respective parliamentary committees what they should and should not do.
I ask the hon. Member to reflect on what he has said.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I have a suggestion.
Mr. Speaker
Yes?
Mr. Winnick
You said that you receive letters of complaint from the general public.
May I help you by suggesting that if you could persuade the Prime Minister to fix the election date now there would be no need for this pre-election period — if the Prime Minister would stop shilly-shallying because he is afraid of going to the country.
Mrs. Maria Fyfe (Glasgow, Maryhill)
On a very brief point of order, Mr. Speaker.
A few minutes ago the hon. Member for Bristol, East (Mr. Sayeed) attacked my hon. Friend the Member for Bristol, South (Ms. Primarolo) for being absent from the Chamber for the statement.
I do not know why my hon. Friend is not here today, but I know that she is a very hard-working, committed hon. Member.
For whatever reason, she is not here; I am sure that she is doing something important.
Mr. Speaker
I hope that in this period of electioneering excitement we can keep off the personalities and concentrate on the policies.
In relation to what the hon. Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick) said about the letters that I receive, very few of them to date, particularly since we have been televised, have been about bad behaviour in the House — rather the reverse — and I wish it to remain that way.
Dr. Norman A. Godman (Greenock and Port Glasgow)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Because the hon. Member was not called earlier, I will allow the point of order.
Dr. Godman
With unfailing respect, may I ask why I was not called on the Yarrow statement?
I have not spoken in this place for a considerable period of time.
Mr. Speaker
I do not think that I should explain to the hon. Member why he was not called.
I have to have a balance of Glasgow Members and other hon. Members
Hon. Members
Clyde Members.
Mr. Speaker
well, Clydeside Members, then, against some other hon. Member who did not hear such good news as the hon. Member has had.
I thought that because he had had such good news he might just like to keep it to himself today.
BILL PRESENTED
Social Security (Mortgage Interest Payments)
Mr. Secretary Newton, supported by the Prime Minister, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Heseltine, Mr. Secretary Brooke, Mr. Secretary Hunt, Mr. Secretary Lilley, Mr. Secretary Lang, Mr. Nicholas Scott and Miss Ann Widdecombe, presented a Bill to make provision for requiring, in certain cases where interest on a loan secured on land is payable by a person who is entitled, or whose partner, former partner or qualifying associate is entitled, to income support, the applicable amount in respect of which includes a sum in respect of that interest, that a part of the benefits to which any of those persons is entitled under the enactments relating to social security shall be paid directly to the lender and applied towards the discharge of the liability in respect of the interest; and for purposes connected therewith: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time tomorrow and to be printed.
[Bill 57.]
Opposition Day
3rd Allotted Day
Poverty
Mr. Speaker
I must announce to the House that I have selected the amendment in the name of the Prime Minister.
Furthermore, a very large number of hon. Members are seeking to participate in the debate.
It would be possible for me to call them all if they were to limit their speeches to 10 minutes.
I have no authority to do that in a half-day debate, but perhaps hon. Members will bear it in mind.
If I may say to those on the Front Benches too, half-hour speeches would help the whole House.
Mr. Michael Meacher (Oldham, West)
I beg to move, That this House, noting that the ten million people today living on or below the income support level of less than £40 a week for an adult represent the greatest numbers in poverty in Britain since the war, and that the Government has as a deliberate policy over twelve years further impoverished the poorest one third of the nation to make the rich richer, calls on the Government to reverse its policies of increasing poverty and unemployment and to give priority to the growing millions excluded from the rights and opportunities of real citizenship by increasing pensions by £5 per week for a single pensioner and by £8 a week for a married couple, by re-instituting the pension link with earnings which the Government broke twelve years ago, and by restoring to families the losses in child benefit from three years of government freeze.
There could be no clearer indicator of the indifference and contempt in which the Government hold those on the lowest incomes than the Government's exclusive concern with our tax proposals, without even a glimmer of a mention of those who will benefit from them.
There could be no more revealing insight into the Government's priorities than their obsessive concentration on the 8.7 per cent.
richest taxpayers whom the independent Institute of Fiscal Studies estimated would lose under our proposals while at the same time completely ignoring the 46 per cent.
of the population who, the same institute calculated, would gain under our proposals.
We should not, however, be surprised.
This is the Government who have stopped pensioners getting an annual increase in line with Community living standards, a deliberate act of policy in 1980, which cumulatively so far — according to a parliamentary answer to me on 25 November last — has removed from pensioners £31.8 billion of improved pensions which they would otherwise have had.
The Government have cut unemployment benefit 11 times since 1979, making a cumulative’ saving’— if I may use that word — at the expense of the unemployed, of £5 billion to £6 billion over the past decade.
They have repeatedly cut benefits for the disabled by abolishing industrial injury benefit, by abolishing disablement benefit for seven out of eight disabled people and by abolishing the reduced earnings allowance for disabled people who cannot earn a full wage.
They have frozen child benefit for three years so that mothers and families are nearly £1 billion worse off than they would otherwise have been.
Mr. James Arbuthnot (Wanstead and Woodford)
About 18 months ago, the hon. Gentleman said that he had irrefutable evidence that the Government intended to abolish child benefit.
After three increases, where is his evidence?
Has he lost it, or did he make it up?
Mr. Meacher
I did not say that I had irrefutable evidence.
I certainly regarded the continuance of child benefit as very uncertain, and I still regard it as uncertain.
If by some mischance the Government are returned for a fourth term, I should be surprised if child benefit survives to the end of their term.
With a record like that, no wonder Ministers want to keep the spotlight on the tax and national insurance costs of our proposals and away from the half of the nation who will gain.
For that half of the nation, the Government have been the meanest, the most divisive and the most vindictive Government in modern times.
It is all too clear why there has been such an unremitting broadside from Ministers against our tax and national insurance proposals.
It is partly because they are desperate to divert attention from the recession — which they created, from which they cannot escape and which will lose them the election — and partly because they are desperate to conceal the enormity of what they have done in wilfully impoverishing the poorer half of the nation.
By contrast, I make it clear that Labour believes it is right and just and should be the first priority for pensioners to get an increase of £5 a week for a single pensioner and £8 a week for a married couple, given the mean and miserable way in which they have been treated over the past decade.
We shall make no corresponding deductions from income support, housing benefit or poll tax benefit, which means that the poorest pensioners will gain the full £5 and £8 a week.
Mr. Jeremy Thorpe
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Tony Speller (Devon, North)
I start by quoting from my maiden speech nearly 13 years ago:’ I should like to start my career in this House by paying a deep and sincere tribute to my predecessor, Mr. Jeremy Thorpe.
As a constituency Member, he was without equal, and there is no doubt of the respect and affection in which he was and is still held in our constituency.’
Mr. Thorpe is now ill with Parkinson's disease, a fact known and regretted throughout north Devon and further.
This debate in public is about Parkinson's disease and a particular experimental treatment.
It is also about the health service treatment of Mr. Thorpe, since it was his doctors who approached me, and his wish, not mine, which has put the matter into the public domain.
The Parkinson's Disease Society has been in touch with me, and I am grateful to its chief executive, Mrs. Mary Baker, both for information and for helping me understand the problems.
She advises me that the treatment involves the implant of brain cells from an aborted foetus which must be 10 to 11 weeks' gestation.
The Litchdon medical centre is a practice of eight doctors in Barnstaple.
All eight doctors signed a letter on 13 December to the Secretary of State for Health and asked me to pass it on.
They copied the letter to the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) and to the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown), and also to the North Devon community health council.
I must read the letter, written by Dr. Beer on behalf of the practice, because it is the crux and the purpose of the debate:’ The Right Hon. Jeremy Thorpe recently underwent a new and innovative neurosurgical operation carried out by Professor Hitchcock, Consultant Neurosurgeon at the Midland Centre for Neurosurgery and Neurology, Nottingham, as a National Health Service patient.
Mr. Thorpe was originally referred to Professor Hitchcock by his London neurologist.
Professor Hitchcock agreed that neurosurgery could be beneficial.
He was told that there was a waiting list and that he must be referred by his General Practitioner, as a National Health Service patient, in order that the local Health Authority provide the necessary funding, as the operation is only available on the N.H.S.
Mr. Thorpe then approached me, his General Practitioner here in Barnstaple and asked to be referred to Professor Hitchcock.
I contacted the North Devon District Health Authority and asked for an extra-contractual referral to be made for this operation.
This request was turned down because of the cost and the fact that the present 30 per cent.
success rate of this operation did not represent value for money'.
Mr. Thorpe then contacted the Health Authority himself and pleaded his case to no avail.
Because Mr. Thorpe resides for part of the time in London, he decided to try another Health Authority.
He registered with a G.P. near his London home who contacted his District Health Authority who readily agreed to finance his brain operation as an extra contractual referral, and surgery was carried out within a short space of time.
Mr. Thorpe is the 47th patient to receive this form of new treatment and he tells us that his medical condition has dramatically improved.
In the new document — The Patients' Charter — there are listed seven existing rights; the first of which states: Every citizen has the right to receive health care on the basis of clinical need regardless of the ability to pay'.
The fact that one Health Authority felt unable to fund this operation and yet another Health Authority felt able to provide the necessary monies does call into question whether the Patients' Charter does actually work.
The Midland Centre for Neurosurgery and Neurology is the only centre in the United Kingdom able to provide such a pioneering operation which is only available through the N.H.S. If Mr. Thorpe had not been in a fortunate position of being able to register with a G.P. in a different Health Authority, he would not have had his operation.
This situation has enormous implications for all patients who require an extra contractual referral based on clinical need.
We look forward to your reply.’
That letter was signed by Dr. Richard Beer and the other seven doctors in the practice.
I forwarded the letter to my right hon. Friend and informed Dr.
Beer that that had been done.
In addition, I asked the practice about the change of GP, since few of my constituents have the advantage of choice about which authority they use.
Being unaware of the details within the North Devon health authority, and seeking in no way to make critical judgments myself, I obtained a copy of the minute of the health authority.
It reads:’ The director of medical services drew members' attention to a recent article in the British Medical Journal which highlighted that, out of 18 clients treated, the 22.2 per cent.
success rate related only to those clients under the age of 50 years.
The members re-emphasised the decision, taken at a previous meeting, not to pay for this treatment.’
The committee made a judgment, based on the recommendation of its director.
The Secretary of State replied:’ In the case Dr. Beer refers to, the treatment involved is a relatively new and largely unproven one.
A recent British Medical Journal article indicated that in a survey of eighteen patients treated in this way only four’— that is the 22.2 per cent.
—’ showed any significant improvement.’
My right hon. Friend then said:’ I understand that in this instance Dr. Beer's request was considered at some length by an assessment panel of six which included the District Chair, Chief Executive and District Director of Public Health.
The decision was I am told based on clinical grounds because of the unproven nature of the treatment.
District Health Authorities have a difficult task in deciding priorities for treatment within available resources.
I would not expect these decisions to be uniform across the country because of different local circumstances and the likelihood of different clinical views on the efficacy of particular treatment.
The North Devon HA took clinical advice in assessing this individual case and on the basis of that advice decided that this ECR was not a high priority for funding.
I would not see this however in any way abrogating General Practitioner's basic rights of referral.’
My right hon. Friend ends his letter by saying:’ I am pleased to learn that following the granting of an ECR by Parkside HA Mr. Thorpe has received treatment and that it is proving beneficial.’
Shortly afterwards, I received another letter from the practice, dated 20 January.
As time is short, I shall just make the four points referred to in the letter.
The practice reiterated its concern about having the freedom to refer patients according to clinical need.
The practice pointed out that the criteria upon which Mr. Thorpe's referral was turned down are invalid and says:’ The NHS changes must not be allowed to stymie new medical treatments, otherwise’, it asks,’how can pioneering work and advances take place?
An initial success rate of 4 out of 18 patients is a rate of almost 25 per cent.
and this, for a new treatment in the most difficult cases, would be very acceptable.’
The practice is also concerned that the standard of care may depend on which area a person lives in and what money is available.
The fourth point is:’ Why should a Health Authority turn down an unproven treatment when it holds contracts with Homeopathic Hospitals and is prepared to pay for such treatment to be carried out?’
The letter concludes:’ We feel that this situation would not have arisen if ERCs were not included in health authority budgets.
We would recommend that these should be taken out of such budgets.’
Apart from the issues that affect Mr. Thorpe personally, questions are raised by this form of treatment that affect any national health service patient who is similarly afflicted.
I have four questions for my hon. Friend the Minister.
First, is this treatment, when successful, likely to reduce the effects of the disease, or does it have only a palliative effect, in that side effects are avoided from powerful drugs that would otherwise have to be used?
Secondly, is this treatment acceptable under medical ethics?
We are talking about the brain tissue of an aborted foetus whose gestation period has to be between 10 and 11 weeks.
There is the possibility of pressure being brought to bear to produce an aborted foetus at that stage for the treatment.
I do not pretend to know what the ethics committee would say about that.
Does my hon. Friend hope that it may be a valuable treatment, to be made available, if finally proven, to sufferers of Parkinson's disease throughout the health service?
Thirdly, if the treatment is available currently, upon clinical decision, under the national health service, should it not be available to patients in north Devon as readily as it is available to patients in London?
Fourthly, extra-contractual referrals are clearly at the discretion of the health authority concerned, but surely clinical decision must be the main criterion.
While this treatment remains at the experimental stage, may I suggest that the logical position is that prospective patients who have been referred onward by the general practitioner and consultant should be selected — probably by Professor Hitchcock himself — and financed centrally as part of the experimental budget?
It is unreasonable that local health authorities should have to compare routine needs — for hernia operations, or knee and hip joint operations — with the problems surrounding experimental surgery, of which they must have no direct knowledge.
Sufferers from Parkinson's disease are many, and their problems are hateful and hurtful.
I now know that they are not automatically exempt from prescription charges, and I draw my hon. Friend the Minister's attention to the recommendation of the Parkinson's Disease Society of the United Kingdom, which I support, that sufferers should be exempt from prescription charges.
My constituents remember the dashing figure of Jeremy Thorpe.
I take no pleasure in bringing this case before the House, although his example may well prove a catalyst to bring help to fellow sufferers.
The patients charter is a bold commitment from a strong Prime Minister who believes, as I do, in a one-class, first-class health service.
I receive no complaints of substance about the excellent health service in north Devon; nor do I believe that it has exceeded its authority in any way.
But the nagging thought remains — why’ Yes’in London, but’No’in Devon if the patient and the clinical advice were the same?
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
My hon. Friend the Member for Devon, North (Mr. Speller) began by drawing attention to the fact that he has always been generous in his praise of the constituency record of Jeremy Thorpe.
Although neither my hon. Friend nor I were Members of the House when Mr. Thorpe was a Member, we both remember that, as my hon. Friend said, he was a’ dashing figure’in the politics of the 1970s.
As my hon. Friend rightly said, Parkinson's disease is a distressing condition, and it will be a cause of sadness to all hon. Members that Mr. Thorpe has come to suffer from it.
I do not believe that the House would expect me to comment on Mr. Thorpe's particular case, beyond expressing the sympathy of the House for his condition.
The health service takes seriously the issues of confidentiality which surround the treatment of its patients, and it would be wrong for me to discuss in the House the details of Mr. Thorpe's individual treatment.
As my hon. Friend rightly said, however, the handling of Mr. Thorpe's case raises some important general principles about the management of the health service.
I am grateful for this opportunity to clarify any uncertainty that may have resulted from this case, the specific circumstances which lay behind it and the way in which it had to be decided.
I refer especially to the fact that Mr. Thorpe had access to two general practitioners and thus to two separate decision-making processes, which arrived at different conclusions.
I begin by repeating the point that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State made in a letter to my hon. Friend the Member for Devon, North on 14 January, that in an organisation the size of the health service, which deals with so many patient contacts, it should not be surprising — indeed, it should be welcomed — that we do not seek to impose total uniformity on every single decision that is made about the treatment of patients across the country.
To attempt to do so, even if it were possible —
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland) rose
Mr. Dorrell
If I may, I should like to develop my argument because there are several aspects to it.
I firmly believe that it would be impossible to deliver that objective, even had we wanted it.
But even if it were possible, it would be actively undesirable to seek to impose precise uniformity in relation to every decision taken about the treatment of health service patients, because that would mean that no individual within the health service could try a different approach without first having had it cleared through a myriad of different committees.
We seek to establish in the health service a system of decision-making which allows different people to reach different conclusions subject to some basic principles which clearly must underlie the delivery of socialised medicine.
Provided that they are consistent with the basic principles set out, as my hon. Friend rightly said, in among other places, the patients charter, the fact that different decisions may be reached in different parts of the country is not surprising.
Indeed, one of the benefits or desirable aspects of the health service is that different clinicians and managers can try out different alternative approaches.
The fact that we recognise that different people in the health service will produce different answers to the same questions is manifest in the fact that different health authorities will reach different conclusions, based on their assessment of the health needs of their resident populations and of their local priorities..
They will also reach conclusions about the allocation of resources and their priority in terms of the use of resources to address the specific health needs of their local populations.
Health authorities will reach those conclusions under the reformed health service in close consultation with their general practitioners.
The intention is that the decisions that health authorities take about the placing of contracts should reflect the views of GPs and also the health authority's assessment of the district's local health priorities.
However, once the health authority has placed those contracts in those terms, we come to the questions which determine the decisions about the honouring of extra-contractual referrals.
That is the issue which lies at the heart of Mr. Thorpe's case.
The Secretary of State has asked me specifically to clarify the principles which underlie the administration of ECRs within the reformed health service.
When speaking to the council of the Royal College of General Practitioners on 9 May last year he said:’ We have consistently repeated the principle that the reforms should not cut across GPs' freedom of referral.
That remains the case.
If, for clinical reasons, a GP wishes to refer a patient to a hospital that is not contracted to provide a service to the GP's district, the GP must be able to do so.’
That is a direct quotation from a speech made by my right hon. Friend.
The Government regard themselves as bound by that principle, and we expect to see it carried out by the management of the health service.
As that is the political sphere given to the health service — it is a public service accountable through my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State to the House — the management of the health service has set out clearly how that principle should be applied to the management of ECRs.
Paragraph 3.14 of the management document,’ Contracts for Health Service Operational Principles’, states:’The DHA will not challenge the GP's choice of provider unless it can be shown that the proposed referral is wholly unjustified on clinical grounds, or where an alternative referral would be equally efficacious for the patient, taking into account the patient's wishes.’
So the test that has to be applied before a health authority refuses an ECR is that the decision must be’ wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds’.
The fact that that is the test does not detract from the fact that the health authority remains responsible for the management of the ECR budget.
I disagree with my hon. Friend's constituents on this point.
Once the authority has accepted that an individual ECR is not wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds, it remains a management responsibility of the health authority to balance the clinical priority of acceptance of a particular ECR against its budgetary considerations.
The budgetary responsibility rests with the health authority.
The decision about an individual referral on clinical grounds, however — provided that it is not wholly unjustifiable — rests ultimately with the GP.
I emphasise to the House that that has been made clear both in the speech of my right hon. Friend to the council of the Royal College of General Practitioners and in the management advice document issued by the management executive.
So the principles cannot be regarded as being in any doubt.
My hon. Friend would then understandably say,’ How does it come about, then, that North Devon health authority finds itself in the position that it does on this referral?’
The best answer that I can give him is that the fact that Mr. Thorpe had available to him the escape route of appealing to a health authority elsewhere in the country meant that the process was not carried to its conclusion in north Devon.
Mr. Thorpe had available to him a quicker way to secure the referral that he was seeking to the unit in Birmingham, so the process was not finally concluded in north Devon.
That is best illustrated by the fact that a similar case has been referred by another GP in north Devon to the same unit in Birmingham.
Although the decision has not yet been made, that ECR is likely to be approved.
Although in theory we do not know how it would have turned out if that had been the only option available to Mr. Thorpe, we know that the principles are clearly set out in the health service management documents and at a political level by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
No one argues that the referral is wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds.
Clearly the health authority does not argue that because it is about to honour a similar referral to the same unit in Birmingham.
We do not know whether the process would have reached its conclusion if Mr. Thorpe had not had the alternative course open to him.
My hon. Friend asked a number of questions about the treatment.
He asked about its effectiveness, whether it would have a palliative effect, and how it would work.
I am advised that if an implant is successful it would reduce the need for medication and would therefore reduce the likelihood of the side effects that may be caused by drug treatment.
That is my advice, although I emphasise to my hon. Friend that I am not a clinician and he does not need to be told that.
My hon. Friend asked me about the medical ethics of the issue.
The position is clear.
All research or therapy of an innovative nature in the health service, especially that involving foetuses or foetal material, requires the approval of a local research ethics committee.
Such committees are established at district health authority level and include medical and nursing staff, GPs and lay members.
They provide independent advice to local management on the ethical acceptability of any research proposed.
My hon. Friend asked why, if the treatment is available on clinical decision in London, it is not available in north Devon and I have dealt with that.
He also asked what criteria should be applied in deciding priorities.
Perhaps the best answer to that question is that we have recently established an NHS research and development directorate, under Professor Michael Peckham.
Its programme will place emphasis on evaluations of the quality, effectiveness and cost of methods of disease prevention and treatment, and on research into the delivery and cost of health care.
The answer to my hon. Friend's question rests with the new research and development directorate of the NHS management executive.
Mr. Wallace
In the letter from the Secretary of State which the hon. Member for Devon, North (Mr. Speller) read out, as well as saying that differences are likely to arise because of different clinical views, he said that they may arise because of different local circumstances.
Can the Minister say whether those might include resources?
Secondly, while I heard what he said about the fact that, in the case of Mr. Thorpe, the process in north Devon was not exhausted, the theoretical position remains that the treatment may not have been available in north Devon, but was made available in London by virtue of the fact that Mr. Thorpe had two residences and was registered in two places.
Does he accept that it is unsatisfactory that that could have happened?
Patients who are very ill may find that they are under pressure to find another place to register.
Given their state of health, that is not desirable.
Mr. Dorrell
Those two questions have the same answer.
I stress that the principle which underlies the acceptance of a particular ECR is that any health authority will, ultimately, accept an ECR that is not wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds.
A health authority retains, of course, the responsibility for ordering its own budgetary priorities.
It has never been the principle of any health service management that the acceptance of a referral means that the person referred will be seen tomorrow.
To balance demand against available resources is a continuing function of health service management intra-contractually and extra-contractually.
If a referral is not wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds, it is not open to a health authority, wherever it is, ultimately to refuse to honour an ECR.
We would actively encourage health authorities to ensure that their resources were used effectively.
If an ECR is made that is surprising to the clinicians working in a health authority, questions should be asked to ensure that it represents a fair use of resources.
The GP who made that referral should understand the options available and the implications of his referral.
If the GP insists on that referral, the health authority will honour it, provided that it is not wholly unjustifiable on clinical grounds.
My hon. Friend the Member for Devon, North asked about prescription charges and whether sufferers from Parkinson's disease should be exempt from them.
He will be aware that that has been the subject of a long-standing argument in the health service.
We have sought to concentrate assistance with prescription charges on those whose incomes are such that the charges cause a problem.
We have not sought to extend the list of conditions which entitle a sufferer to exemption from prescription charges.
We offer help through our income-related system and through the season ticket system, which limits the cost of a prescription to an individual patient.
I emphasise that I do not believe that any individual or manager in the health service has done anything in this case which departs from the principles upon which the health service is built.
The district health authority received an unusual ECR and in those circumstances it was entitled to ensure that the use of resources involved in that decision was justified.
It was also entitled to ensure that the GP who made the referral understood the implications of his decision.
The process in this case did not reach its logical conclusion because Mr. Thorpe — I commend him on his ingenuity, a quality with which the nation knows he is amply endowed — found a way to secure the necessary care.
Nothing that I have read about the case leads me to the conclusion that anything untoward happened or that the basic and important principle of the GP's right to refer has been undermined.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at seven minutes to Eleven o'clock.
House of Commons
Friday 24 January 1992
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
PETITION
Royal Parks
Mr. Bryan Gould (Dagenham)
I have here a petition with about 22,000 signatures, principally of visitors and the staff of the royal parks who are concerned about the proposed privatisation of those parks because they fear a consequent fall from the high standards established in them.
The petition reads:
To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Parliament assembled.
The Humble Petition of the staff of, and visitors to, the Royal Parks Sheweth That the government, through Mr. Michael Heseltine MP, has signified its intentions to contract out the work carried out in London's Royal Parks.
Wherefore your petitioners pray that your honourable House halt the contracting out of the maintenance of the Royal Parks.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, etc.
To lie upon the Table.
Orders of the Day
Traffic Calming Bill
Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Keith Mans (Wyre)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.
The purpose of the Bill is to introduce the concept of traffic calming into statute.
Traffic calming is a way of containing vehicle speeds by self-enforcing engineering measures and improving driver behaviour.
It is further intended to change people's attitudes so that they drive more smoothly and are aware of the kind of roads that they are using and drive at speeds tailored to fit the environment.
Traffic calming is specifically directed at urban areas, particularly residential roads in our towns and villages.
The Bill has twin objectives — the reduction of road casualties in built-up areas, particularly among the young and the elderly, and the improvement of the road environment near where people live.
The Bill applies equally to England, Wales and Scotland.
I wish to take this early opportunity to thank the hon. Member for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond).
I know that his party would have preferred a separate Bill for Scotland, introduced by the Scottish Office, but it understands that because of a shortage of time the only way to achieve its objective is for one Bill to cover England, Wales and Scotland.
I also wish to thank the hon. Member for Glasgow, Shettleston (Mr. Marshall) who suggested in the first place that the Bill should apply to Scotland as well as to England and Wales.
I have a general word of thanks to members of the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties who have given me their support and, through them, to the various councils in their areas which have also expressed support for the Bill.
They consider that it should be enacted.
The need for the Bill, which will tidy up the law on the legality of traffic-calming measures, is easy to see throughout the country.
Although the most commonly used traffic-calming measures, road humps, are governed by statute and are subject to clear regulations, other techniques such as chicanes, road narowing, different road surfaces, shared road surfaces, rumble strips and gateways are not properly covered by legislation.
Some doubt has been cast on the legality of all or some of those methods in certain circumstances.
Mr. Peter Bottomley (Eltham)
On behalf of pedestrians in general, may I say how much the Bill will be greatly welcomed in all parts of the country?
Although a lot of attention is given to motor journeys and to journeys by bus, we are all interested in the safety of people on foot because even motorists walk around.
Certainly, those who are on foot rely on road users, be they on motor cycles or in cars, to drive safely.
Will my hon. Friend acknowledge that the road hump regulations had to be changed two or three times?
That had to be done, first, to reduce costs to a level that highway authorities could afford and, secondly, to deal with circumstances that were perhaps too tightly restricted.
My hon. Friend's Bill will enable local highway authorities to take account of the interests of all their residents as well as those travelling through their areas.
That will be of great service to pedestrians.
I have listened to my hon. Friend's speech with great interest.
I fear that I may not be able to take part in the debate as I intend to cause trouble for the Government over Oxleas wood, which is in my constituency and that of the hon. Member for Woolwich (Mr. Cartwright), but I hope that my hon. Friend will regard my support as being with him throughout the debate.
Mr. Mans
I fully agree with my hon. Friend's remarks about pedestrians.
One of the central parts of my Bill is intended to cut down the number of pedestrian casualties, and I shall explain that more fully later.
The purpose of the Bill is not to over-regulate but to allow as much discretion to local authorities as possible, bearing in mind that we also need certainty within the law, and I hope that I have struck a balance.
Mr. Derek Conway (Shrewsbury and Atcham)
Before my hon. Friend further develops his theme, will he explain whether it is envisaged that measures that might result from the Bill will include action to control traffic on narrow roads?
I am sure that my hon. Friend and many right hon. and hon. Members will understand that, although this issue is important in cities and built-up areas, in rural areas such as Shropshire we face immense problems because of large — often continental — lorries charging around the country lanes.
They are considerably wider than normal traffic and are often very dangerous.
There have been a number of fatalities in my constituency.
Although the issue may not be of great interest in urban areas, it is important in rural areas, and I wonder whether the Bill will tackle the problem of road widths and the width of vehicles travelling down narrow country lanes.
Mr. Mans
I sincerely hope that it will.
I have been interested in the number of representations that I have received from country areas and I see no reason why the Bill cannot apply to villages, too.
It is basically an enabling measure to allow more discretion to local authorities to take measures, within a light regulatory framework, so that roads are more suited to the traffic using them, bearing in mind other road users, such as pedestrians and cyclists, and local people in villages and constituencies like that of my hon. Friend the Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham (Mr. Conway).
I hope that the Bill will enable the measures that he wants to be put in operation.
Before the interventions I was discussing the legality of existing measures and whether that had held up the introduction of traffic-calming measures.
There has been some doubt about the law with regard to traffic-calming measures other than road humps which has meant that authorities have produced traffic-calming schemes but have been left in some doubt as to whether they could be prosecuted for obstructing the highway.
Other authorities have held back before embarking on such highly desirable projects because of that uncertainty in the law.
One of the primary reasons for the Bill is to clarify the law.
Also, once the law is straightened out, it should result in clearer advice from the Department of Transport on traffic-calming measures.
I have received considerable assistance in drafting the Bill from the Government and from my hon. Friend the Minister for Roads and Traffic, who is on the Front Bench.
I am indebted to his Department for all the technical help that I have received from it, and I sincerely hope that the Bill is a better measure as a result.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
I hope that my hon. Friend understands that, although it is unusual to contribute at this point in the debate, there are reasons for it.
Does my hon. Friend agree that we should also pay tribute to Friends of the Earth which, when I was a Minister at the Department of Transport, suggested that it would be sensible for the Minister with responsibility for roads to go to the Netherlands with some civil servants to see how traffic calming works there.
We learnt not merely that the’ woorerf’idea — which is unpronounceable and unspellable — can work, but that it is too expensive to be applied everywhere, even in the Netherlands.
We also learnt that one can integrate the interests of motorists by using bypasses to take through traffic away, and go in for traffic-calming measures which work.
Does he agree that we should pay tribute to those civil servants who cycled around, before and after the Minister, to ensure his safe journey?
Mr. Mans
I am more than happy to pay tribute to those gallant and courageous civil servants who led or followed my hon. Friend on that exciting detour on the continent.
I shall return to the subject of Friends of the Earth later and shall not go into too much detail now.
The Bill is short, containing only five clauses and two schedules, which is a good thing.
Essentially it adds to measures in various statutes, notably in the Highways Act 1980 — covering England and Wales — and the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984, so that traffic-calming techniques of the sort that I outlined can be constructed by highway and road authorities.
That power is given in clauses 1 and 2 and the regulatory framework is outlined in the accompanying schedules.
The Secretary of State is given the authority to sanction road and highway authorities' schemes, which may not always fall within the regulations.
I understand that the Bill will also allow temporary traffic-calming measures to be used — for example, with roadworks or other work that does not require the adoption of permanent traffic-calming techniques.
Lancashire county council — my highway authority — is especially interested in that and I hope that it will be reassured by that part of the Bill.
I stress that I understand that the regulations will be general and that highway authorities will be given discretion to interpret them in the most appropriate way.
Clearly, we need to balance the requirement for certainty and also allow initiatives to be taken by highway and road authorities when dealing with problems in their areas.
I sincerely hope that I have managed to strike a balance in the Bill between those two needs.
I assure groups that have contacted me and which are concerned about over-regulation that I want a minimum of regulation and the maximum amount of discretion to be given to local authorities.
I believe that the Bill gives that discretion.
I understand that the Government propose to introduce shortly a money resolution in association with the Bill.
I mentioned the primary objective of reducing the number of road casualties.
We have a good accident record in this country and that is due in no small way to the special interest given to the subject by my hon. Friend the Member for Eltham (Mr. Bottomley) when he was Minister for Roads and Traffic and to the actions of the present Minister.
Clearly, reducing the number of road casualties is and has been a priority for the Government for some time.
Our accident record is good when judged against that of virtually every other country, and certainly against that of easily comparable European countries.
I am sad to say that we have a different record on pedestrian deaths.
It is considerably worse than that in other continental countries.
For example, in 1990 there were 1,694 pedestrian deaths on our roads and 367 children died.
The majority of other pedestrian casualties were people over 60.
There were 3.1 pedestrian deaths per 100,000 of the population, above the average among European Community countries.
The figure for child deaths was 2.4 per 100,000 of the population, one of the worst statistics in the European Community, at 31 per cent.
above the European Community average.
For example, in West Germany, which has invested heavily in traffic-calming measures in the past 10 years, there has been a large drop in pedestrian fatalities, from 6.2 to 2.3 per 100,000 of the population — a reduction of 63 per cent .
In contrast, the drop in the United Kingdom over the same period has been from 4.4 to 3.1 per 100,000 of the population — a reduction of 32 per cent.
That illustrates graphically the fact that in 1980 we had fewer pedestrian deaths than West Germany and now we have more.
The only quantifiable difference between what happened in this country and in Germany during that period is that the Germans produced many more traffic-calming schemes, which I acknowledge are complicated and in many cases quite expensive.
They have clearly had a considerable effect on the pedestrian accident record.
Although we have reduced the number of pedestrian deaths in this country — we should not underestimate the work that has been done to achieve that — the results have been less dramatic than in Germany.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
I congratulate my hon. Friend on introducing the Bill.
While he is speaking about child deaths, will he confirm that if vehicles travelled at 20 mph, only one child in 20 would be killed?
Will he comment on the idea of reducing speed limits to that level?
Mr. Mans
Yes, I affirm that my hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Speed is critical in terms of child deaths and one of the Bill's main purposes is to allow greater flexibility in the use of speed limits.
There is no point in simply applying lower speed limits on residential roads if the drivers have not been prepared for the fact that they must slow down.
Traffic-calming techniques are meant to encourage a driving style that is more concerned with the surroundings and, as a result, lower speed limits can be introduced.
I would go so far as to say that one of the main reasons why there are fewer casualties among pedestrians and particularly children in countries such as West Germany is that that country has more flexibility in the use of speed limits.
That must be a primary objective of the Bill.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
I, too, congratulate my hon. Friend on introducing this important Bill.
I hope that, in what is inevitably a short Session of Parliament, it will be able to complete its passage.
What my hon. Friend says is no doubt the kernel of why we need the Bill.
Does he agree that, whereas one can read too much into cause and effect, too many children and other pedestrians are being injured on our roads?
Since the Government first introduced road humps in 1981, traffic engineers in too many councils have shown naked hostility to the idea of traffic calming and have completely set their face against the idea of road humps.
I do not suggest cause and effect, but authorities must consider carefully the effects of not implementing those measures.
Mr. Mans
It varies across the country.
Some local authorities may not have introduced those measures as quickly as possible, but it goes further than that.
Many may have been persuaded or encouraged not to do so by the uncertainty in the law, so I would not go quite as far as my hon. Friend in suggesting that local authorities alone are to blame.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
That was a most disgraceful comment by my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes).
He may have had an unfortunate experience with a highway engineer —
Mr. Hughes
Several.
Mr. Bottomley
I suspect that part of the problem is that councils have an allocation of resources and the Department of Transport has helped by providing extra resources.
I wish to say on behalf of highway engineers, both in the counties and the boroughs of the metropolitan districts, that their contribution through their professional associations — the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution of Highways and Transportation — and in co-operation with the experts in the Transport and Road Research Laboratory and the Department of Transport has led to much enthusiasm among many of those responsible.
One of the messages from the Bill may be that bringing in those schemes and making them work is one way in which the engineers can show that they have as much to contribute in cutting the number of casualties as those who deal with the behavioural side of driving and those who build the bypasses that take traffic away from towns and villages.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West will not mind my robust defence of those who are not in the House to defend themselves.
Mr. Mans
Perhaps I can find a way through the middle of my two hon. Friends' useful contributions.
This is a debate and I welcome differing views on the initiatives shown by road traffic engineers.
If the Bill is enacted, as I hope that it will be, I hope that extra impetus will be given to road traffic engineers to come up with innovative schemes.
I do not want over-regulation or road traffic engineers simply toeing the line and following regulations as they are laid down where they may not be appropriate for their particular locality.
I hope that the Bill will change that so that there are fewer of the type of engineers described by my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) and more progressive traffic engineers.
Ms. Joan Ruddock (Lewisham, Deptford)
Before the hon. Gentleman leaves that topic and because there is clear disagreement between his hon. Friends, will he acknowledge that the criteria by which the Department awards funds to the local authorities are framed in such a way that the widest traffic-calming measure that he wishes to introduce, not just for safety reasons, is not possible?
The problem is not necessarily caused by the unwillingness of local authorities.
Lewisham council, for instance, is very willing, but often it is unable to secure sufficient resources from the Department to implement all the traffic-calming measures that it would wish.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will acknowledge that there is a resource problem.
Mr. Mans
Obviously, there will always be resource problems for a variety of activities that local authorities would like to carry out, under whatever Government exist at a particular time.
Points of Order
Mr. David Martin (Portsmouth, South)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
This concerns your responsibility for the accuracy of the parliamentary record.
In the important debate on poverty last Thursday, the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher), at col. 514 of Hansard, suggested that extra national insurance payments would be payable under Labour by some people earning less than £21,000 a year.
However, over the weekend, the deputy Leader of the Opposition contradicted that.
Would it be possible for Hansard to be corrected —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
With the best will in the world, I am not responsible for what was said over the weekend or for what may to be a contradiction.
That is not a matter of order in the Chamber.
Several hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Today is a rare opportunity for Ulster Members to have parliamentary time.
They would be very unhappy if that time was taken from them by points of order of this kind.
Mr. Martin
Perhaps the Hansard report can be corrected or the Opposition spokesman can come to the House and correct his party's blunders.
Mr. Norman Hogg (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth)
On a point of order arising from questions today and statements in the press yesterday, Mr. Speaker.
It is clear that Ministers are intent on a campaign of vilification and attack on Mr. Bruce Millan, the European Commissioner responsible for regional development.
Leading that charge has been the right hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine)— that elegant nonentity whose only claim to fame was that he helped rid the nation of the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher).
So he has some track record.
Mr. Speaker
I know, but what is the point of order for me?
Mr. Hogg
My point of order is that, if the Government are having a difference with someone as important as a European Commissioner over such a substantial sum of European and public money, and with the charges that the British Treasury is laundering that money, surely a Minister should have been at the Dispatch Box today to make a statement.
Why was there no statement?
Mr. Speaker
I do not know, but the issue arose several times at Question Time.
The right hon. Bruce Millan is no longer a Member of this House and therefore is not protected by privilege here.
Mr. Peter Thurnham (Bolton, North-East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I seek your advice on a very serious matter.
I should like your guidance on what steps can be taken to curb a continuing abuse of the facilities of this House at serious unauthorised cost to taxpayers.
Last week, my attention was drawn to a document headed’ Oldham, Central and Royton Labour Party’about the’Royal Oldham Hospital Opt-out’, and bearing the name of Mr Bryan Davies, a former Member of this House who still works in the precincts of the House and who is the prospective parliamentary condidate for Oldham, Central and Royton.
There are to be 4,000 copies of that document, and it is purported to be printed and published by Cath Ball at 110 Union street, Oldham.
The document is actually being printed at the taxpayers' expense on the two photocopiers next to my desk in the House of Commons.
Both photocopiers have been set for multiple copies, and both have run out of paper.
That is clearly an unauthorised and flagrant abuse of the facilities of this House and an unauthorised use of taxpayers' money.
Should you not summon Mr. Davies to the Bar of the House — Should not his candidature be declared invalid?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
What the hon. Member should do —
Interruption
Order, please.
What the hon. Member should do is to draw the matter to the attention of the Serjeant at Arms, and it will be investigated further.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes (Harrow, West)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
There is no’ further’to it at all: I have dealt with it.
Mr. Geoffrey Dickens (Littleborough and Saddleworth)
With respect —
Mr. Speaker
With respect — no.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Skinner.
Mr. Denis Skinner (Bolsover)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Now hold on a bit.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
I do not know whether I can do that, but I must hear it first.
Mr. Skinner
If we are going to start looking into where money has gone, let us examine how it was that the right hon. Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) had a job for two months and a £100,000 pay-off and a Mercedes for a penny.
There is summat wrong in that.
Mr. Speaker
This is the trouble with points of order of this kind.
They tend to be contagious.
I repeat that this is a rare opportunity for Ulster Members, and I ask hon. Members to raise points of order with which I can deal — that is to say, within my responsibilities.
Interruption
Mr. Bob Dunn (Dartford)
Further to the point of order raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham).
It does seem —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I have already given my ruling on that and said exactly what the hon. Member should do about it.
Mr. Tim Janman (Thurrock)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I seek your guidance on a matter that may arise in future.
You will know that the —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Something that may arise in future is not a matter for me now.
Mr. Don Dixon (Jarrow)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Could I be of some assistance?
Incidents like this happen almost every day, usually —— raised by Tory hon. Members, and they are usually dealt with through the usual channels, the Government deputy Chief Whip, myself and the Serjeant at Arms.
If the Government want to fetch every one of those issues to the Floor of the House, I am quite prepared to do exactly the same, and every day we shall have points of order that go on for half an hour —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
If there is not some self-discipline, that is exactly what happens.
Points of order can come from both sides of the House.
I must say to Conservative Members who are raising points of order of this kind that it is a dangerous game.
Interruption
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
I have raised with you, Mr. Speaker, on several occasions matters similar to that which was brought to your attention by my hon. Friend the Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham).
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I have dealt with that.
Mr. Hughes
I am raising it —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Dickens
On a different matter, Mr. Speaker.
Oldham has been mentioned, and as five wards of my constituency fall within the borough of Oldham, this matter very much concerns me.
We are talking not about election expenses, but about theft from the House of Commons —— because there is no doubt that it is a theft of material —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I told the hon. Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham), who first raised this matter, that he should draw it to the attention of the Serjeant at Arms, when appropriate action would be taken.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Finally — Mr. Janman.
Mr. Janman
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, Opposition Members continually tell the House that their industrial and tax policies have the support of British industry.
Is it in order for them to continue clearly to deceive the House, when the chairman of Ford of Britain has said that their policies amount to economic suicide?
Mr. Speaker
That is way outside any point of order for me and is an absolute abuse of the system.
Let us get on with the Irish debate.
I call Mr. Needham.
Electricity (Northern Ireland)
[Relevant documents: First report of the Energy Committee, HC 25 of Session 1991-92, on privatisation of Northern Ireland Electricity, and the Government's observations, HC 178 of Session 1991-92.]
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Richard Needham)
I beg to move That the draft Electricity (Northern Ireland) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 27th November, be approved.
I understand that it will be convenient for the House also to discuss the second motion:
That the draft Electricity (Northern Ireland Consequential Amendments) Order 1991, which was laid before this House on 27th November, be approved.
I am sure that all hon. Members representing Northern Ireland constituencies will welcome the opportunity to debate the orders.
The Government wish to present our proposals for legislation that will enable the electricity industry in Northern Ireland to be privatised.
The House has already had considerable opportunity to discuss our proposals.
We had three sessions on this in the Northern Ireland Committee in June last year, when we had a thorough debate.
Indeed, it appears that that debate was so thorough that many Northern Ireland Members no longer wish to debate the matter or to listen to my opening comments.
A variety of opinions was expressed in Committee, and at the end of our debates some of the opinions were slightly different from those held at the start of our Committee proceedings.
Mr. John D. Taylor (Strangford)
I should point out in all fairness that quite a few Northern Ireland Members are engaged in talks with the Secretary of State on the future government of Northern Ireland and therefore cannot be present at the moment.
Mr. Needham
I understand the right hon. Gentleman's point, but all three members of the Democratic Unionist party are surely not required to attend those talks.
I am disappointed that none of those hon. Members is in his place, because I had been looking forward to their contributions and should have liked to address the odd remark to them, but I shall do that in any event.
The Select Committee on Energy has also examined the proposals in considerable depth, and the Government welcome its report.
In particular, I welcome the Committee's conclusion that there are admirable features in our privatisation proposals.
I agree with the Committee about the welcome developments that are in prospect, such as the electricity interconnector and the possibility of a gas pipeline.
We have made some proposals to Commissioner Millan for a contribution from the European Economic Community of about 35 per cent.
of the cost of the pipeline and 50 per cent.
of the interconnector.
I am sure that that former right hon. Member of this House could do a lot to help Northern Ireland by giving us a favourable response in the very near future, as I believe he will.
I part company with the Committee in a small way on its comment that those developments would have come about irrespective of our privatisation proposals.
According to paragraph 25 of its report, the Committee did not feel that the gas pipeline was dependent on the form of privatisation that we have proposed.
I shall return to that point later, but I want to put down a clear marker now.
Potential purchasers —
Dr. Michael Clark (Rochford)
Although the Select Committee on Energy did indeed say that some of the advantages that would flow from the privatisation of the electricity industry in Northern Ireland were not entirely dependent on privatisation for their achievement, we accepted that privatisation would accelerate that achievement, and in that sense, we certainly welcome the privatisation.
Mr. Needham
I am grateful for the comments of my hon. Friend, who is the distinguished Chairman of the Committee.
Nevertheless, I do not believe for one moment — I made this point on enough occasions to the hon. Member for Antrim, East (Mr. Beggs)— that, if we had not given potential investors the opportunity to buy a power station that could be converted to gas, there would have been much hope of bringing a gas pipeline to Northern Ireland.
I am convinced that it was only our privatisation proposals which allowed us to bring gas as a real possibility — now a probability, and almost certainly a certainty — to Northern Ireland.
Without those proposals, I am sure that the gas pipeline would never even have got out of the locker.
If we had not given investors the chance to bid for Ballylumford and taken steps towards privatisation, that vital option would not have been made available to us.
I hasten to add that I would not lightly disagree with the findings of the Committee, but I am firmly of the view that the developments to which I shall later refer — interconnection, increased fuel diversity, competition within the system, downward pressure on cost, environmental benefits and energy efficiency — are all a direct result of our proposals to restructure the electricity industry and change the conditions under which it operates.
There is a consistent logic to our position.
We are privatising the industry for two reasons.
First, the existing position is unsatisfactory and should be changed.
Secondly, privatisation can deliver a significant range of benefits to Northern Ireland consumers.
That will be a recurring theme of my speech.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
Is it not ironic that the Government are introducing the Bill at a time when virtually all the political parties — parties which rarely find common ground, as we have tragically and sadly witnessed over the years — see eye to eye in opposing the scheme?
When so many different strands of opinion oppose privatisation — a view that will undoubtedly be expressed today — is it not stupid for the Government to introduce the Bill in their dying days?
Mr. Needham
It is an order, not a Bill.
The Government have proposed to privatise Northern Ireland Electricity for a considerable time.
If the hon. Gentleman had participated in our debates in Committee, he would have heard a wide range of differing views and opinions expressed by the various parties in Northern Ireland — and, to some extent, by people within the same party.
I shall refer to the positions within the parties as I proceed.
Mr. Peter Bottomley (Eltham)
Following the remarks of the hon. Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick), does my hon. Friend the Minister agree that most people want the benefits that will come from privatisation freeing the constraints placed on the industry?
What effect will the measure have on rural electrification, and in particular the mains system for Rathlin?
Mr. Needham
My hon. Friend was one of the major promoters of the scheme to bring electricity to Rathlin.
As he will know, the scheme is in the process of being introduced.
He knows Northern Ireland Electricity as well as I do.
He will recall that dealing with NIE and trying to bring electricity to Rathlin was not one of the easiest tasks that he or I had to undertake.
When we consider the regulation that will be imposed and the rights of consumers in Northern Ireland, my hon. Friend will find that consumers will be much better protected and safeguarded under privatisation than if they had been left to continue with a publicly owned monopoly which too often had a life of its own and was not subject to the outside pressures that consumers have a right to bring to bear.
Mr. Harry Barnes (Derbyshire, North-East)
The debates in Committee have been mentioned.
Although hon. Members representing Ulster voiced different shades of opinion, they reached a common conclusion with the Liberal Democrat and Labour hon. Members in the Committee that they were opposed to the order.
The party of the hon. Member for Belfast, West (Mr. Adams)— although he has not taken his seat — was also in opposition.
The only party in Northern Ireland which supports privatisation is the small Conservative party.
As there is such widespread unity, I reiterate the words of my hon. Friend the Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick)— surely in that case Northern Ireland's viewpoint should be taken into account, and the order should be kicked into touch.
Mr. Needham
The hon. Gentleman has listened to the debate and knows perfectly well that a vast variety of views exist within the Northern Ireland parties.
The Labour party's proposal, which I shall come to later, is to do nowt.
The hon. Member for Antrim, North (Rev.
Ian Paisley) said that, if it was all right, we should leave it alone.
The hon. Member for Antrim, East was in favour of the introduction of gas, but could not explain how on earth to get it without privatisation.
The view of the hon. Member for South Down (Mr. McGrady) was that many things should be left as they are, but he accepted that savings could be made and changes ought to be made, although he did not explain how.
There is plenty of time for hon. Members to make speeches, and if I can develop my argument a little en route, I shall be happy to do so.
Mr. John D. Taylor
I am sure that the Under-Secretary will agree that there is usually more agreement between political parties within Northern Ireland than between the Labour and Conservative parties in England, so I do not understand the logic of the statement by the hon. Member for Derbyshire, North-East (Mr. Barnes).
To get back to the subject of the gas pipeline — I suspect that the Minister has left it and will not return to it —
Mr. Needham
I shall return to it.
Mr. Taylor
In that case, could the Minister tell us whether it has already been agreed which firm will provide the gas pipeline?
Will it be the gas board in the Republic of Ireland?
Has a proper analysis been made of its implications for the fishing industry in the Irish sea?
Mr. Needham
No, it will not be the gas board in the Republic of Ireland, and I suspect that I shall be returning to the subject of gas all afternoon and most of the evening.
Mr. Seamus Mallon (Newry and Armagh)
The Minister is right to say that there are different reasons and attitudes in the different parties in the north of Ireland on this issue.
Some arguments are ideological, some are about practicalities and others are about economy.
I am sorry to interrupt the Minister at this point, but he should clarify one great worry — we are concerned about exchanging a public for a private monopoly.
That is the underlying fear of all of us in the north of Ireland.
He must argue convincingly for that during the debate.
Mr. Needham
If the hon. Gentleman will allow me to proceed, I shall cogently answer that question, because it is the key to our decision.
First, even critics of privatisation have the greatest difficulty in defending the existing position.
How does one continue to justify the Northern Ireland electricity system's over-dependence on a single fuel?
Seventy per cent.
of our capacity is still oil-burning.
Why does the system in Northern Ireland remain isolated with no connection to any other system, with all the technical and economic disadvantages which that entails and which the hon. Member for Antrim, East has referred to on several occasions?
Given its captive market, why does NIE have such a poor track record in improving efficiency, productivity and profits?
Why has it been necessary to have endless debates about developing phase 2 of Kilroot as an oil or coal-burning plant, which is the expensive and the dirty option?
Why was the lignite option given such short shrift by NIE when it was raised a few years ago?
Hon. Members from the Democratic Unionist party are constantly asking me that question.
Why has it taken so long to bring interconnection back on to the agenda?
The answer is simple.
To operate an undertaking in public ownership locks in management to a mindset that is’ steady as she goes’.
That system is flawed.
I do not believe that, in those circumstances, management can recognise new opportunity when it occurs — and, my goodness, there is new opportunity around.
Only the prospect of competition can alter that outlook.
The system of publicly owned monopoly is flawed.
It cannot be expected to deliver the kind of service that Northern Ireland consumers have a right to expect.
It was repeatedly said, particularly in Committee, that there was nothing seriously wrong with NIE; to quote again the hon. Member for Antrim, North:’ If it ain't broke, don't fix it.’
There seemed to be an unspoken acceptance by hon. Members that the present system was less than satisfactory, but that we must avoid at any cost anything as dangerous and revolutionary as suggesting a change.
That attitude is incomprehensible in hon. Members who say that they wish to represent the interests of the consumers in their constituency.
If we all shared that attitude, we would undoubtedly still travel in steam trains, and passengers would be covered in soot.
Of course we should not endlessly meddle and interfere with the electricity industry in Northern Ireland.
That would serve no useful purpose.
Equally, if we see that the electricity industry is not performing to maximum efficiency and should be doing better — there is general agreement on that — surely we have an obligation to do something about it.
That applies as much to hon. Members opposite, to whose arguments for improving the system under their regime I look forward, as to other hon. Members with their proposals about what should be done about it.
Mr. Jim Marshall (Leicester, South)
We are all interested to hear the Minister's view on NIE.
Could he remind the House which Minister exercises overall responsibility for NIE, and why that Minister has shown such a lack of activity in the past few years?
Mr. Needham
I do not know what the hon. Gentleman is talking about.
I am in charge of NIE, and whatever matters I can be criticised for, showing a lack of activity is not one.
Let us look at what has happened to other utilities in Great Britain that were fixed by the Government before they broke down.
British Telecom prices are down by 27 per cent.
in real terms, 96 per cent.
of all call boxes are in working order at any given time, and waiting lists for connections are virtually eliminated.
Gas has seen domestic prices fall by 12 per cent., and disconnections are at their lowest recorded level.
The RPI minus X factor is now RPI minus 5.
The water companies are investing some £28 billion between now and the end of this century.
The fact that Treasury rules restricted past investment makes it all the more necessary now for the privatised companies to get on with it.
In Northern Ireland itself, Shorts and Harland and Wolff have demonstrated an ability to hold their position even in recessionary times.
Employment levels at Shorts are higher now than when the company was privatised.
Recently, Harland and Wolff has attracted the largest orders in Europe.
How many Northern Ireland Members who agreed with Labour Members and opposed the privatisation of Shorts and of Harland and Wolff would do so now?
Would the hon. Member for Belfast, East (Mr. Robinson) now oppose the purchase of Shorts by Bombardier?
We cannot ask him, because he is not here, but it is an important question, to which his constituents have a right to know his answer.
He opposed the privatisations, yet they are now the two greatest flag carriers in the Northern Ireland economy.
If he were here to answer the question, I suspect that he would be in considerable difficulty if he tried to say that he continued to oppose those privatisations.
I want to see the right kind of deal for electricity consumers in Northern Ireland.
I want greater investment and efficiency and to see prices stabilised in a tougher, more competitive electricity industry.
The arrival of the single market in 1992 means that, as never before, our costs must be in line with those in the rest of Europe.
A revitalised electricity industry is crucial to the supply of power to our factories and businesses at the cheapest possible price.
I wish to tell the House not what hon. Members have said about our proposals, but what industry and commerce in Northern Ireland have said.
I hope that Opposition Members will give credence to the views of industry and commerce in Northern Ireland, if they hope to attract future investment and employment to the Province.
The Confederation of British Industry in Northern Ireland has stated:’ CBI (NI) welcomes Government's decision to privatise NIE.
Moving NIE into the private sector will bring benefits in terms of efficiency, commercial drive, attitudes and investment decisions free from Treasury interference.’
The Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce has stated that it’ supports the privatisation of NIE because it is convinced that the introduction of private sector business disciplines will ultimately produce a more efficient industry.’
The Action Group on Northern Ireland Electricity Prices states:’ The group supports the Government's plans for privatisation and in particular the link to Scotland.’
That is the authentic voice of industry and commerce in Northern Ireland, and surely Opposition Members should listen to it.
Mr. Mallon
The Minister is attempting to paint a comprehensive picture of what those in industry and commerce in Northern Ireland say about the privatisation, but what about the views of the Northern Ireland Economic Council?
First, it has said that the benefits to the consumer are far from obvious.
Secondly, it has expressed fears about changing a public sector monopoly into a private sector monopoly, and expressed concern about consumer protection.
If the Minister wishes to quote sources, he should be comprehensive so why does he not quote the views of the Northern Ireland Economic Council as well?
Mr. Needham
I am happy to acknowledge the views of the Northern Ireland Economic Council, and the questions that it had at the time of its submission need to be dealt with.
I have already said that I shall answer the three particular issues that it raised.
I cannot say that I believe that that council necessarily represents the views of industry and commerce.
On political opinion, the submission of the Ulster Unionist party shows, I am pleased to say, movement towards reality.
However, it is alone on that.
First, it now believes that competition is possible.
I was delighted that the hon. Member for Antrim, East told the Select Committee on Energy that, with the introduction of gas and interconnection, competition was becoming possible.
Secondly, the Ulster Unionist party felt that supplies of natural gas should be obtained for Northern Ireland.
I hope and believe that we shall be able to meet that objective.
Thirdly, it suggested that interconnection with Scotland was a good idea.
I am in complete agreement with that.
Finally, it suggested that interconnection with the Republic of Ireland ought to be re-eastablished.
The hon. Member for Antrim, East said that we had lost millions of pounds as a result of the failure to re-establish that interconnnection.
I could not agree more.
Reading the submission of the Ulster Unionist party brought me back to a comment made by the right hon. Member for Lagan Valley (Mr. Molyneaux), the leader of the Ulster Unionist party, during the first sitting of the Northern Ireland Committee on 13 June.
I asked him if he would be prepared to support the Government's privatisation proposals, and he said:’ I should be happy to do so, provided that the general public can apply for shares.’
After reading the submission of the Ulster Unionist party, I am delighted to tell the right hon. Gentleman and his hon. Friends that I can add to their happiness.
I have served a place for him at the head of the queue to buy shares in the privatised NIE.
I hope that all hon. Members representing Northern Ireland will take the opportunity to invest in the economic future of the Province.
I know that some have already taken the plunge and purchased shares in privatised utilities, and I trust that they will encourage their colleagues to do likewise.
Industrial Relations
The Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Michael Howard)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a statement about the Government's legislative intentions, following the consultation on the Green Paper’ Industrial Relations in the 1990s’, which was published in July last year.
Like all our previous trade union legislation, the proposals that I am announcing today have two main objectives — first, to safeguard the democratic rights of trade union members within their unions and, secondly, to protect employees, employers and the community at large against the abuse of industrial power.
Each of the proposals is carefully designed to meet a clear deficiency in our present arrangements, that has been acknowledged by many of the organisations that have commented on the Green Paper.
The CBI says in its response that its members’ warmly welcome the Government's continued commitment to reviewing the law governing the conduct of industrial relations’.
The Engineering Employers Federation says that its members’ strongly support the Government's objective of providing a balanced and effective framework of trade union and industrial relations law’and that’the step by step approach has been seen by all to have worked successfully and it is right that it should continue.’
The Institute of Personnel Management says —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down and listen to the statement, and I remind hon. Members that we have a busy day ahead of us.
Mr. Howard
The Green Paper, said the IPM,’ is primarily aimed at particular abuses which it is the duty of Government to address in order to protect the rights of the individual.’
In all, we have had more than 100 responses to the Green Paper.
These have come from employers' organisations, individual companies, trade unions and other organisations, and from individual people.
The number of responses is in itself a clear indication of the interest the Green Paper has aroused and the importance of the issues it has raised.
Most of the proposals it contains have been widely welcomed.
I deal first with the proposals to protect the public against strikes and other forms of industrial action.
The first proposal was announced by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister in his statement on the citizens charter.
We proposed in the citizens charter to provide a new right for members of the public in relation to unlawful industrial action which affects a public service.
This proposal has been widely welcomed.
At present, the employer has the right to bring proceedings against a trade union which organises an unlawful strike.
Members of the public, who are usually the specific target of industrial action, have no such right.
If the employer does nothing, the citizen is defenceless.
We therefore intend to introduce legislation to establish a new right for members of the public to seek an injunction to halt unlawful industrial action affecting a public service if the employer concerned fails to use the remedies available to him.
This proposal has been widely welcomed.
It will enhance the protection of the public, and it will be a further deterrent to unlawful industrial action.
The consultations have also shown that there is strong support for legislation to require trade unions to give seven days' notice of strikes.
Strike notice is a well established feature of the law in other countries.
This requirement will help to protect the general public against lightning strikes in the public services.
It will also allow employers to take steps to safeguard jobs and businesses.
In addition, there has been strong support for the proposal to reduce the scope for intimidation and fraud by requiring strike ballots to be conducted by post and to be subject to independent scrutiny.
These measures will add significantly to the protection which our legislation already provides against strikes which are deliberately targeted on the life of the community.
We intend to introduce legislation to implement all of them.
I turn now to the rights of individual union members.
The first concerns an employee's freedom to join the union of his choice.
Only last year we saw how building workers who left the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians when its leadership fell into the hands of the far left were prevented from joining the General, Municipal and Boilermakers union, even after the GMB had indicated that it would welcome them.
That was clear evidence of how the operation of the Trades Union Congress's Bridlington principles can deny employees the chance to belong to the union of their choice.
Contrary to the claims of the TUC, only a minority of employers have expressed reservations about the change in the law that we propose to make.
We therefore propose to introduce legislation which will give individual employees the right to join the union of their choice, free from interference from any arrangement between trade union bosses which is designed to deny them that choice.
The consultation also showed widespread support for the proposition that the law should not allow trade union dues to be deducted from an employee's salary without his or her individual consent.
Since the Green Paper was published, there has been further evidence of the scope for abuse of check-off arrangements.
On 8 December, for example, the Sunday Times reported that union subscriptions had been deducted from the pay of some 10,000 construction workers in London, but that these subscriptions had never reached their trade union.
The case for reform of the law is clear.
Some employers have said that they believe that a requirement to review the check-off annually would be unnecessary and burdensome.
I have therefore decided to accept a proposal from the Institute of Personnel Management that employers should be required to seek the consent of their employees to the check-off every three years.
In addition, we propose to introduce legal safeguards which will ensure that in future no employee has union subscriptions deducted from his pay without his individual consent.
Again, no one has seriously questioned the need for further legislation to protect union members against the sort of financial mismanagement which was revealed in the Lightman report into the affairs of the National Union of Mineworkers.
Nor is there any serious doubt that the law on trade union elections needs to be strengthened, in the light of the ballot rigging in the 1990 elections for the national executive of the Transport and General Workers Union.
I have decided to adopt a suggestion which was put to my Department in the course of the consultation that unions should be required to employ a mailing house or some other external agency to distribute and store voting papers.
This proposal is, I believe, the most effective way to ensure that electoral fraud of the kind which occurred in the Transport and General Workers Union is not repeated.
I have also accepted the advice of a number of organisations, including the TUC, that, for security reasons, union members should not have access to the names and addresses of other union members.
Instead, I propose that the independent scrutineer should be allowed such access on behalf of any union members who are concerned that the list may not be accurate.
The consultations have reflected a wide range of views on the proposal in the Green Paper relating to the legal status of collective agreements.
There was both support for and opposition to the specific proposal on which we sought views.
Some employers' organisations have put forward alternative suggestions.
This is an important and complex issue.
We shall continue to consider the scope for amending the law in the light of the comments that we have received and, if appropriate, we shall consult further before taking a final decision.
It should be clear to everyone that this has been a genuine and productive consultation.
We have modified some of our proposals in the light of the views we have received.
But the consultations have shown that there is widespread majority support amongst employers for a great majority of the proposals in the Green Paper.
The legislative plans that I have announced today are designed to consolidate and build on the improvement in industrial relations which we have achieved over the last 12 years.
They will increase the rights of individual members of the public, individual trade union members, individual employees and the community at large.
They will ensure that we have an effective and up-to-date framework of law in order to maintain that progress in the 1990s.
The clearest evidence of the progress we have achieved so far is our record on strikes.
More working days were lost because of strikes in the last 12 months of the last Labour Government than have been lost in all the last five years put together.
No one should be surprised by that stark contrast.
Before 1980, the law gave trade unions a virtually unlimited licence to organise strikes and industrial action, not matter how remote from the original dispute.
There was no requirement for ballots before strikes, and the law allowed flying pickets to spread the disruptive effects of industrial action far and wide.
The choice before the House and the country is clear.
On the one hand, there is the threat to roll back the legislation of the last 12 years, to put the trade unions back in the driving seat and make strikes easier, longer, more frequent and more damaging than ever before.
That is the policy of the Labour party.
On the other hand, we can carry forward the process of reform and build on the achievements of the last 12 years.
Mr. Joseph Ashton (Bassetlaw)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Howard
That is what the decisions which I have announced today will do, and that is why they deserve the support of the House.
Mr. Tony Blair (Sedgefield)
Let me deal with the main points of the statement item by item.
On the seven-day cooling-off period, it is correct, as the Minister says, that there are similar provisions in other European countries, but will he confirm that, in those countries where there is a cooling-off period for unions, there is also a cooling-off period for employers?
Is it his intention to legislate even-handedly for both?
Secondly, as for ballots before strikes, surely the important requirement is independent scrutiny of the ballot, whether it is postal or workplace.
May I put it to him that the danger of his proposal of making workplace ballots illegal, which is what he is proposing, even where there is independent scrutiny, is that the participation level is lower for such ballots?
Since he had the gall to suggest that employers' organisations all support the proposals, may I put it to him that this and many other parts of his provisions were vehemently opposed by employers' organisations, including the CBI, the British Association of Chambers of Commerce and the Institute of Personnel Management?
Let me read to the right hon. and learned Gentleman what the Engineering Employers Federation said:’ Our experience is that provided they are properly conducted’— the very point that I am making —’secret workplace ballots are not subject to harassment and have additional beneficial features.
EEF experience is that workplace secret ballots have a significantly higher level of return than postal ballots.’
Thirdly, as for members of the public suing in respect of unlawful action in the public sector, will the Secretary of State confirm that unions have no immunity now for unlawful action in respect of public services and, that, although there may be some doubt about it, the only decided case in law held that the public already have the right to sue in respect of action that affects them?
On the fourth part, relating to Bridlington, the Minister proposes legislation.
Six months ago, we put to him the problem of single-union agreements and he dismissed it.
The CBI, the British Institute of Management and the Institute of Personnel Management have all put to him the same point about single-union agreements.
Will the Minister comment specifically on that?
While we are on the subject of’ joining the union of your choice’, will he ensure that the security guards who are presently members of the Transport and General Workers Union and the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union, employed by the Ministry of Defence, are allowed to continue as members of the union of their choice and are not ordered into another —
Mr. Howard
We shall allow it.
Mr. Blair
The Secretary of State can confirm that when he speaks.
If, however, he believes in the right to a free and independent trade union, let him grant that right to the employees at the Government communications headquarters, who have been denied it for the past eight years.
Let him also take action against the Economic League, which prevents that right from being exercised by many people.
The Secretary of State gives a wholly misleading account of how check-off operates.
Will he confirm that it operates only if there is prior written consent on the part of the employee —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I say to those below the Gangway that the debate takes place at this end of the Chamber.
Mr. Blair
Will the Secretary of State confirm that check-off already requires the prior written consent of employees and that, contrary to what he has just said, an employee can withdraw his consent to that at any time?
Legally enforceable agreements formed the main part of the Secretary of State's original proposals.
I gather that that issue has now been kicked into touch.
Perhaps we shall hear no more about it.
The proposals are significant not for what they do but for what they omit.
If the purpose of the statement is, as the Secretary of State says, to protect individuals against the abuse of industrial power, why does it contain scores of rights exercisable against trade unions, but not a single right to a British employee, male or female, exercisable for fair treatment by the employer at the workplace?
Why is Britain the only country in Europe that does not give legal protection to our 6 million part-time employees?
Why is Britain the only country in Europe with no right to a minimum holiday entitlement?
Why does Britain have the worst maternity rights, the fewest equal opportunities and the least protection against poverty pay?
If the purpose is to protect the individual, why do we not sign the European social charter, as every other country is prepared to do?
The Secretary of State's proposals are not for the sake of better industrial relations but, for the sake of the worst prejudices of the Tory party.
Can there be a more telling difference between the day when the CBI has confirmed the depth of the recession, unemployment is rising faster than in any other European country, we have a training and skills crisis, which the Government are making worse daily, and the fact that the Conservatives are returning to the agenda of the 1970s because they have no answers to the problems of the 1990s?
That may have worked in different circumstances in a different decade, but in 1992 the people of this country look for something better.
They will get it under Labour.
Mr. Howard
The hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) has huffed and puffed, but he has not told us the Labour party's position on a single proposal contained in the Green Paper.
When I announced the Green Paper last July, the hon. Gentleman said that he would examine our proposals carefully.
In November, I wrote to him pointing that the formal period for consultation was ending and I asked when we might hear his response to the Green Paper.
I have heard nothing.
This afternoon, he has treated the House to an extraordinary collection of half-truths and inaccuracies, but he has not told us the Labour party's attitude to the proposals that I identified in the statement.
On ballots, the hon. Gentleman quoted what one of the employers' organisations said about workplace ballots and its proviso that they should be properly conducted.
There is always the risk with workplace ballots that they will not be properly conducted, which is why we think that it is infinitely preferable to have postal ballots.
The hon. Gentleman did not explain the Labour party's attitude to that.
On the protection of members of the public, the hon. Gentleman said that a case had been decided, but that there was some doubt about the position.
If he agrees that the position is as we think it should be, why does he not say that he agrees with the proposals in the Green Paper, which we intend to put into legislation?
On the right of trade unionists to join a trade union of their choice, the hon. Gentleman seems to have forgotten that even Bill Morris, the general secretary-elect of the trade union that sponsors the hon. Gentleman, has said:’ today when we are about choice and opportunity for the individual there is no choice in this matter or opportunity within them’.
Ron Todd, the present general secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union, has said:’ All I want, quite frankly, is the right for a worker to determine the union he wishes to join’.
The hon. Gentleman is behind even the leaders of the trade union that sponsors him.
I can certainly confirm on the specific point that the hon. Gentleman raised that those workers who work at the Ministry of Defence can continue to be members of the union of their choice.
That is the answer to the specific question that was put.
Mr. Blair
They can carry on as members of the TGWU?
Mr. Howard
They can certainly carry on.
That was never in doubt.
The dispute, of which much has been made, I regret to say, by some ill-informed members of the Labour party, was about recognition, not trade union membership.
On check-off, the hon. Gentleman said that we could not have that now unless individual trade unionists gave their consent.
He is wrong about that, too.
There is no such provision in law, and that is one of the things on which we shall legislate.
The most extraordinary feature of the Opposition's response has been the deafening silence of their principal spokesman in relation to the proposals.
There are two explanations for that.
First, the hon. Gentleman is terrified of saying anything that would upset his trade union paymasters; secondly, he is afraid to do anything that would remind the electorate of the chains that bind his party to those paymasters — the bosses of the trade unions.
When he is challenged about the Opposition's attitude to trade union legislation, the hon. Gentleman says that that is a matter of public record.
It is indeed.
The hon. Gentleman is on record in the House as describing ballots before strikes as’ a scandalous and undemocratic measure against the trade union movement’.
The shadow Chancellor has described strike ballots as an’ irrelevant effrontery’.
The Labour party has opposed
Mr. Martin Flannery (Sheffield, Hillsborough)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I have heard nothing disorderly.
Mr. Flannery
The right hon. and learned Gentleman, Mr. Speaker, is making a second statement.
He has already made a long statement, and you are letting him get away with it.
Mr. Speaker
The right hon. and learned Gentleman is answering the questions that were put to him.
If I cut him short, there will be complaints about that.
Mr. Howard
The Labour party has opposed every trade union Bill that we have introduced since 1979.
Opposition Members have persistently evaded questions about their plans to repeal that legislation, but they have been more forthcoming about the new powers that they have promised the trade unions, including powers to force employers to recognise and negotiate with trade unions
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Allow me to deal with this, please.
I do think that the Minister is going a bit beyond the statement now.
He should confine himself to the questions put to him.
Mr. Howard
The lengths to which the Labour party will go to rush to the defence of its trade union paymasters whenever this issue is raised are remarkable.
The truth is that it is this party and this Government who have consistently sought to defend employees and trade union members over the past 12 years, and that is what the country will bear in mind when we come to the general election.
Mr. Tony Banks
I assume that my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) is referring in part to the article in the Evening Standard of Monday 27 January headed’ Chunnel doubts grow over King's Cross’.
The article states that the costs’ have escalated’—
It being Ten o'clock, the debate stood adjourned.
Ordered, That, at this day's sitting, the King's Cross Railways Bill may be proceeded with, though opposed, until any hour.
Question again proposed, That the Bill be now read the Third time.
Mr. Banks
The article states:’ estimates of the project's cost have escalated from £457 million to £1.4 billion’— the figure mentioned by my hon. Friend — and that it is possible that the scheme will not go ahead.
Under those circumstances, I ask him whether it would be wise for the House to proceed with the Bill tonight.
Before he answers, and in order to assist all hon. Members, perhaps he will say whether, like me, he wants to press the Bill to a vote at the end of Third Reading?
Mr. Smith
I am grateful to my hon. Friend the Member for Newham, North-West (Mr. Banks) for drawing my attention to the article in the Evening Standard.
I am indeed minded to seek a vote on Third Reading at the end of what I hope will be a relatively brief debate.
The issue of finance raised in the Evening Standard article to which my hon. Friend draws attention is extremely important.
The Government are fond of asking where the money is coming from, but they are supporting a project which, according to old estimates which will probably have to be updated, will cost £1.4 billion.
However, the Government do not appear to be currently giving any commitment to provide funds or even to give British Rail the necessary borrowing authority.
The railways division of the Department of Transport wrote a letter to one of my constituents, Mr. R. H. Keynes, of Keystone crescent, whose home will be directly affected by the works.
My constituent had sought assurances from the Minister about the financing of the proposed station.
The Department of Transport replied:’ Turning to your letter to Mr. Freeman, I cannot answer your detailed questions about the financing of the station, as we have yet to see a full, up-to-date, case on this from BR.’
The letter continued:’ The answers to your specific questions to the Minister, are, therefore, that we have seen a certain amount of information on the cost of the King's Cross project’— we should like to know what that certain amount of information is —’and the projected revenues before giving consent to the deposit of the Bill.’
That was three years ago — the Bill was deposited in 1988.
A lot of time has elapsed, there has been a lot of inflation, many cost recalculations, and many changes in the route to get to King's Cross, and many other considerations, such as the creation of Stratford as a major interchange, have intervened in the meantime.
The Department of Transport goes on:’ But the project has altered considerably since’— the Department admits that —’and a lot of that information is no longer current, particularly on the revenue side.
We do not therefore know at this stage whether the station will meet the Government's investment criteria.’
In other words, not only do we not have in front of us an exact cost for the works that are being voted through in this Bill — we have to go on the basis of an outdated figure of £1.4 billion, which is in itself an enormous amount — but the Government are saying that they do not have the foggiest idea whether the amount involved will accord with their investment criteria.
The Government are dragooning their troops to push the Bill through the House despite the fact that they do not have the faintest idea how they or British Rail will pay for it.
That is something of which we ought to be extremely wary.
Mr. Corbyn
During the passage of this Bill, my hon. Friend has made himself an expert on the subject.
That being the case, perhaps he can help me.
If British Rail goes ahead with the building of this station at a cost of £1.4 billion, what sort of income will it need to secure from the capital developments to service the loan, bearing in mind the fact that the Minister has often said that the Government will put no money into the project?
Mr. Smith
If British Raik were seeking to finance this project entirely out of the relatively small amount of revenue that will come to the station from the operation of the services and from the surrounding property development, it would find that impossible.
Even with the property market at its height — I do not need to remind the House that it is not at the height at the moment — British Rail would not be able to cover the £1.4 billion capital cost out of its profit from property development or out of revenue from running the trains.
Of course, that is not a debate that the Government have yet entered into.
They have not even set out their parameters for the financing of the station.
The only figure that they have been prepared to come up with is bad enough — the initial cost of all the preparatory work involved in making drawings, hiring expensive barristers to put the Bill through the House, and so on.
Last week, I tabled a written question about precisely these costs:’ To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what funds are being made available to British Rail for design and other work in connection with planning and preparation of the King's Cross project.’
The reply that I was given is as follows:’ The external finance limit for BR next year will be £2,041 million.
This will allow BR to spend £66 million on design and preparatory work for the King's Cross, Thameslink 2000 and channel tunnel rail link projects.’
It is worth pointing out that Thameslink 2000 has been put back a year.
The Bill will be deposited next November instead of last November.
Therefore, the great bulk of the money to which that answer refers is for the King's Cross and channel tunnel rail link projects.
We know that the Government have already given British Rail approval to spend £66 million — an awful lot of money — on the preparatory work.
That, of course, makes even more important the question of the ultimate financing.
If the Government are prepared to put £66 million into the work now, as well as dragooning hon. Members to push this Bill through the House, they must have — certainly they ought to have — a clearer idea of how they will behave in relation to the ultimate funding of the project when British Rail wants to start work.
Apart from the issue of financing the work —
Mr. Corbyn
The question of financing is important.
As the future funding of the project is so uncertain and vague, are we to assume either that there is a private understanding between British Rail and the Government that the Government will pay the capital cost, or that the capital cost will be taken from other British Rail capital investment programmes, such as rail electrification?
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend raises an extremely important point.
I simply remind the House of some of the items of expenditure which British Rail seeks to undertake.
All are extremely worthwhile projects, including the upgrading of the west coast main line at a cost of £750 million and the electrification of the midlands main line at a cost of £315 million.
Mr. Cryer
I caution my hon. Friend about using those figures.
The east coast main line has been electrified, according to figures provided by the Minister, at a cost of £470 million.
At 1990-91 prices, the original cost of the west coast main line electrification in the 1960s was £1,900 million.
In other words —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
None of this has anything to do with the Third Reading debate.
Mr. Cryer
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
All those points have been covered —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
This is not a point of order.
The hon. Gentleman knows better than to start challenging my ruling.
Mr. Smith
I certainly —
Mr. Cryer
The King's Cross development may draw money away from the projects that my hon. Friend has listed.
The Government figures for investment, although accurate, represents investment on the cheap and not the full cost required for a decent job.
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend may be right.
I do not claim to be an expert on the detailed financing of particular aspects of railway work, but I know that there are many useful and worthwhile projects which British Rail could undertake.
Apart from the projects that I have mentioned, there is the electrification of the trans-Pennine routes, the electrification of the Perth-Inverness line, the modernisation of the London, Tilbury and Southend line, Thameslink 2000 and the potential modernisation of the north Kent line.
Those are important and worthwhile projects, and we must ask the Government where the money for them will come from, especially if £1.4 billion is gobbled up by the proposals for King's Cross.
Mrs. Gwyneth Dunwoody (Crewe and Nantwich)
I know that my hon. Friend realises that many north-west and north-east Members have been careful not to intervene in the debate because we understand the strength of feeling in my hon. Friend's constituency.
I hope that my hon. Friend will bear in mind the fact that there is another calculation which he has not mentioned.
What will happen to all those projects if none of them has access to the channel tunnel and to the rapid movement of freight and passengers around the London area?
Without the King's Cross terminal, there may be real problems.
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend is mistaken in including freight in her remarks, because the Bill contains no proposals on freight.
The proposal is not for freight traffic to go through King's Cross.
That issue is completely separate from the Bill.
Precisely this question was raised at an earlier stage in our discussions, and I pointed out then that the Government had not come clean at all on the issue of freight and what would happen to freight.
I share the desire of my hon. Friend the Member for Crewe and Nantwich (Mrs. Dunwoody) in wanting to see not just passenger traffic but freight able to make a direct contact with the channel tunnel from all parts of the country, especially the north and the north-west.
I share her desire to ensure that the channel tunnel becomes a tool for economic regeneration around the country.
This Bill, however, has nothing whatever to do with the movement of goods from the north of the country to the channel tunnel.
It does have something to do with the movement of passengers from the north of the country to the channel tunnel, but, as I have already explained, I do not believe that King's Cross is essential to achieve that end.
However, even if one takes the view that King's Cross is essential, there are better and more appropriate ways of building and developing a new station at King's Cross than the one that British Rail has effectively forced upon us.
Considerations of finance are important in relation to that, because I do not believe that British Rail has to build an underground station in order to achieve its purpose.
What impact will the proposed station have on its environment and especially on traffic?
According to British Rail and the Department of Transport's own published estimates, the new low-level station will double the number of rail passengers passing through the King's Cross station complex during the morning peak hours.
It will double the number of vehicles that will come into King's Cross or St.
Pancras during the morning peak hours.
The station and office development together will increase the traffic on Euston road during the evening peak hours by 70 per cent.
Anyone who has tried travelling in a bus or car on Euston road in the evening rush hour will know that it is bad enough at present; to impose an additional 70 per cent .
of traffic on that major artery will cause enormous congestion.
That takes no account of the 100 per cent.
increase in traffic which is likely to occur in the morning peak hours.
British Rail and the Government must therefore take some notice, at the very least, of the traffic implications of the Bill.
It is all very well to say, as I am sure the hon. Member for Keighley (Mr. Waller) will say — because it is what British Rail has said for months — that the great majority of passengers coming into King's Cross on the channel tunnel trains will go to further destinations by public transport, but there will also be many hundreds of thousands of passengers in a year who will want to be met by friends in cars, who will want to get on to coaches if they are in large parties or who will want to take taxis.
The traffic implications of what is proposed are enormous, and I hope that British Rail and the Government will take cognisance of the fact that we do not want to create around King's Cross a traffic jam far worse than anything that we have to put up with at present.
Mr. Corbyn
My hon. Friend knows King's Cross well.
I am not aware of any proposal to upgrade the Piccadilly or Victoria lines, which carry the majority of passengers to and from King's Cross.
If those lines cannot cope during the rush hour at present, how will they cope with double the traffic?
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friends makes a valid point.
British Rail has consistently argued that people will get off the channel tunnel trains and get on to one of the five underground lines going through King's Cross station, and that that will somehow solve the problem of increased passenger traffic.
It will not.
Even if a new underground concourse is built — that is one of the proposals that is being advanced — nowhere in the Bill is it proposed that a single extra train should run on the Victoria, Piccadilly or Northern lines, or on any of the other lines that run through King's Cross.
The tube trains are already packed during the rush hour, and there is no proposal in the Bill to ensure that extra services are provided.
Both below ground and above it, the traffic implications will be absolutely massive.
I have explained why I think that the Government should come clean on the financing of the project and why the traffic and congestion implications of the proposals will be enormously painful for the King's Cross area.
In addition to all that, my constituents will have to put up with untold damage to their lives, homes, shops and other properties — both immediately and in the years to come.
It is worth reminding the House what the Bill, if enacted in its present form, would involve: the loss of 83 homes, the displacement of 326 residents, the demolition of four listed buildings, the destruction of well over 10 acres of property in two conservation areas, the destruction of a two-acre inner-city nature reserve of great value to the local community, the loss of 168 workplaces providing 1,620 jobs, the loss of 58 shops, 38 of which provide key services to local people, the diversion of a major traffic artery for a period of three years, a doubling of the number of rail passengers and a doubling of the number of cars and taxis coming to King's Cross and St. Pancras during the morning peak hour.
In addition to all that, the project will involve six years of construction work on the station and two years of construction work on the post-station development.
That work will be in progress 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
It will be taking place immediately beside, behind and in front of the homes of a large number of my constituents.
Sincerely though I respect the wish of hon. Members on both sides of the House to ensure that their constituents can benefit from access to the channel tunnel — I have no desire to stand in the way of their efforts to make that wish come true — I urge that the interests of my constituents, who will have to put up with untold misery for an extended eight-year period, should be given closer consideration than BR has given them hitherto.
BR could have come to us at the outset and said,’ King's Cross has to be the location for a whole series of railway reasons, but let us talk about how best to ensure that the building of the station has minimal impact on local people and their lives.’
If it had done that, we might have had a sensible dialogue with British Rail, but it did not.
It came forward with these proposals, and it has attempted to bludgeon them through the House.
It was, quite rightly, fiercely criticised by the Select Committee for the way in which it behaved in trying to get its proposals through the Committee and the House.
It has not listened on a whole series of points, even though I am very grateful that amendments have been agreed to in the course of our debate this evening.
I shall vote against the Third Reading of the Bill tonight, but my intention is not to deprive the north of access to the channel tunnel.
That is the last thing in my mind.
My intention is to try to persuade British Rail and the Government to take more reasonable notice of the needs, requirements and quality of life of my constituents.
The Minister for Public Transport (Mr. Roger Freeman)
I am grateful for the opportunity to record the fact that the Government support the Bill and encourage all hon. Members to vote in favour of Third Reading, so that the Bill can proceed to another place for further consideration.
The Government support British Rail's plan to have the terminus of a high speed rail link at King's Cross.
They also support the plans of London Underground to have, under the powers of this Bill, extensive work carried out at King's Cross to improve facilities there and also to improve commuter services — the Thameslink services which run north-south through King's Cross.
These are all laudable aims.
The hon. Members for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) and for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape) referred to an article in the Evening Standard.
May I make it plain, as my Department has done consistently over the past three years of consideration of the Bill in the House, that this is indeed a mammoth project, that the appraisals of such a project inevitably change over time as the project changes in costs and revenue.
It is not possible to come to a firm conclusion about this project in financial terms at the moment.
British Rail remains convinced that, the appraisal tests that we have set can be met; that is to say, for InterCity and for the international services, an 8 per cent .
return.
For the social services, that is for Thameslink and for the underground services in London, wider social benefits are taken into account, such as road decongestion, social regeneration and economic benefits to the City of London through such construction.
British Rail remains convinced that, when it puts the detailed investment proposition to us, once planning permission is obtained, it will pass the appraisal test.
The House would not expect me to give any assurances about the timing of construction and the extent to which the investment appraisal test will be met.
But the Government are committed to the Bill.
We believe very strongly that planning permission should be given to permit construction to start, to bring benefits not only to the metropolis but to the north-east, the north-west and other parts of the country to which rail services will run from King's Cross to other great cities in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Corbyn
Before the Minister leaves this subject of the cost of the development, could he be more specific about it?
British Rail has given a figure of £1.4 billion for the construction of the station complex.
The Minister has said that there will be appraisal tests for the rail linkages in and out of it and their viability in return on capital, and so forth.
He has not said what return on capital will have to be attained from the station in order to service the loan to construct the station, unless he intends to make a very large Government grant available for that construction.
Mr. Freeman
I hoped that I had made it quite plain that there are several different constituent parts of the project.
For the non-commercial parts of the operation, the Government's present procedure for funding such investments, for example by Network SouthEast or London Underground, is to take into account, where appropriate, the wider non-user benefits — I gave the House examples of such non-user benefits — and to finance London Underground by grant and British Rail by passenger service obligation grant, which is a revenue grant, and then by loan sanction permission to borrow.
The revenue impact for social railway investment is met by increases in the passenger service obligation grant.
If the hon. Gentleman wants to table a question or write to me, I shall be glad to enlarge upon that.
As I have said, the Government support the Bill.
We think that it is appropriate not only that King's Cross should be the terminus for a rail link but that underground and Network SouthEast facilities should be improved at that station.
We urge the House to give the Bill a Third reading.
Mr. Snape
I, too, will be extremely brief.
I believe that there are objectives that should be endorsed, not because the Bill favours one part of the country at the expense of another but because an international terminal, as well as a through station, at King's Cross will benefit the whole country.
Indeed, I believe, as do many of my hon. Friends, that from a railway point of view there is no alternative to King's Cross.
That is not to say that the Minister has not left questions unanswered, not least the one just put to him by my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn).
We are confused about the financing of this great development.
The Evening Standard article, to which he referred, emphasises his confusion.
The terms in which he wrote to various organisations, talking about commercial viability or otherwise, also caused confusion.
The station will benefit not just international passengers.
There will be benefits for domestic rail services to which the Minister referred.
None of those benefits — neither those for the international services nor their domestic counterparts — could come from building the terminal anywhere else, such as Stratford or the other places which have been mentioned.
Because of the geographical location of King's Cross and its easy connections to other parts of the country, it is not just the obvious choice but the only choice.
I have been involved for many years with the channel tunnel project as a whole and its associated terminal at King's Cross.
I think that I am the only hon. Member to have served on two Select Committees on the channel tunnel.
During the period in which the Conservatives have been in power it was said, first, that we needed only one terminal, Waterloo.
Then it was decided that we needed two terminals.
Originally, the Government and British Rail management said that there was no need for a dedicated rail route from the channel ports, and that we could manage with the existing railway infrastructure.
Then it was said that we needed a dedicated rail route, which would pass through Kent, and which would obviously affect the prospects of some Conservative Members in marginal constituencies.
Despite the need to spend hundreds of millions of pounds of public money on property acquisition, overnight we had the proposal for an eastern route into Stratford — a defeat for the Secretary of State, if we are to believe what we read in the newspapers, who wanted the original route.
The confusion about the project has been made worse by the Government's vacillation and indecision, and also by their lack of answers to my hon. Friends about where the finance for the project will come from.
Mr. Chris Smith
My hon. Friend is right in the point that he is putting to the Minister.
He will recall that, when British Rail proposed that Waterloo should be the first channel tunnel station, not only did it say that one station was sufficient and that it did not need a second one but, in the case which it put to the House of Lords during the discussions, it said specifically that King's Cross was not an appropriate location for a second station.
British Rail was ruling out King's Cross at that stage, yet two or three years later BR tells us that King's Cross is essential.
Mr. Snape
My hon. Friend underlines the confusion which has reigned over the project, certainly during the past decade and probably for some time before that.
On the point about additional traffic the Minister overlooked the fact that the new terminal will be a combination of King's Cross and St. Pancras, which, from a railway point of view, is considerably under-utilised.
I have no figures on the throughput of passengers in those stations' heyday, but I hazard a guess that considerably more passengers now use the combined stations.
Mr. Corbyn
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Snape
With respect, I shall not give way because my hon. Friend has not been present for much of the debate.
I know that he wants to speak on Third Reading and no doubt he will make his point later.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, North agrees that the total number of passengers using King's Cross and St.
Pancras in those stations' heyday was considerably more than the number who use the combined stations today.
I am worried when people say that it is fine to live next to a railway station but that one must never use it to its full capacity.
That does not appear to be sensible
Mr. Corbyn
Who says that?
Mr. Snape
Various pressure groups make that point about both the London terminuses.
They are apparently quite relaxed about living next to railway stations, provided they are not used to their full capacity.
I neither understand nor share that view.
I realise that my hon. Friends who represent constituencies in other parts of the country are still waiting to hear something that was implied during the passage of the Bill.
My hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) says that the Bill has been railroaded through the House, but I remind him that it is three long years since it was introduced.
If that is a railroad, it is pretty slow, and I would not look forward to travelling on it.
None of us believes that a real alternative to King's Cross exists, although we are not particularly happy about British Rail's proposals.
I give my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury an undertaking that we are committed to a terminal at King's Cross, but we are not necessarily committed to the expensive and grandiose project, which seems to depend on property values that were optimistic three or four years ago and are hopelessly pessimistic now.
I hope that the Minister will attempt, in his final few weeks in office, to clarify exactly which part of the station the Government are prepared to support financially.
So far, an answer on that has been lacking from him and other Ministers.
After three years, it is time to draw this saga to a close.
I hope that my hon. Friends will support the Bill, because the principle of a terminal station and an international channel tunnel station at King's Cross cannot be challenged.
Mr. Waller
I shall not strain the good will of hon. Members who have supported the Bill by speaking for more than a few moments.
I should like to speak longer, because the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) spoke about the losses that he envisages would be incurred by the development of the station at King's Cross, and if I had the time I should love to expand on the economic benefits that could be achieved in employment terms, the environmental benefits that would accrue to the area and the safety benefits that would be brought about by the Fennell provisions in the Bill.
However, I shall desist from following that course and merely state that the co-ordinated package of works in the Bill will make King's Cross a first-class interchange between international trains and inter-city services from the east midlands, the north and Scotland, as well as to and from Thameslink and London Underground services.
With the short transfer to Euston station, passengers will have an interchange to and from the north-west and the midlands.
The Bill will also provide for the expansion of the successful Thameslink service and create new cross-London routes.
It will enable the promoters greatly to improve capacity and the safety of passenger flows at the London underground station.
Several hon. Gentlemen referred to the problems that will result from the increased throughput of passengers.
However, the concourse will be enlarged and the facilities will be compatible with the new British Rail station, which will be able to handle many more passengers.
There has been a highly informed debate on the King's Cross Bill since the day my hon. Friend the Member for Ealing, Acton (Sir G.
Young) moved the Second Reading in May 1989.
My hon. Friend the Member for Chipping Barnet (Mr. Chapman) was originally associated with the Bill.
He has spoken with authority on other transport-related Bills.
It took an historic 53 days to get the Bill through Committee, under the expert chairmanship of my hon. Friend the Member for Tatton (Mr. Hamilton), who was present on the Front Bench today.
It is curious that those two hon. Gentlemen were snatched away from their work on the Bill to enter the Whips Office.
Mr. Enright
Is my hon. Friend aware that, in the Wakefield health authority district, democratic results gave only two seats to the Conservatives but that every appointment in the health authority area is a Conservative?
Is not that a disgrace?
Does not it give us cause to fear clause 5?
Mr. Fatchett
Again, my hon. Friend makes a valid point relating to new clause 2 and the method of appointment.
We are trying to preserve the integrity of the chief inspector.
My hon. Friend will know that, not too far from Wakefield, the chairman of one of the hospital trusts in Leeds, who is the largest private donator to the Tory party — a man who decided last week that he would use private medicine in the hospital trust that he manages — was yet another of those appointments.
You probably consider that my remarks are a little wide of the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there has been a recent discussion about contextual factors in education.
This is a contextual argument, which makes one understand the way in which the Government are prepared to make appointments for political reasons.
We know that from time to time, there has been a slight delay in publishing the HMI annual report.
We also know that the Government are not reluctant to make it clear to those working on their behalf exactly what sort of political message they want to receive.
There are real risks in that.
I refer, for example, to a recent HMI report.
My hon. Friends will be interested in this matter, because it is an HMI report on the first city technology college, Kingshurst, in Solihull in the west midlands.
It is a creature of the Government, a college in which the Government have invested substantial money, and a college which, in the Government's terms, should be a success.
The independence of the inspectorate enabled it to make its comments, which is why new clause 2 is so relevant.
On the Kingshurst CTC, it stated:’ On occasions, the lessons are undemanding.’
On curriculum management, the inspectorate report stated:’ There is no co-ordination of the various aspects and strands that support the curriculum, nor are there effective links with the social education programme or with careers education and guidance.’
In other words, a college had substantial Government money but was producing education standards that were not satisfactory to the inspectorate.
I want an inspectorate to have the ability to make comments and criticisms and to be free of direct government interference.
Why have we decided to relate the responsibility and the duty to the national curriculum?
We have linked back to the Education Reform Act 1988 for several reasons.
There is broad acceptance of the principle of a national curriculum.
It seems sensible for the inspectorate to maintain that national curriculum.
There are certain characteristics that any national curriculum should have.
It must be national and it must not be the plaything of any political party.
Mr. Pawsey
Hear, hear.
Mr. Fatchett
Yes.
Over recent months, we have seen good evidence of a Secretary of State who is prepared to overturn independent expert advice in order to satisfy his own prejudices.
We saw that in terms of history, and we recently saw it in terms of music, although he did a famous U-turn after his cage was rattled, I suspect.
In those circumstances, we have seen party-political interference as represented by the idiosyncratic views of the Secretary of State.
We want a national curriculum which is above and beyond the suspicion of party politics.
Above all, it must be a national curriculum that gives all our children a guaranteed entitlement to higher standards in education.
That has been the Government's argument for a national curriculum — it has been broadly accepted — but we need a national curriculum that is secure and delivered by the inspectorate.
We need an inspectorate that is powerful and independent and has a chief inspector who can make comments on aspects of Government policy, free from the interference of Education Ministers.
There are points on which my hon. Friends would like HMI to comment.
For instance, they would like HMI to comment on the increase in class sizes in primary education, the scandal that one in four of our children are now taught in classes of 30 and over, and the fact that 10,000 of our children in primary education are taught in classes of 40 and more.
We should like the inspector to comment on what those large classes do to the quality of education.
A reading of the report of the so-called three wise men last week will show the difficulties in delivering key stage 1 and key stage 2 in very large classes.
I have no evidence to support it, but I suspect that Ministers looking for private schools for their children will not take as a key selling point class sizes of more than 35 or 40.
They will be looking for smaller classes.
We should like the inspector to comment on that point.
We should also like the inspector to comment on the quality of our school buildings.
We are faced with a backlog of £3.5 billion of school repairs.
We need comment on that.
We need to know what that does in terms of the quality of education and the standards of education for our children.
They are legitimate matters.
The hon. Member for Lancaster (Dame E.
Interruption
Kellett-Bowman) seems delighted to have children taught in substandard schools.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
The hon. Gentleman did not hear what I said.
I said that schools in my constituency are improving substantially under LMS.
Mr. Fatchett
Clearly the hon. Lady does not understand LMS.
Let me explain it to her.
We may find that there is a substantial difference.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
This is not a Second Reading debate.
Let us get a bit closer to the new clause.
Mr. Fatchett
I believe that this is close to the new clause, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
Indeed, it is totally within it to talk about the fact that the inspector has a right to comment on the quality of school buildings and its impact on education.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
I thought that the hon. Gentleman, for the benefit of the hon. Lady and the House, was going to explain LMS.
Mr. Fatchett
I appreciate that in that respect I was drifting out of order.
I probably felt that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thought that the task was beyond my intellectual capacity.
In the circumstances I was asking a great deal.
Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)
Surely the hon. Gentleman would expect an inspector commenting on school buildings to do so in proper context by drawing attention to the fact that deterioration, about which we are all concerned, has been prevalent for 40 or 50 years, and sometimes much longer.
This is an historical situation that must be addressed by everybody.
Mr. Fatchett
That was an interesting intervention.
The hon. Gentleman says that the problem has existed for 14 years.
Mr. Greenway
No, 40 or 50 years.
Mr. Fatchett
Ah, 40 or 50 years.
I was about to remind the hon. Gentleman that the present Government have been in office for the past 13 years and therefore must accept a great deal of responsibility.
I know that the hon. Gentleman has a considerable understanding of education issues and will realise that all the independent evidence suggests that the problems have worsened over the last few years.
There is the problem of crumbling schools.
Literally hundreds of thousands of children are taught in substandard buildings.
That must have direct effect on education standards, and it is legitimate that Her Majesty's inspectorate should comment on it.
I want the independent inspector to be able to comment on other aspects of Government policy.
Whether the Government are Labour or Conservative, the inspector ought to have the right to comment, on, for instance, funding and on what is currently going on in the Prime Minister's county of Cambridgeshire, where there have been some very severe reductions.
These must be matters for the inspector.
A report prepared by head teachers in Cambridgeshire and circulated to all county councillors comments on the impact of the £2 million cut in the county council's budget.
It refers to the reduction in the number of teachers, to cuts in the provision for children with special educational needs, to larger classes, to cuts in the expenditure on books and equipment and to the national curriculum.
The hon. Member for Lancaster will be interested to hear that it says that the national curriculum will not be delivered because of the difficulty —
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
It will be delivered in our schools.
Mr. Fatchett
The hon. Lady demonstrates the typically inward-looking Tory approach.
She says that the national curriculum will be delivered in her schools.
It does not seem to matter to her what will happen on the other side of the road.
She is bothered only about what happens in Tory Lancashire.
That is a quite legitimate interest, but surely what is going on in other parts of the country should be of interest to all of us.
If we are to improve our general education standards we must have funding for the system and an inspectorate able to comment on that matter.
I know that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, take a keen interest in educational matters.
If you look at other schools in Cambridgeshire, you will find cuts in physical education, technology, language assistance and music.
All that is the result of the Government's funding policies, and an independent inspectorate has a right to comment on it.
An independent inspectorate would have a right to comment also on teacher supply and teacher shortage and on instances of classes being taught subjects in which the teachers are not qualified.
The Minister of State does not see this as a legitimate area of concern for the inspectorate, but I do.
It is an important matter.
We know from an HMI report of last year that more than three quarters of our secondary schools are finding it difficult to deliver the national curriculum because they do not have properly qualified staff in every subject.
This is a crucial difficulty.
We should be concerned not just about the number of teachers but about their quality.
We should be concerned about whether a science teacher is available to teach a science lesson, or whether the only person available is someone trained over a very short period.
We want an independent inspectorate that is able to comment on all those matters.
We want, above all else, a system of inspection that does not derive from ideology, that is not a quick fix, that does not represent a commitment to privatisation on the ground that the Department of Education and Science must deliver its element of privatisation.
We want an education partnership between parents, schools, local authorities, industry and higher education — a partnership that will enable us to achieve standards comparable to those in the rest of western Europe.
The only way we can achieve such standards is to have a chief inspector who is independent and free and who brings integrity to the partnership.
That is why we have moved new clause 2.
Mr. Eggar
Before hearing the speech of the hon. Member for Leeds, Central (Mr. Fatchett) I was going to say how much we had missed him in Committee.
Having heard him speak, I can just about forgive him for not understanding the Committee debate.
Indeed, he probably did not read the report of it.
But there is something for which I have rather more difficulty in forgiving him.
It is quite clear that he has failed to read not only the Bill and the report of the Committee's proceedings but his own party's policy document’ Raising the Standard’.
It is up to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to decide whether hon. Members are in order, but I must say that the hon. Gentleman went on at considerable length about matters some of which seemed to stray interestingly from the subject of the amendment.
The hon. Gentleman spoke at some length about his desire for a totally independent inspectorate.
If he had bothered to read his own party's policy document he would have seen that it is his party which seeks to deprive the inspectorate of its independence; that it is his party which is determined to put the inspectorate under the control of a new quango quaintly called the educational standards commission; that it is his party which would deprive Her Majesty's inspectorate of an essential part of what has given it independence and credibility — its role in advising the Secretary of State of the day.
I am not the first one to have criticised this side of the Labour party's proposals.
The criticism came from the former senior chief inspector, Mr. Eric Bolton, who pointed out that, under Labour's proposals, the inspectorate, instead of advising the Secretary of State directly, would have to rely on the secondment of some senior inspectors.
It must have been a considerable disappointment to the hon. Gentleman and his colleagues to hear Mr. Eric Bolton describe their proposals as’ cloud cuckoo land’.
To people who seek to follow the Labour party's proposals in this area I suggest that the new clause demonstrates very deep and very worrying confusion.
Her Majesty's inspectorate — presumably still under the control of the education standards commission — would apparently have executive responsibilities.
That is what the new clause suggests.
The chief inspectors would be responsible for the curriculum in all schools.
As well as supposedly advising the Secretary of State on policy and standards, they would take on the responsibilities of the Secretary of State, the local education authorities, the governors, the heads and the senior management of schools.
For good measure, it appears that the inspector is meant also to advise in respect of a number of other matters, including resources.
I was interested that the hon. Member for Leeds, Central said nothing about the importance of separating inspection from advice.
I recommend to him a good paragraph in’ Raising the Standard’:’We propose that every LEA should be placed under a legal duty to maintain a local inspectorate of schools, separate from any team of advisers or advisory teachers.’
The hon. Member for Leeds, Central will recognise those words, and he should own up to them.
The hon. Member for Knowsley, South (Mr. O'Hara)— whom I welcome to the Chamber — missed that point in Committee, where we enjoyed the confusion that reigned on the Opposition Benches in respect of this issue.
Although one can understand the Opposition having difficulty with their own Back Benchers, I never expected that they would have difficulty with members of their own Front Bench.
It is no use the hon. Member for Leeds, Central looking to either side of him; he is the guilty man.
In a document that has conveniently been leaked to me, the hon. Gentleman, without any hesitation, contradicts the words of the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) in’ Raising the Standard’.
I refer to a letter written by the hon. Member for Leeds, Central on 28 November 1991 to the secretary of the Society of Chief Inspectors and Advisers:’ The subsequent evaluation, monitoring and implementation of new practices could be carried out by both the initial inspector or by a group of advisers.
At this point, whilst we define separately the responsibility of inspection and advice we also recognise that in certain circumstances approved by the LEA and the Education Standards Commission inspection and advice could be offered by the same group of people.’
That is directly contrary to what was stated in’ Raising the Standard’and to the remarks made by the hon. Member for Blackburn from the Opposition Front Bench in Committee.
I am sorry that the hon. Member for Blackburn is not here to set the hon. Member for Leeds, Central right.
I would welcome an intervention from the hon. Gentleman to explain whether Labour's policy is that described in’ Raising the Standard’or that stated by the hon. Member for Leeds, Central in his letter to the Society of Chief Inspectors and Advisers.
I suspect that the Opposition are in the same muddle on this as on every other issue — including taxation, over the past three weeks.
If the Opposition Front Bench cannot get its act together, how can we believe that they want to introduce effective inspection?
New clause 2 is humbug.
It clearly exposes the weakness that is at the heart of Labour's inspection policy, and demonstrates that the hon. Member for Blackburn does not speak to the hon. Member for Leeds, Central.
Mr. Fatchett
It is flattering of the Government to spend so much time on Labour's proposals.
There is a growing consensus, which the Minister is prepared to support, that there will be a Labour Government before too long — when our proposals will be implemented.
It is characteristic of the Government that although the Minister spoke for one quarter of an hour, he did not once refer to new clause 2 or defend the Government's record.
That is typical of the Government's tactics and negative approach.
The Minister called the new clause’ humbug’.
If he regards the inspectorate's independence and integrity as humbug, he is not fit to serve as Minister of State.
We are not satisfied with the Minister's response and will divide the House on new clause 2.
Question put, That the clause be read a Second time:
The Committee divided: Ayes, 203, Noes 285.
New Clause 3
Power of Chief Inspector for England to promote studies for improving efficiency etc.
The Chief Inspector for England may, with the consent of the Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales, promote or undertake studies in connection with his functions designed to improve efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the management of schools in England.
Brought up, and read the First time.
Mr. Straw
I beg to move, That the clause be read a Second time.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
With this it will be convenient to take the following: New Clause 4 — Power of Chief Inspector for Wales to promote studies for improving efficiency etc. —
The Chief Inspector for Wales may, with the consent of the Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales, promote or undertake studies in connection with his functions designed to improve efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the management of schools in Wales. '.
Government amendments Nos. 26, 27, 48 and 49.
Mr. Straw
I am sure that the House is pleased that the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Darlington (Mr. Fallon), is to answer the debate.
It may explain why scores of hon. Members are trying to get into the Chamber.
Mr. George Howarth
It is the other way round.
Mr. Straw
One of the problems with the Official Report is that heavy irony usually fails to come off, and it certainly did on that occasion.
New clause 3 proposes to add to the Bill the following:’ The Chief Inspector for England may, with the consent of the Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales, promote or undertake studies in connection with his functions designed to improve efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the management of schools in England.’
Clause 4 has the same wording, except that it applies to the chief inspector for Wales.
Amendments Nos. 26 and 27 appear on page 412 of the amendment sheet.
We need not worry about No. 26 because it simply deletes the word’ and’.
Amendment No. 27 proposes to insert in clause 16, at the end of the two sets of criteria, the words:’ assist in assessing the degree of efficiency with which the financial resources of those schools are managed.’
Government amendments Nos. 48 and 49, which can be found on page 413, do the same in respect of clause 17 and the exercise of functions in Scotland.
In Committee there were substantial debates about how far the effectiveness of schools could fairly be judged simply by the publication of crude raw data on their results.
We shall deal with that later.
New clause 3 touches on those issues because it proposes that, after consultation with the Audit Commission, the chief inspector ought to be able to’ undertake studies in connection with his functions to improve efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the management of schools’.
It would be difficult for us to object to Government amendments Nos. 26 and 27 since, as I recall, they arose from amendments that we tabled in Committee.
Thus, we do not object — it would be churlish to do so.
Amendment No. 27 is concerned only with assessing the degree of efficiency with which a school's financial resources are managed.
The Chief Inspector ought to be able to study wider criteria.
Obviously efficiency is important, but he should also consider economy and effectiveness.
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
I am listening to the hon. Gentleman with very great care.
Is he aware that the Association of County Councils, on which his own county council and Buckinghamshire and many other Conservative county councils are represented — indeed, the association is controlled by the Conservatives — says that the removal of the power to inspect under section 77(3) of the Education Act 1944 will greatly diminish the local authority's ability to intervene in a school that is falling below standard?
Mr. Madel
I am in very close touch with Bedfordshire county council, and the hon. Gentleman is right; it is concerned about this, too.
I think that what I will conclude by saying will answer the hon. Gentleman's point.
I do not think that the House of Commons wants to get into an argument about when an inspection is not an inspection.
One could play around with the word ad nauseam; then, the next thing that we would be arguing about is the place of the potato in English folklore.
We want something very specific, which is why I welcome this specific day for the Bill.
If any of those specific points that I have listed came up, I believe, on the basis of what my hon. Friend the Minister of State said in his letter, that the local education authority could go into the school.
It would be carrying out its broad statutory duty for the provision of education.
Every one of those specific points refers to the provision of education.
I hope that, before 10 o'clock, my hon. Friends on the Front Bench will be able to assure me specifically that what my hon. Friend the Minister of State said in his letter to Dr. Morris would allow local education authorities, if approached by parents or friends of the school, to go into the school to deal with any one of the specific points that I have raised.
Mr. Merlyn Rees (Morley and Leeds, South)
I rarely speak or am active on guillotine motions and resulting business arrangements on timing, because in general I have long been in favour of timetabling all Bills from the start.
My experience over many years is that Standing Committees and other similar Committees on the Floor of the House, with exceptions that I will come to in a moment, never give Bills the due consideration that they ought to have.
One of the reasons why I was in favour of televising the House and Committees was that I thought that it might be a good idea for the public to see Standing Committees, with Ministers doing their mail and others trying to hold up the business.
With regard to the Bill before us today, education is a most important issue and I doubt whether the House, despite the intentions of the few who are actively interested, has looked at the problems that have arisen.
So in general I am in favour of timetabling from the start.
I understand the dangers.
I understand the problems in hung Parliaments, and all the rest of it.
I had the dubious pleasure, after Second Reading, of trying to pilot the House of Lords reform Bill through the House many years ago, when we found that the divisions were on both sides of the House and any idea that one could timetable or guillotine soon went out of the window.
For the reasons that I have given, I am sceptical of the existing system and therefore I rarely speak on such motions.
Yesterday afternoon and evening, I sat in the Chamber because I am interested in the subject of the inspectorate.
I owe a great deal to my education many years ago, as I come from the background of a Welsh mining village, where a high proportion of us ended up with university degrees — a far higher rate than in many posher, salubrious, suburban areas.
I am even more interested these days, not because of my children who are grown up, but because I am interested in special education.
All Governments have failed to deal properly with that, despite all their Ministers' words.
I question whether the inspectorate is giving it due consideration.
I listened carefully to the debate on the inspectorate yesterday.
As the hon. Member for Meirionnydd Nant Conwy (Dr. Thomas) will know, last century the inspectorate played an important part in developing Welsh education, not necessarily by visiting each school to give its view, although no doubt that played a part but by creating a philosophy — in the Matthew Arnold sense of the term — for the development of education which, frankly, one does not get from party manifestos.
When I read that junior Ministers are interfering with the curriculum, I get worried, because I do not think that they know very much about it.
There are times when I think that other people know little about it, but politicians are the last people to pontificate about the curriculum, and I hope that teachers and inspectors are concerned about it.
I sat in on the debate yesterday because of my great interest in the role of the inspectorate and in what will happen if schools and local education authorities, however affluent, pay little attention to special needs.
What good can a tied inspectorate do?
I saw no example of filibuster yesterday afternoon and evening.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunninghan) said, the Secretary of State spoke for a long time — until about 6 o'clock.
If there was any urgency in getting the Bill through, the Secretary of State did not show it.
There were many interventions.
The hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth (Mr. Pawsey), who has a great interest in education, spoke for a long time, as did other hon. Members on both sides of the House.
There was something odd about the whole procedure because there was no great urgency.
I began to realise that something was very wrong.
The guillotine was not decided at 9.55 pm last night, when the first frisson went through the Government Front Bench and Ministers began to pass around bits of paper and to consult properly, but earlier.
The only reason that I am speaking is that I do not believe that the guillotine motion has anything to do with speeding up the Education (Schools) Bill because time was being wasted.
It is being used simply to speed things up for the general election.
If polling day is 9 April, a certain amount of time is needed to get business through the House, and that is all that the guillotine is for.
That is what happened last night.
Possibly, the delay in the English and Welsh revenue grants is to enable the Government to deal with the problem of poll tax bills which will be plopping through doors shortly.
I am opposed to what is happening and shall readily vote tonight.
It is not because I am not interested in timetabling — although it is too late now, as I shall be leaving the House shortly.
I hope that one day there will be pre-timetabling in the House, except for important and constitutional Bills.
However, this motion is to do with the election.
I must tell the Leader of the House that, if the election is to be on 9 April — everyone is planning for it, buying space to advertise and organising; one hears it from sources in the advertising business who know what the Opposition and the Government are doing — then, for the good of the House, for heaven's sake announce the date and let us do business in a sensible fashion during the next six weeks, instead of proceeding in this way and covering up the reality.
We are in an election period and the guillotine motion is for election purposes.
It has nothing to do with the inspectorate.
What the Government are doing about the inspectorate is extremely foolish and flies in the face of its proud history.
Mr. Anthony Nelson (Chichester)
If ever there was a case for the timetabling of Bills, it is the shenanigans over this Bill.
Ms. Hilary Armstrong (Durham, North-West)
Nonsense.
Mr. Nelson
I believe that that is the case, and the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) was right to call for the timetabling of Bills.
I notice that a great many people were nodding when he suggested that, possibly including the hon. Lady, who should not be so argumentative because I am agreeing with him.
It is a good idea.
I have thought so through five years of opposition and 12 years on the Government side.
The real initiative for timetabling Bills must come from Opposition parties.
Mr. Don Dixon (Jarrow)
Why?
Mr. Nelson
Because Governments obviously want to timetable their Bills and get their business through as soon as possible.
All hon. Members on both sides of the House have an obligation to scrutinise legislation but, understandably, Opposition Members will have more interest in trying to delay it, because if they do not have the votes to defeat the Government, they will try to protract discussion.
Whichever party is in opposition next time, let us try to decide early to timetable more Bills.
Let us not have pious words about timetabling Bills every time that there is a debate on a guillotine motion, only to find that nothing happens.
The next Opposition party should agree more timetabling of Bills early in the new Parliament, and we should keep to it.
The reason for timetabling is not to satisfy the Government and Opposition Front Benches, but to protect the interests of Back Benchers.
We lose out.
Our amendments do not get proper consideration on Report or in Committee if there is a timetable motion.
Invariably, new clauses will come first in the order of business on Report.
Official Government and Opposition motions can crowd out amendments tabled by Back Benchers.
There is not adequate opportunity for those of us who feel strongly about aspects of a Bill to raise them.
The answer lies in our own hands.
In the next Parliament, let us do something about it, for the sake of Parliament, better legislation and refining legislation more adequately.
In the House we serve no one 's interests — not the Government's nor those of the people that we seek to represent — by cursory examination of Bills.
As a result, hon. Members are left with the option of trying to inveigle their points in an artificial way.
Important issues affecting our constituents' schooling and the structure and scrutiny of education are introduced in a wholly artificial and improper manner.
The proceedings of the House should not be used for that purpose.
I want a change in the attitude of the Government to guillotines and in the Opposition's attitude towards timetabling.
I am worried about the guillotine motion and the extent to which it will inhibit discussion on important matters later.
Some of us will be unable to raise matters about which our constituents feel strongly.
Although my right hon. Friend the Member for Worthing (Mr. Higgins) and my hon. Friend the Member for Horsham (Sir P. Hordern) mentioned in interventions yesterday a situation in my county of West Sussex which is replicated in many other local authority areas, there should be an opportunity — within order — to raise matters of concern and to obtain assurances from Ministers about them.
I am delighted that my hon. Friend the Member for Bedfordshire, South-West (Mr. Madel) mentioned an important issue which has not received satisfactory answers in Committee, nor is likely to, in what will remain of the Report stage after the guillotine.
There is no guarantee that we shall move beyond discussion of new clause 6 and the amendments taken with it.
Opposition Members may well decide to make some progress and we may get to new clause 9 and to others further down the list, we cannot be sure about that.
As a result, we have no other means of raising important matters.
Labour Members may state that it is the Government's fault for introducing the guillotine.
It is not.
I should like to have had time to discuss such matters, but the paucity of progress made yesterday, the long speeches and the many amendments which had to be considered left the Government with no option but to move a guillotine motion today.
More rapid progress could have been made.
I shall not now be able to raise in the debate a subject that is of deep concern to my local education authority in west Sessex.
Local education authorities carry out inspections more frequently than the four-year cycle that is likely to be provided in the Bill.
I hope that, at the end of the debate on the guillotine motion, it will be clear that more frequent inspections can also be carried out.
That view is shared by five other hon. Members from West Sussex as well, and I see that my hon. Friend the Member for Crawley (Mr. Soames) is in his place.
Sussex Members and others have received strong representations from the governors and head teachers of numerous schools expressing great concern that inspections should take place only once every four years.
In that period, negative and positive changes may take place to effect a school's performance.
It is important that more frequent inspections should sometimes be possible in order to give continuing reassurance to parents and local charge payers about the educational and management standards of the school and the cost-effectiveness of the provision.
Mr. Flannery
The hon. Gentleman seemed to miss an important point when he said that head teachers were worried.
The National Association of Head Teachers is with us.
It does not want the Bill.
We have found almost no teachers' organisations or teachers who want it.
They do not understand the Bill; we Labour Members understand it and do not want it.
The hon. Gentleman should not leave such issues out.
Mr. Nelson
I was not dealing with that important overall view, which the hon. Gentleman also expressed at length yesterday.
My understanding of the Bill is that it seeks to improve the inspection performance of the worst authorities in the country by insisting on a minimum number of regular inspections of schools.
That is wholly laudable, and I suspect that it does not divide the parties.
Everyone wants to achieve that.
An issue that the guillotine motion will not allow us to discuss does not involve improving the average standards, but the fact that those local authorities that already exceed the minimum standard and conduct inspections more frequently than once every four years will be required to lower their standards.
I am not happy about that.
West Sussex has no quarrel with the Bill's basic objectives of raising the overall quality of schools' teaching and and attainment by changing the inspection system requiring all schools to be inspected periodically.
The shortcomings and infrequency of inspections in many areas must detract from the quality of schooling, and the Bill clearly aims to raise the performance of the worst local education authorities.
However, the position in many parts of the country, including west Sussex, is different.
We have more frequent reviews and inspections.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State will vouch for the effectiveness of the scheme in West Sussex as only last week he commented most warmly on it.
Every school has its management and national curriculum provision once a year by inspectors.
There is a rolling programme of whole school inspections and detailed subject department inspections.
That more frequent inspection pattern enables better guarantees to be given to parents and local charge payers of the standards and effectiveness of schools.
It success is partly demonstrated by the fact that school examination results in West Sussex ranked third in the country according to The Times performance league.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State will understand why there is reluctance to change a system that has served us well and to reduce the frequency of inspections from once every year to once every four years.
Schools should be able to request more frequent inspections so that the best practice of a few is not brought down to the standard practice of the many.
Such a policy should commend itself to the Government and my constituents, and I will be perplexed if it is not accepted today.
Ms. Harriet Harman (Peckham)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) on choosing this subject for his private Member's Bill.
He said that he had faced a dilemma about whether to choose a Bill that would make the headlines or one that would be passed.
I am sure that the 7 million or so patients who will benefit from nurses being able to prescribe will be grateful that he has chosen a Bill which will certainly be passed and will certainly — once it has reached the statute book and is implemented — have practical benefits for that many patients.
The Bill will also help district nurses and health visitors.
They do not want to waste their time going backwards and forwards to the general practitioner's surgery.
The hon. Gentleman rightly said that it is a waste of the doctor's time for him to turn his attention to something that has already been decided by someone else and merely to rubberstamp it.
Such a situation also undermines the role of district nurses and health visitors if they have to go through that procedure when they know that they should be able to take the responsibility.
The Bill has the confidence of GPs and will suit patients.
The hon. Member for Chislehurst can be certain that the Bill has the Opposition's support.
It is important but not controversial.
Everyone agrees that it makes sense and that it is a long-overdue reform.
I do not want to concentrate on procedural matters, but, as the hon. Gentleman said, it is curious that the Bill has not been introduced by the Government, especially as the Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Bill has just completed its Committee stage.
It would have made sense for the Government to include this measure in that Bill so that it could be dealt with at the same time.
Having publicly committed themselves to extending legislation to protect residents in small private residential care homes, the Government left it to a Back-Bench Member to bring in a Bill, and they have done the same thing again.
Having said that this is not the procedure by which such a measure should reach the statute book, I welcome the Bill because it will result in a long-overdue reform.
I wish to raise three issues that are part of the backdrop to the Bill.
The first is training, which the hon. Gentleman mentioned.
The second is retaining those district nurses and health visitors who, as a result of the Bill, will be better trained, more skilled and more useful.
We need to keep them within the national health service work force and to make better use of their additional skills.
The third is the question of nurse prescribing in community care.
I am simply flagging those issues; I do not want to go into them in great detail.
The Bill has the support of the Government and both sides of the House.
It is uncontroversial.
I should be sorry if the debate on the Bill were to be unnecessarily prolonged and so prevented the House from debating the Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill that hon. Members are waiting to discuss.
The issue of training was partly dealt with in the Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Bill.
The training of nurses to prescribe will be vital if the service is to be as widely available as we want it to be and if it is genuinely to benefit patients.
However, there are problems with post-basic education.
Training for nurse prescribing is likely to be at post-basic level.
Although there is usually an incentive to safeguard funding for pre-registration education to maintain the supply of nurses coming into the NHS, the incentives for post-basic education are less secure.
The Royal College of Nursing has expressed its particular concern that trust employers might offer a poor deal to nurses who want to undertake training courses.
The RCN suggests that nurses in trusts who want to undertake post-basic training are being required to transfer to fixed-term training contracts, with no guarantee of employment on completion of training.
We do not want any disincentives in the system that would prevent people doing post-basic training and becoming nurse prescribers.
Can the Minister assure us that training for nurse prescribing will be provided and that it will be accessible to those nurses who need it?
I wish briefly to deal with two other issues, but we shall explore them further in Committee.
We need to retain trained staff.
Prescribing will be carried out by specially trained and experienced nurses, yet trained nurses are leaving the NHS at the rate of 80,000 a year — a quarter of all nurses.
That is bad enough for nurses with the basic qualification, but it will be an absolute waste of training and experience if we do not retain within the NHS those who are qualified to be nurse prescribers.
So far, the Government have made a large number of verbal commitments to creating the terms and conditions of employment that would enable women to stay in the work force and not give up when they have families.
However, at district health authority and hospital level there have not been the practical measures needed to achieve that.
That is why the figures for nurses leaving the NHS remain so bad.
It all comes down to practical implementation of flexible working hours and job sharing, so that women working in the nursing profession do not have to follow male patterns of employment, where eventually they find that combining family responsibility with work is simply too difficult, and they leave.
That point applies to nurses at the basic level, but it is even more important when they become a more valuable resource after their post-basic education has given them the ability to prescribe.
Community care is also an issue.
Nurse prescribing should be an important component of care for those who have long-term continuing needs, but are living in the community.
I want community care to be properly implemented and funded, with nurses prescribing as a part of their work in the care of people living at home.
Nurse prescribing will happen, and I hope that it does so promptly.
I hope that the Minister gives the assurances about timing asked for by the hon. Member for Chislehurst.
The Bill will work better if it is implemented properly, if there is access to training for all who want it, if there are flexible patterns of employment to enable nurses to stay in the work force following post-basic training and if community care — where they will be doing their work — is implemented and fully funded.
I hope that the Minister will also assure us on those points.
Once again, I congratulate the hon. Member for Chislehurst on choosing this subject for his Bill.
He will not hit the headlines, but he will receive the gratitude of patients and nurses.
We welcome the Bill.
Sir David Price (Eastleigh)
Like the hon. Member for Peckham (Ms.
Harman), I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) on his good fortune in winning a high place in the ballot.
I am delighted that he has chosen to introduce a Bill on nurse prescribing and I am honoured to be associated with it as one of its sponsors.
As my hon. Friend said, the Bill deals primarily with the delivery of health care in the community.
As presently envisaged, it has little relevance to medical practice in hospitals.
However, I wish to put down a marker that, as the provisions of the Bill succeed in care in the community — for health visitors and community nurses — I hope that the possibility of its being extended to certain aspects of hospital work will be considered.
Both I and my hon. Friend have received representations from the Southampton eye hospital, suggesting that there might be a case for extending the provisions of the Bill to ophthalmic casualty.
I shall not develop that point today, because it is not immediately relevant; I am simply putting down a marker that, as the Bill's provisions succeed in the community, we should not exclude an extension into other areas.
As the Bill is drafted, such an extension would be possible at a subsequent stage through the Minister of the day introducing the necessary order.
My hon. Friend quoted from the Cumberlege report in support of his proposition that there should be a limited extension of prescribing from doctors to nurses.
The report of my hon. and noble Friend Lady Cumberlege has clearly impressed my hon. Friend.
It equally impressed those who served on the old Select Committee on Social Services.
Paragraph 61 of the Select Committee report succinctly encapsulates all the arguments for the immediate move proposed by my hon. Friend.
It states:’ The CNR team, and many witnesses believe that nurses should have freedom to prescribe a limited range of items, such as dressings, ointment and medical sprays’.
I pause here to point out that items such as dressings are available on prescription.
Hon. Members can buy them over the counter in a chemist's shop.
It continues:’ and that they should be able to use their professional judgment on matters such as the timing and dosage of drugs prescribed by doctors for pain relief.’
Pain relief is greatly important to many people.
Our experience of people in that condition is that they are not in a steady state so, rightly, the prescription must be altered almost day by day according to the pain of the patient.
It continues:’ Both suggestions have merit; to some extent they reflect developments which are already happening, for example in the care of the terminally ill where many nurses have special expertise.
It is obviously wasteful nonsense for a district nurse needing a new dressing for a patient to have to return to the surgery, tell the doctor what is needed, possibly even draft the prescription for him, get the prescription dispensed by a pharmacist and then make a second visit to the patient to apply the dressing.’
Those last few words describe the present position.
I am sure that all would agree that it is nonsense and that there must be a simpler way.
My hon. Friend's Bill would provide that simpler way.
Our report continued:’ We recommend that the Government introduce legislation to permit nurses with appropriate training limited powers to prescribe and in defined circumstances to modify dosage.’
I hope that my hon. Friend the Minister will forgive me if I say that the Treasury, as always, seems to have made rather heavy weather of this matter.
What are the extra costs of nurse prescribing?
The truth is that nobody knows — and in so far as there will be an extra cost, that cost shows an unfulfilled need.
That is the story of the resource implications of care in the community.
One factor after another shows unfulfilled needs.
As we become more successful in delivering health care in the community, we discover things that we should have been doing in the past but have not done.
Now that those things are identified, we do them and — surprise, surprise — it costs more.
I ask the Treasury to be relaxed about that.
Mr. James Arbuthnot (Wanstead and Woodford)
Does my hon. Friend agree that in practice, costs may be reduced?
Nurse prescribing will save the waste of time that he has described when district nurses have to go backwards and forwards to doctors, and will allow them to give their time to more beneficial activities, rather than wasting petrol on such journeys.
Sir David Price
My hon. Friend has made an excellent point, succinctly put, which has not yet been fully recognised by the Treasury.
The Touche Ross report had to be completed in a considerable hurry, for reasons that we understand.
Let us not attach too much weight to it, because the overall response rate from the 18 district health authorities surveyed was 15 per cent.
of district nurses and 23 per cent.
of health visitors.
That sort of return is even lower than those used by political pollsters.
All that we know is that nurse prescribing will cost a bit more in medication.
The extra costs will be those for the extra prescriptions generated; we cannot say more than that.
It is not possible to put a figure on the costs.
However, I am delighted that the Government are giving my hon. Friend a money resolution — that is all very proper — but I beg the House not to be too concerned about what the figure is.
Let us recognise that there is a figure and settle for that.
I warn the House — I am afraid that I have been an awful bore in continually pointing this out — that, as we extend the concept of health care out into the community, we shall find more and more unsatisfied demands that have not previously been recognised.
I hope that in so far as we are achieving a consensus on care in the community, there is a general recognition that it will cost more and use more resources.
I shall say nothing more about the financial side.
The Touche Ross report had one or two nice things to say about the advantages of nurse prescribing.
Under the heading,’ Other Benefits’— uncosted — it said:’The further benefits from Nurse Prescribing are the benefits to patients of faster access to some prescription items and the benefits they will derive from additional items prescribed for them by District Nurses and Health Visitors.’
That sentence encapsulates one of the obvious advantages that will accrue from the Bill.
I am sure that both sides of the House will welcome my hon. Friend's Bill.
In modern jargon, it is a patient-friendly Bill, and as such, it will appeal to both sides of the House.
Mr. David Bellotti (Eastbourne)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) on deciding to promote the Bill.
It is important, because, as the hon. Member said, there have been earlier opportunities for such legislation — the Government could have chosen to include a measure in their order of business, and a private Member once introduced a Bill, but unfortunately did not have enough time to secure its progress.
I believe that the Bill will make headline news, because millions of people will benefit from it and they will see the advantages to them.
So, although the hon. Member for Chislehurst feels that he may not achieve headlines in the newspapers, I feel that he will.
The hon. Gentleman has the opportunity of warning us all not to speak for too long, because another important measure, concerning the civil rights of disabled people, is to come before the House today.
I hope that we shall be able to ensure that both these important measures make progress.
In principle, the Liberal Democrats support the Bill because it puts patients first; it brings their needs and concerns to the fore.
It is so important that the person nearest to the patient should have the right to prescribe that I am sure the measure will receive all-party support.
We are told that there are 28,000 qualified district nurses and health visitors.
With so many people who may eventually receive the training to prescribe, we can imagine the advantages that patients will derive from that training and delivery.
Such a measure has taken a long time to appear.
I wonder why.
The Government have had opportunities, but have not taken them.
Nevertheless, the Bill will form an important part of the full delivery of their policy of care in the community.
We shall not see real care in the community without nurses being able to prescribe drugs at the point at which they are needed.
We have an aging population and a growing number of residential care homes in the private, voluntary and statutory sectors.
It is important that the health visitors and nurses who go to those homes can meet the needs that they find there.
If we support care in the community we must realise that nurse prescribing is part of that and will help to make it work.
That is why I was especially pleased to hear that the Government are prepared to allocate the necessary funds.
If they did not, the costs would fall elsewhere — or the job would not be done.
Elderly people and chronically sick people in residential and nursing homes will not be the only ones to benefit.
People in the community will benefit, too.
I know from my work with homeless families that such people invariably need help late at night, in the early hours of the morning or at weekends, when it is especially difficult to find a general practitioner who will respond quickly to a call to see someone who has arrived on the doorstep — in my case that means the doorstep of the YMCAs for which I worked.
President Yeltsin and UN Security Council
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
With permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a statement about President Yeltsin's visit to London on 30 January and about the special meeting of the UN Security Council in New York on 31 January.
I was accompanied to New York by my right hon. Friend the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary.
Both meetings came at an important time in Russia's relationship with the rest of the world and at a critical time for world peace and stability.
Russia has, in President Yeltsin's own words, thrown off the shackles of communism.
She remains a nuclear super-power.
As such, and as one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, she has world responsibilities.
It is essential for our own peace and security that Russia continues to play the positive role on which President Gorbachev embarked and which President Yeltsin is set to continue and to develop.
I believe that we should offer them our support in this.
I called the meeting in New York during our chairmanship of the Security Council so that the council could meet at the highest level to reaffirm and develop its commitment to peacekeeping and peacemaking.
The timing was particularly apt following the appointment of a new Secretary-General and with Russia taking the seat in the Security Council formerly held by the Soviet Union.
The meeting was successful, and I should like to highlight the key points.
This was the first time in the 47 years of its history that the UN had met at the top level.
For the first time ever, the Heads of State and Government of the United States, Russia, China, France and Britain sat around the same table and pledged themselves, with the other members of the council, to collective security, to international law and to our commitments under the United Nations' charter.
A statement was agreed by all the members of the Security Council.
Copies are in the Library of the House.
In it we reaffirmed that all disputes between states should be resolved peacefully in accordance with the provisions of the charter.
We committed ourselves to the fight against terrorism.
We asked the Secretary-General to make recommendations for a more effective role for the United Nations as peacekeeper and as peacemaker.
Under article 99 of the charter, the Secretary-General may bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which, in his opinion, may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security.
We hope the new Secretary-General will use those powers.
He will report to us within six months with his recommendations.
We committed ourselves to arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation and to the conclusion of a chemical weapons convention this year.
The council endorsed the idea put forward by the British Government, and recently endorsed by the General Assembly, of a UN register of conventional arms transfers.
During his visit to London, President Yeltsin noted that Britain had been the first country to denounce the August coup, and the first to recognise Russia; the first to propose Russian membership of the International Monetary Fund; the first to propose an April deadline for that membership; and the first to support a stabilisation fund for the rouble.
It is essential that Russia join the IMF at the earliest opportunity, and I believe that a stabilisation fund may need to follow if Russia is to have a prospect of establishing a successful market economy.
There is, of course, a financial cost in this, but the cost of failure and a return to dictatorship and the cold war would be infinitely higher.
It is in our national interest and in the interests of the west as a whole to help Russia, and we shall continue to take a lead in doing so.
I undertook to make it one of the priorities of our presidency of the European Community later this year to carry through an improved trade and co-operation agreement with Russia.
In our discussion of arms control issues, President Yeltsin committed Russia to further significant reductions in the Russian strategic and international arsenal.
I told him that we had already committed ourselves to a cut of one half in our sub-strategic nuclear weapons and to smaller conventional forces.
I told him also that Britain's only strategic weapon would be the minimum deterrent constituted by Trident.
President Yeltsin accepted that Trident was indeed a minimum deterrent and that the focus of arms control negotiations should be on the arsenal of the two super-powers.
We agreed to co-operate in handling surplus Soviet weapons and in safeguarding nuclear materials.
I offered to send a technical mission to Moscow to assess the immediate needs at first hand.
I have also offered to send a small number of officials from the Ministry of Defence to the Russian Ministry of Defence to advise on the restructuring and control and financing of armed forces in a democratic society.
We discussed the problem of the possible leakage of expertise from Russia in the field of weapons of mass destruction.
President Yeltsin has made proposals for handling this problem, and we have offered our help as part of an international effort.
The President and I agreed to establish a secure telephone link between our two offices.
This is not meant as a crisis hot-line; it will enable us to conduct the significant amount of business we have to undertake.
We signed a joint declaration — the text of which is in the Library of the House — on relations between our two countries.
It will form the basis of a treaty which the President and I hope to sign during the official visit to Britain which he will make later this year.
It will be the first such treaty since 1766.
This is a time of great hope in international affairs, but also of uncertainty and potential instability.
The two meetings on which I have reported to the House have shown our determination to work for a safer world and a new partnership with Russia in the cause of peace.
Mr. Neil Kinnock (Islwyn)
In thanking the Prime Minister for his statement, may I first confirm our welcome for President Yeltsin's visit to London and for the United Nations Heads of Government meeting?
May I also take this opportunity to wish the new United Nations Secretary-General success in his efforts to prepare recommendations for improvement in the preventative diplomacy, peacemaking and peacekeeping capacities of the United Nations?
There is clearly force in Mr. Yeltsin's view that greater support for economic development is essential for political stability and for the prevention of any possibility of a return to totalitarianism and militarism in the former Soviet Union.
Will the Prime Minister therefore tell us what specific proposals he has made for supporting economic projects in the republics of the former Soviet Union, particularly in the distribution industries, which are obviously of basic importance to economic growth and to the development of markets?
The Government's announced change of policy on export credit facilities for the republics of the former Soviet Union is welcome, but can the Prime Minister clarify the extent and the effectiveness of these changes in practice, as it appears that the conditions limiting the operation of those credit guarantees is likely to make them unusable for several years to come?
May I express my satisfaction that the Prime Minister does not now take the reluctant attitude towards the establishment of a rouble stabilisation fund that he did in July and August last year when I put that proposal to him?
Will the right hon. Gentleman say what support he is receiving from other G7 countries for his recent endorsement of a rouble stabilisation fund?
Can the Prime Minister say also whether he has encouraged discussion of the establishment in the new democracies of a payments union similar to that which played such an important part in western Europe's recovery after the second world war?
Following his contact with Mr. Yeltsin and with other leaders of former Soviet republics and Warsaw pact countries, does the Prime Minister accept the need for a co-ordinated international aid and support programme — a modern Marshall plan — as proposed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe?
Does he not agree that such a programme could, amongst other things, establish an effective linkage between western support for economic development and the response from the newly independent states in terms of schedules for comprehensive, verifiable, and quicker disarmament?
I endorse the Prime Minister's request to the Security Council that all member nations’ commit’themselves’anew to reinforced measures of arms control.’
With that in mind, can the Prime Minister tell the House what his response is to President Yeltsin's call for Britain, France, and China to participate in the process of international negotiations for reduction in strategic nuclear weapons?
What is the Prime Minister doing to promote a comprehensive test ban treaty, and what proposals does he have for strengthening the non-proliferation treaty?
The Prime Minister's declarations of support for the United Nations are, as ever, to be commended.
I therefore invite him to express his regret that, according to the figures published by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office last week, United Kingdom support for United Nations development agencies has been cut by 38 per cent.
in real terms since 1979.
Will the Prime Minister tell the House whether he has any intention of reversing such cuts?
Does he not agree that, without such a radical break with his previous policies, his statement that’ a new situation in the world needs new ideas and a new impetus’will not carry much conviction?
I welcome the Prime Minister's use of the words’ partners and friends’to describe the relationship with the new democracies.
We on this side of the House will continue to propose and to support policies which give practical effect to the hope for a new and durable world order of peace, liberty, and prosperity which was expressed again at the United Nations last week.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman for his welcome for President Yeltsin's visit, and for the broad welcome that he gave to the outcome of last week's United Nations meeting.
I am pleased that we have a joint view on so many matters of such importance.
As to economic support, one noticeable difference in the circumstances within the former Soviet Union over the past few weeks is that the price of a liberalisation programme has been put in place.
That is a vitally necessary component of creating a free and open market there — but it necessarily brings with it great short-term difficulties.
It was an immensely brave step for President Yeltsin to take, and on that basis I believe that it is right for the United Kingdom to change its policy on a rouble stabilisation fund — as an indication that we are prepared to support the reform programme that is now in place.
There will be need for support in that fashion, and that can satisfactorily come only through the International Monetary Fund.
For that reason, I proposed that Russia should join the fund, and that has the support of other members.
We propose that that process should be concluded not later than April, but it is immensely to be hoped that it can be done far more speedily.
Once Russia is a member of the International Monetary Fund, that will make it possible for Russia to receive sustantial assistance in cash to deal not only perhaps with a stabilisation fund but balance of payments support — which I personally suspect will be needed in the Soviet Union.
It is equally likely that Russia will need ECGD or comparative support in the months and years ahead, not just from this country but from others.
Let me respond to the specific ECGD point raised by the right hon. Gentleman.
We have announced the availability, for Russia and the other republics, of £280 million worth of ECGD support this year, but that is dependent on an IMF programme's being in place.
I hope that that will be the case not later than April; it may well be a good deal earlier.
The arrangement is also dependent on the Russian republic's continuing to meet its debt obligations in the future, as in the past.
As for the arms control matters, we have been working to improve the measures of arms control.
During my discussions with President Yeltsin, he explicitly accepted the disproportion between the British nuclear deterrent, Trident, and the nuclear capacity that will be available to the Soviet Union even after it has carried out the reductions to which it has committed itself, and which will take a decade or more to implement.
That point was explicitly recognised by President Yeltsin in our private discussions, and also acknowledged in public after our meeting.
The United Kingdom has spoken bilaterally to a number of countries about the non-proliferation treaty.
We have raised it through the United Nations, and we see the United Nations as the primary focus for encouraging a much wider group of countries to sign the treaty and abide by it.
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, we have made very large contributions to the development agencies, and we shall continue to do so.
As for the question of partnership and friendship in the 1990s, the joint declaration that we signed sets out a series of bases on which we can improve our relationship with Russia.
We intend that joint declaration to be turned, during this year, into a comprehensive treaty between Russia and the United Kingdom — the first that we have had since 1766.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is a Back-Benchers' day, and a motion has been tabled in the name of the hon. Member for Romford (Sir M.
Neubert).
I shall allow questions to continue until 4.30.
I hope to be able to call every hon. Member who wishes to speak before then, provided that single, brief questions are asked.
Mr. David Howell (Guildford)
Does my right hon. Friend accept that, through his energy and skill, he has now given a powerful send-off to the new United Nations and its new Secretary-General in the very complex and difficult tasks that we expect the UN to have to face in the post-cold-war world?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that much the most important and immediate task now faced by the international order is to ensure that there is not a quantum leap in the number of countries with access to smaller, tactical and battlefield nuclear weapons and nuclear warheads?
Will he assure us that everything will be done, as a matter of urgency — both by this country and by the Security Council and its agencies — to ensure that that task is tackled, collectively, with the utmost vigour?
Failure now would involve colossal cost later.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for his kind welcome for what has been achieved.
I think that there are two aspects to the question of a quantum leap in nuclear weapons.
First, there is the success of the non-proliferation treaty, and the inhibition on extra states' developing a nuclear capability; secondly, there is ensuring that the nuclear capability — particularly the sub-strategic capability — that is at present spread throughout the republics of the former Soviet Union remains under strong control, is brought together and is dismantled at the earliest possible opportunity.
Mr. Paddy Ashdown (Yeovil)
Does the Prime Minister realise that many people in Great Britain greatly welcome the fact that the first Heads of Government meeting in the United Nations' history was chaired by a British Prime Minister?
Does he further realise that what will also have been welcomed and noted is the difference in attitude between the Prime Minister and that of his predecessor towards the United Nations?
Those of us who have criticised the Government's and western nations' lack of urgency in providing appropriate assistance to the Soviet Union will also welcome the new steps and the energy that is being shown in this area If, as the Prime Minister rightly says, the protection of non-proliferation is the absolute key to world peace, why are the Government seeking to increase the number of nuclear warheads that are carried on Trident, when they have the option of keeping the number the same, at a time when the rest of the world is decreasing them?
How can it be consistent — perhaps the Prime Minister will answer the question now, since he did not answer the Leader of the Opposition — for the Prime Minister's policy to be as expressed in the statement but for that policy to be opposed to a comprehensive test ban treaty?
Finally, if the Prime Minister says, as he rightly does, that one of the centrepieces of reshaping the United Nations so that it can cope with the new challenges to world peace is to strengthen the United Nations' peacekeeping capacity, why is it that the Government are, I am told, $8 million in arrears with their dues towards United Nations' peacekeeping?
The Prime Minister
On the first of the right hon. Gentleman's three points — how many nuclear warheads we have — he knows that we have never indicated how many warheads there will actually be: I do not believe that it would be in the interests of our security for us to do so.
However, we shall maintain the minimum necessary.
That has always been our position, and I reaffirm it again today.
As for the nuclear test ban treaty, for as long as it is necessary for us to have nuclear weapons, we require the ability to test and we propose to keep the ability to test.
For Opposition Members to suggest that we should have nuclear weapons but not the ability to test shows how little they understand the responsibility that lies with a nuclear power.
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend (Bexleyheath)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the problem faced by the United Nations in recent decades has been entanglement in east-west confrontation and that at this stage of its development it does not need to embark on an extremely controversial and difficult period of structural reform but should make greater use not only of the United Nations charter but of the existing United Nations machinery?
Does my right hon. Friend also agree that we need greater United Nations intervention in the sovereign affairs of sovereign states — as in Iraq, where there is gross violation of human rights and massive oppression of minorities?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend's second point.
In the Gulf war the United Nations played a part of immense importance.
I hope that in similar circumstances in the future it would do so again.
I share also my hon. Friend's view about the reform of the United Nations.
There are parts of the United Nations that certainly could work better.
We are keen to help them to do so, but the Security Council is working well and reform is neither necessary nor desirable.
Mr. Harry Cohen (Leyton)
Did the Prime Minister discuss the anti-ballistic missile treaty?
Is not the United States trying to scrap the ABM treaty so that it can push on with its star wars programme?
Does the Prime Minister agree that we do not want the militarisation of space, and that in any case it is not needed?
Will he put his weight against that treaty being abrogated?
The Prime Minister
I know that the hon. Gentleman is chairman of the Labour party's defence committee and that therefore he is a specialist in these matters.
On the ABM treaty, he will know that the United States is also talking to Russia about acting jointly in that matter.
Mr. Terence L. Higgins (Worthing)
May I enthusiastically welcome the enhanced role for the United Nations, particularly the excellent choice for its new Secretary-General?
My right hon. Friend will be aware, however, that contributions to the main United Nations budget have not in the past always been paid on time or in full, even by members of the Security Council.
Can my right hon. Friend give us an assurance that the additional funds that the United Nations needs to carry out these increased responsibilities will be provided by the members of the United Nations?
The Prime Minister
I cannot answer for other members of the United Nations, but in our meeting last week I certainly drew attention to the necessity for ensuring that the United Nations had the right financial and material aid to complete the tasks that we have set it.
Mr. Tom Clarke (Monklands, West)
The Prime Minister told my right hon. Friend the Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) that the Government make a large contribution to the UN development agencies, but he must be aware that our contribution has been cut by 38 per cent.
since 1979.
What would happen if other advanced nations did the same?
When do the Government expect to meet the target for overseas aid of 0.7 per cent.
of gross national product?
The Prime Minister
Before the hon. Gentleman lectures me about the 0.7 per cent.
commitment, he should bear in mind that the shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer has said that that is an aspiration and not a commitment.
There is no indication that the Labour party would meet it.
Mr. Julian Brazier (Canterbury)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, although I welcome the economic measures to assist the Soviet Union — granted, as he rightly says, because of the courage of President Yeltsin in implementing his reforms — the other side of the coin is that it would have been a terrible mistake if we had jumped the gun and granted the assistance before the reforms were implemented?
It is unlikely that Boris Yeltsin would be implementing those reforms if we had jumped the gun, as the Opposition wanted.
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The important fact is that President Yeltsin is there now, and we have an obligation to assist him; it is in our own interests to do so.
Mr. Ted Rowlands (Merthyr Tydfil and Rhymney)
Is not one of the most serious threats to stability and peace in central and eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union the presence of large minorities within the new states that do not necessarily recognise those states?
I realise the major problem of recognising new borders, but did the members of the Security Council discuss new machinery or initiatives to deal with those potentially tremendous conflicts?
Yugoslavia was the most extreme case, but there are many other examples that could threaten stability in central and eastern Europe.
The Prime Minister
I agree with the hon. Gentleman about the potential causes of instability, but that was not the subject of our discussion last Friday and it was not discussed other than in the margins of the meeting.
Mr. Michael Mates (East Hampshire)
May I particularly welcome my right hon. Friend's announcement that he has agreed to President Yeltsin's request to send advisers to help the Russians with the traumatic changes that they must make to their armed forces as a result of the change in the situation?
Will he instruct them to explore further the possibility of greater co-operation so that we can work, train and perhaps exercise with the Russian forces?
It is becoming clear, day by day, that our interests and theirs are growing more and more together in our determination to achieve stability in the new Europe.
The Prime Minister
We are content to explore any and all of those matters; indeed, a number of them have been the subject of detailed discussion.
We have agreed in principle on some completely new ideas of co-operation between Britain and the Russian defence ministries and the armed forces, in particular on the handling of military budgets, co-ordination between military and civilians, accountability to Parliaments and such matters.
On the safe disposal of nuclear weapons — a critically important matter to the House and elsewhere — NATO made a general offer of co-operation in December.
I again offered our bilateral co-operation to President Yeltsin last week, and we are prepared to make United Kingdom expertise available to the Russians.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
The Prime Minister rightly emphasised the question of non-proliferation.
Why, therefore, does he continue his nuclear fatalism through his pursuit of the Trident programme, which increases the number of nuclear warheads on Polaris from 192 to 512?
He may wish to confirm or deny those figures.
How does that set an example to countries that he wishes to discourage from adopting nuclear deterrence?
If he believes in friendship and partnership, at whom will we be pointing the Trident warheads?
The Prime Minister
I dealt with the first part of the hon. Lady's question in reply to the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown).
She will recall that Britain halved its sub-strategic nuclear weaponry only last year.
Sir Peter Blaker (Blackpool, South)
Is it not clear that the welcome improved prospects for an effective United Nations are due to the Soviet Union's abandonment in the late 1980s of the aim of intimidating western Europe into submission and expanding its power generally?
Was not that change in turn due to a realisation by the Soviet Government that the Governments of western countries, particularly the British Government, were not going to adopt a policy of one-sided nuclear disarmament, despite the urgings of Opposition Members?
The Prime Minister
I agree entirely with my hon. Friend's analysis on that point.
I think that the right decisions were taken in recent years on the deployment of cruise and other nuclear matters, and we are now seeing the benefit of that.
Mr. Chris Mullin (Sunderland, South)
How can the Prime Minister possibly justify spending £23,000 million in capital and maintenance on a missile system which does not work properly, which does not deter, which is not independent and against whom there is now no one to target it?
The Prime Minister
I do not accept the figure, I do not accept the analysis, and I do not accept the premise.
Mr. Nigel Forman (Carshalton and Wallington)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that one of the most important subjects on which he obviously made so much progress with President Yeltsin was that of non-proliferation?
Can he tell the House a little more about any plans that he and the Government may have to recruit or to find peaceful employment for some of the rocket scientists and nuclear experts of Russia and, perhaps, even of the Ukraine?
It seems to many of us that that would be one way to limit the spread of nuclear know-how which could be one of the longer term dangers of the issue.
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend about that.
I discussed the question of the nuclear scientists with President Yeltsin last Thursday.
He has put forward some interesting ideas for international centres to redeploy nuclear scientists on civilian work.
We have agreed to examine that with him and to see in what way the United Kingdom and other countries can help Russia and the other republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States to use the talents of their nuclear scientists for peaceful purposes.
Mr. Tam Dalyell (Linlithgow)
Will the Prime Minister rule out United Nations military action against Libya?
The Prime Minister
No, Sir.
Mr. Michael Jopling (Westmorland and Lonsdale)
Will the Prime Minister bear in mind the vast quantity of surplus conventional and chemical weaponry held by the former Soviet Union states?
Did he attempt to get undertakings from President Yeltsin that he would use his best endeavours to ensure that they resist the temptation to sell that weaponry to unreliable states in the middle east and elsewhere?
The Prime Minister
I am able to say to my right hon. Friend that I raised that matter with President Yeltsin very forcibly indeed.
Mr. Kevin Barron (Rother Valley)
I am sure that the House will agree that the United Nations' enhanced role in the issues that the Prime Minister has mentioned will be most welcome.
However, as that role will need to be funded, does he support the Government's policy of cutting aid to the United Nations development agencies by 38 per cent.
since 1979?
Does not he think that we are a bad example to tell people to act through the United Nations when we as a Government have failed to do so?
The Prime Minister
We have been one of the foremost supporters of the United Nations, and the Government have played the prime role in enhancing the position of the United Nations in the past few years.
Mr. Kenneth Warren (Hastings and Rye)
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his robust leadership of the United Nations last week.
Was he able to discuss with President Yeltsin the problems of the old Soviet bureaucracy in Russia and the way in which it is inhibiting the ability of the people of Russia to receive the aid that they deserve?
Will he consider setting up in Moscow a unit composed of people from British industry, from the British Government and from the British-Soviet Chamber of Commerce to try to help the Russians receive the aid that is being held from them by the stupidity of their bureaucracy?
The Prime Minister
One of the principal difficulties faced by the Russians at present is that they have no effective distribution system whatsoever to deal with the aid that is available to them.
That distribution system fails at the bureaucratic level and in terms of the direct transport available.
That is a matter of discussion between the Russians and the European Community at present, and the Community has stated its willingness and ability to assist.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
That subject was not raised.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow referred to Zaire.
United Kingdom bilateral aid is naturally focused on the Commonwealth in Africa, but Zaire is a major recipient of the African Development bank finance and fund resources.
We hope that the African development fund will undertake work in the forestry sector in Zaire.
We agree that tropical rain forest resources are of vital importance in Zaire.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow also mentioned the issue of dry versus wet forests.
We most certainly agree that dry forests deserve as much attention as tropical and moist forests.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow referred to rattan and to water in Africa.
My collective brain has its limitations, and it cannot answer this question off the top of its collective head.
Once again, the hon. Gentleman has shown by his skill and knowledge a way of challenging the expertise of the experts, who will have to take further instruction on the matter.
I will ensure that the hon. Gentleman is answered by letter.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow kindly referred me to Leptis Magna and the successful irrigation system of the Roman world.
If I may digress for a moment, I refer him in turn to the successful water system invented by the Greeks at Pergamon.
That system did not even need the Roman aqueduct; it managed the flow of water on Archimedean principles, which was even more remarkable.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman's friend in Manchester university will enlighten him further about that.
In 1990, we spent more than £10.5 million bilaterally on water sanitation projects in Africa —
Mr. Dalyell
On the question of Libya — I realise, an unpopular cause and a delicate issue — may I ask the Foreign Office to reflect again on what I have said, which is rather different from the subject of the Adjournment debate?
I say this in the presence of the Leader of the House: if, heaven help us, there are to be sanctions or if military action is to take place, there should at least be some statement to the House of Commons and a three-hour debate before we go further down that perilous road.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
The hon. Gentleman will understand that, in all matters of such sensitivity, it is deeply important that a weak signal is never given by any Member of this House.
He will agree that it will be only wise of me not to attempt to comment on or in any way to qualify the words that the Prime Minister used this afternoon — and I have no intention of doing so.
The hon. Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) asked me to list the contributions of our European Community partners.
That is all published information.
I can give it again tonight if the hon. Gentleman wants the figures, but I suspect that the fact he wants to establish, which I do not dispute, is that Britain comes fourth on the list of contributors behind France, with 9.43 per cent., Italy with 9.43 per cent. , and Germany with 9 per cent .
Britain gives 4 per cent.
I will not list the countries that come below us.
Why is the United Kingdom so low down the list?
I explained during my comments on the speech by the hon. Member for Cynon Valley that we attach high priority to Africa, but that there are other channels in the aid system.
Fifty per cent.
of our aid budget goes to the African continent.
Our aid to Kenya has been well used in helping to improve living standards and prospects for the poorest.
Kenya's economic performance has been better than many other sub-Saharan country.
We welcome the positive moves of recent weeks on economic and political reform, but further effort is needed on key economic issues.
The coming elections must be free and fair.
We shall continue to stress the need for transparency and a level playing field.
The Kenyans are absolutely clear about our views on that.
I hope that I have done justice to at least some part of all hon. Members' contributions.
I now want to deal with the central point raised this evening.
It has been raised often before with me and with my right hon. Friend the Minister for Overseas Development and I am sure that it will be raised again.
I shall answer it as best I can, although I am afraid that I may burden Opposition Members with an answer that they have heard before.
It is important, however, that the facts should be put in some perspective.
We accept in principle the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent., but we are not prepared to set a timetable, because a real-terms growth in aid quality is much more important.
When the hon. Lady says that our official aid-to-GNP ratio was 0.2 per cent.
in the calendar year of 1990, that does not reflect —
Mr. Campbell-Savours
My hon. Friend did not say that.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
I thought she did.
For those who do say that, it does not reflect the underlying growth in the aid programme.
This year — 1991-92 — our aid programme is £1,789 million, which is 10 per cent.
more in cash terms and 3 per cent.
more in real terms than in 1991-92.
Over the past five years, our average aid — to — GNP ratio has been 0.3 per cent.
We cannot make forecasts, but in 1991-92 our aid is expected to be about 0.3 per cent.
of GNP.
Is the hon. Lady saying that, if a Labour Government were elected, they would immediately put right that ratio?
Is she making a promise to the British people that this improvement will be financed by an increase in taxation, or that, just as the Conservative Government have always aspired to improve that target, so will a Labour Government, and the British people will have to wait a long time for such an improvement to materialise?
The Government have tried strenuously to maintain effective and sensible aid policies, with a view to maintaining that commitment and reaching that target when the country can afford it.
Mrs. Clwyd rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
The hon. Lady has already spoken.
She needs the leave of the House to speak again.
Mrs. Clwyd
With the leave of the House, I wish to answer the question that the Minister asked me.
The Labour party's policy is clear.
I would be happy to send him a copy of our policy document if he would like to have more detail.
It is much more substantial than the policies produced by the Government in their papers on overseas development.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman (Lancaster)
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
The hon. Lady does not have the leave of the House to speak a second time.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
When I asked whether the hon. Lady had the leave of the House to speak again, there was no objection.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
I said no.
Mrs. Clwyd
I am sorry that the hon. Lady was not here for the debate.
She has come into the Chamber in the past five minutes.
The answer to the Minister's question is clear in Labour party policy documents.
Within the lifetime of a future Labour Government — that is, within the next five years — we shall aim to meet the 0.7 per cent .
United Nations target for developed countries.
The Government are not prepared to set out any timetable for reaching that limit.
Their aid policies will be judged by that failure to make any such promise.
In 1979, the Labour Government achieved an aid budget of 0.51 per cent.
of GNP.
Since then, the Government have carved that back, and the developing world has lost £10 billion in aid.
Those are the facts.
Question put and agreed to.
Resolved, That the draft Caribbean Development Bank (Further Payments) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 13th January, be approved.
Overseas Development and Co-operation
Resolved, That the draft African Development Fund (Sixth Replenishment) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 13th January, be approved.
—[Mr. Lennox-Boyd.]
Statutory Instruments, & c .
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No 101 (5)(Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Terms and conditions of employment protection
That the draft Employment Protection (Variation of Limits) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 19th December, be approved —[Mr. David Davis.]
Question agreed to.
Motion made, and Quesition put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No 101 (5)(Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Unfair dismissal
That the draft Unfair Dismissal (Increase of Limits of Basic and Special Awards) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 19th December, be approved
Question agreed to.
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No 101 (5)(Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Transport
That the draft International Transport Conventions Act 1983 (Amendment) Order 1992, which was laid before this House on 19th December, be approved.
Question agreed to.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (SCOTLAND)
Resolved, That the Rate Support Grant (Scotland) Order 1991, dated 17th December 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 19th December, be approved.
SATELLITE BROADCATING STANDARDS
Resolved, That this House takes note of European Community Documents Nos. 7573/91 and the Supplementary Explanatory Memoranda submitted by the Department of Trade and Industry on 6th November and 11th December 1991 and 10157/91, relating to standards for satellite broadcasting of television signals, and 8122/91, relating to audio-visual production in the context of the strategy for high definition television; and endorses the Government's approach which is to aim for the correct balance between promoting new broadcasting technologies, protecting the rights of satellite broadcasters and serving the best interests of consumers.
SOCIAL SECURITY (MORTGAGE INTEREST PAYMENTS) BILL
Ordered, That, in respect of the Social Security (Mortgage Interest Payments) Bill, notices of Amendments, new Clauses and new Schedules to be moved in Committee may be accepted by the Clerks at the Table before the Bill has been read a second time.
Ordered, That, if the Social Security (Mortgage Interest Payments) Bill be committed to a Committee of the whole House, further proceedings on the Bill shall stand postponed and that as soon as any proceedings on any Resolution come to by the House on Social Security (Mortgage Interest Payments) Bill [Money]have been concluded, this House will immediately resolve itself into a Committee on the Bill.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE
Ordered, That, at the sitting on Tuesday 4th February, notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business), Mr. Speaker shall put the questions necessary to dispose of proceedings on the Motions in the name of Mr. Secretary Heseltine relating to Local Government Finance not later than Ten o'clock; and those Questions may be decided after the expiry of the time for opposed business.
—[Mr. David Davis.]
Ordered, That, at the sitting on Tuesday 4th February, the Motions in the name of Mr Francis Maude relating to Supplementary Estimates 1991-92 and Estimates 1992-93 (Vote on Account) may be proceeded with, though opposed, until half-past Eleven o'clock or for one and a half hours after the first of them has been entered upon, whichever is the later, at which time Mr. Speaker shall put the Questions necessary to dispose of them.
Ordered, That, at the sitting on Wednesday 5th February, notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business), the Motions in the name of Mr. Secretary Hunt relating to Local Government Finance (Wales) may be proceeded with, though opposed, until half-past Eleven o'clock or the end of a period of one and a half hours after the first of them has been entered upon, whichever is the later, at which time Mr. Speaker shall put the Question necessary to dispose of them; and those Questions may be decided after the expiry of the time for opposed business.
TRAFFIC CALMING BILL [Money]
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Traffic Calming Bill, it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by Parliament of any increase attributable to the Act in the sums payable out of money so provided under any other enactment.
Police National Computer
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett (Denton and Reddish)
I welcome very much the opportunity to raise on the Adjournment the question of the working of the police national computer mark 2 and the need for effective safeguards, and I am delighted that this debate is starting at a relatively civilised hour.
The police national computer mark 2 came on stream last autumn, and I understand that its direct access capacity is 190 million bytes, with a further 80,000 million bytes available as back-up on disk.
Already, about 60 million records are included on it.
I welcome very much developments such as this one.
This national computer will enable the police force to prevent crime and to be more effective in catching criminals.
I regret that during my research for this debate I found that, in the field of computers, one of the least well-equipped police forces is that in my own area, Greater Manchester.
I understand that the Greater Manchester force still does not have the necessary computer capacity to take full advantage of the police national computer mark 2.
Cynics in Manchester claim that the last chief constable there had a direct link to God and, therefore, did not see the advantages of computers.
Whatever the explanation, it is very sad that the Manchester force does not have the necessary computer capacity.
I hope that achieving that capacity will be one of the priorities of the new police committee.
As I have said, I welcome computers.
However, like all modern inventions, for all their advantages they must be effectively controlled.
That is the point of this debate.
The need for control of computers was well anticipated by the Lindop committee in the 1970s.
A whole chapter of that committee's report is devoted to the question of the requirements concerning data collection by the police force and the security services and the necessary controls.
I am worried about one of the Lindop committee's central recommendations — that, with the recording of any information on computers, fact should be separated from supposition or intelligent guesswork.
The Home Office and its Ministers accepted that recommendation in respect of both the mark 1 and the mark 2 computers.
I gather, however, that about 1982 the Home Office changed its mind.
However, it made no public statement concerning its decision that factual information and suspicions could be mixed in one computer.
I hope that the Minister will be able to tell us why that change took place.
The Lindop report made it fairly clear that safeguards with regard to access and illegal use are needed.
I hope that the Minister will confirm who is entitled to have access to the police national computer.
Obviously the police have that right, although I understand that there is some doubt in respect of the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
That may be for technical reasons, or a matter of policy.
There is the question also of the extent to which Customs and Excise and the immigration authorities have access.
Also, given the meetings of the Trevi group of Ministers and the development of Europol, perhaps the Minister can say how soon it will be possible for other EC police forces to gain access to Britain's police national computer and what restrictions will apply.
One wonders whether the Department of Social Security fraud branch is able to request information, and what checks there are on its legitimate use.
I understand that local authorities have pressed hard for access to the criminal records section, in particular in vetting potential employees — particularly those who would be working in sensitive areas, such as the social services.
I am informed that local authorities currently have to make their requests through the police.
In the past, there have been a number of stories about illegal use of police computer information.
I am sure that the Greater Manchester force takes that aspect very seriously; all inquiries by police officers are logged; and a senior officer checks about 3 per cent.
of all entries each month to ensure that they were made for legitimate purposes.
However, one still hears all sorts of rumours to the effect that it is possible for others to obtain information, yet one or two of my constituents found it difficult to obtain information about the identity of a car owner involved in an accident.
I should like the Minister to state clearly what checks are made to ensure that police computer information is not available to debt collectors, bailiffs, and other such persons.
When 60 million items are included on a computer, and however carefully information may be segregated — I understand that the system used is known as NASCH, meaning name, age, sex, colour, and height — one is worried that it could be easy to confuse one John Smith with another John Smith.
I hope that the Minister can give an assurance that there is no risk that information that should have been entered in respect of one individual is recorded in the name of another.
In order to reassure the House and the public, perhaps the Minister can explain what is the procedure when a police officer uses the powers given in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to stop someone in the street or someone driving a car.
In the case of a driver, the officer will ask for his or her name, address, driving licence, and insurance documents.
Either the investigating officer, using his own personal radio, or the officer accompanying him is then usually able to check those details almost immediately on the police national computer.
Can the Minister say whether other information about the individual is also presented?
It is obviously important to know whether the car has been stolen or whether the driver has a criminal record.
It would also be logical to know whether there are any outstanding warrants for the individual's arrest.
I understand that any such information is presented by the control computer, which can then convey it to the police officer concerned.
One or two police forces are experimenting with notebook computers, and perhaps it is intended that they will receive information from the control computer.
Perhaps the Minister will clarify that point.
What concerns me is the extent to which any warning signals included on the computer record are made available to the control officer and conveyed to the officer on the beat.
An answer that the Under-Secretary gave me on 15 October 1990 suggested that a fair number of warning signals would be available.
I asked the Home Secretary to list the kinds of information currently held on the police national computer under the data class of warning signals.
The Minister — this Minister — replied:’ Warning signals are intended to alert officers to potential difficulties or risks in dealing with the individual.
They may be used only in cases where there is supporting evidence of the need for them to be included in the record.
Their inclusion and removal is at the discretion of the force which enters the record on the police national computer.
The information held under the data class of warning signals is intended to indicate individuals who may possess firearms, may possess weapons, may resort to violent behaviour, may attempt to escape, may suffer from mental disorder, may possess explosives, may make false allegations against the police, may be a hazard to others as a carrier of contagious diseases (e.g., hepatitis)’—
I suppose that HIV and AIDS are included in that category —’ may suffer from a medical condition and/or require medication, e.g., heart condition, claustrophobia, epilepsy, alcoholism, may attempt suicide, may be in unlawful possession of controlled drugs, may impersonate male or female.’
Some of those warning signals relate back to criminal convictions.
I consider it legitimate to require that officers have such information when dealing with individuals on the pavement or in cars.
Some of the information, however, will be merely conjecture, based on guesswork by police officers — albeit, on occasion, quite good guesswork.
I wonder how much of that information is passed on to individual police officers.
Surely, if someone has been convicted of possessing weapons or explosives, it is vital for the information to be passed on as quickly as possible, so that the officer concerned can take it into account.
I am not sure about the question of persons suffering from mental disorder.
The trouble is that, as soon as anyone is given a piece of information, he will tend to treat the person involved in a slightly different way as a result.
Occasionally I attend functions with my wife.
If I am introduced as’ Gill's husband’, I am treated in a certain way; if I am introduced as a Member of Parliament, I am generally treated in a very different way.
On social occasions, of course, that does not matter.
However, if a police officer is suddenly told by control that the member of the public with whom he is dealing may be suffering from a mental disorder, he may start to deal with that individual differently, and in a way that may not be particularly helpful.
I hope that the Minister will be able to tell us at whose discretion all the information is passed on — mainly with a view to protecting the officer concerned, if any risk is posed to him, but also with a view to protecting the individual from being treated in a different way by that officer.
Let me also ask the Minister to deal with the whole question of the inclusion of suspicions.
I pointed out at the beginning that the Lindop committee had said that suspicions should be dealt with differently.
Two studies have been made of police records relating to suspicions, one in the Lothian and Borders region in 1982 and the other in the Thames Valley in 1984.
The Minister may tell me that there is a much more up-to-date set of statistics relating to police suspicions.
I understand, however, that in 1982, in the Lothian and Borders region, there was an entry on the computer for one in six of the population suggesting some kind of suspicion.
In 1984, the statistic for the Thames Valley was one in 10.
That is a large number of people in those two areas to have been entered on the computer.
Had that led to a dramatic detection of crime, it would have been good, but I understand that the surveys then carried out suggest that in only 0.03 per cent.
of detected crime did the suspicions on the police national computer lead to convictions.
I hope that the Minister will be able to tell us that more recent studies show that the number of suspicions, as a percentage of the population, has been dramatically reduced and that the detection rate has been much better.
One understands why information should be put on the computer in the first place.
The question that one has to ask, however, is how quickly that information is used.
When children are molested, for example, people come forward with information.
The police draw up a list of five or six people who, it is alleged, were seen in the vicinity and upon whom suspicion falls.
It is perfectly legitimate for the police to have that information.
In the past, a notice was usually put up in the local police station.
When somebody had been convicted of the offence, or no other offences had been committed for some time, the names were removed from the police station notice board — the police needed the space there — and put in a file or destroyed.
The temptation now, however, is to leave the information on the police national computer.
Although the information was absolutely accurate in the case of one person who was apprehended, in the case of the other individuals it was completely mistaken.
Can the Minister tell us how information is taken off the police national computer?
DNA information was collected for one purpose many years previously in the case of Ray Williams.
It then turned up in another court case much later.
How many entries on the police national computer are deleted each week?
Is the Minister confident that when information is no longer relevant, because somebody has been convicted of the offence, the information relating to other people is removed as soon as possible?
Furthermore, if information is to be sent abroad, will other police forces be told that we, unlike some of them, do not separate suspicion from factual information on our computer?
Most people here would be very worried if information about them turned up in Greece, or in other European Community countries, based upon suspicion.
The safeguards here may be very good, but they may not be so well understood by a police officer in another country who read about that suspicion.
I understand that the only guidelines for the police national computer were produced by the Association of Chief Police Officers in 1987.
The guidelines contain a foreword by the Data Protection Registrar who had a few reservations about the guidelines.
He said that they sounded all right, but that he would like to know what was happening in practice.
Those guidelines were produced for the police national computer mark I. It is now almost five years since they were published.
It is certainly five years since they were drawn up.
What discussions has ACPO had with the registrar about the guidelines?
Has he looked at the way that they are used by individual police forces?
How many people have asked to see the data relating to them?
Is the Minister satisfied that the 1987 guidelines are still sufficiently detailed and effective, or does he think that they ought now to be updated?
I am interested in whether the police national computer is linked with poll tax registers, electoral rolls and telephone numbers.
Every telephone directory is now available on disk.
I assume that that is readily available to the police — it certainly should be, because sometimes they have the nasty task of tracing accident victims and informing the next of kin.
It is therefore important for them to be able to verify addresses quickly.
Concern has been expressed about people's HIV status appearing on returns.
I hope that the Minister will give us some more idea of the circumstances in which people's HIV status will be entered on the computer.
The police national computer has a list of prostitutes, but I understand that it applies only to London.
Are lists being kept by other big cities?
Will the Minister confirm that the list contains male and female prostitutes, and what conditions apply to removing names from that list?
I assume that people are put on the list if they have been connected with an offence relating to prostitution or have been cautioned.
It is reasonable and sensible that, if the police are trying to implement a rational policy whereby, first, someone is cautioned and then prosecuted, that information should be available.
I make no complaint about such information being kept, but I am worried about it appearing on the police national computer when the original request had nothing to do with prostitution.
Suppose someone's name is entered on the computer as having been convicted of prostitution in London and they report an assault in York or perhaps somewhere totally different.
It would be perfectly reasonable for the police to check their address and details such as car ownership on the computer.
Does the computer then disclose their conviction for prostitution?
If that information became available to the police officer investigating the assault, would it affect the way in which he pursued the investigation?
Will the Minister assure us that information on someone's behaviour as a prostitute would be accessed only if they were being charged for similar offences?
The Government should have made a statement on the way in which the police national computer operates; it should not have been necessary for me or the National Council for Civil Liberties to prise information from them.
The police and the Government can be proud of the police national computer because it fights crime, but it is important that they offer assurance to the general public that it cannot be misused and does result in people being dealt with differently.
I apoligise for putting a long list of questions to the Minister, but I gave him advance notice and I hope that he will answer most of them.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
I am glad that the hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) selected this subject for tonight's debate.
Numerous questions have been asked in the House about the police national computer, but to my knowledge this is the first opportunity we have had in recent times to discuss wider issues.
As the hon. Gentleman said, he let me know some of his particular areas of interest in advance.
I am grateful for that because it enables me to provide him with a fuller response on those points than I might otherwise have been able to do.
However, he has added some detailed questions.
I shall read his speech and where I am unable to reply as fully as I might, I shall write to him.
Like the hon. Gentleman, I shall make a few general observations to set this important subject in context.
The police national computer has been in operation since 1974.
It has become an established part of police operations.
Many police officers today, even in the higher ranks, cannot remember carrying out their police duties without the assistance of the computer, and it is now as much a part of police back-up as the police car and police radio.
That is what it is, a tool to help police officers carry out their difficult task of investigating and detecting crime and bringing offenders to justice.
The police national computer is one of the most comprehensive record systems in the world and it gives police officers across the country rapid access to vital information round the clock, every day of the year.
In seconds police officers can obtain details of a stolen car or a wanted person, and establish whether an offender has previous convictions for serious crimes.
The police service takes this service for granted, and that is how it should be.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State formally unveiled the new police national computer on 17 November last year.
The new system continues the services provided by its predecessor, but it takes advantage of the latest developments in technology to provide a high quality service in the most cost-effective way.
The transition to the new system went very smoothly, and those involved in the Home Office and in the police forces deserve congratulations on this significant achievement.
But replacing the old by the new is not the end of the matter.
The police are increasingly looking to technology — and to information technology in particular— to help them combat increasing crime.
We are, therefore, proposing to provide a number of new information services which the police believe will make a significant contribution to their operational effectiveness.
These will necessarily have to be spread over the next five or six years as, and when, resources become available.
Plans are being prepared for a new communications network which would enable rapid and cost-effective exchanges of information between the police national computer and forces, and between police forces themselves.
This could be extended later to other agencies in the criminal justice system, but it has not yet been so extended.
The Government have declared their intention to computerise the national collection of criminal records currently held at the national identification bureau.
Some concern has been expressed by the Select Committee on Home Affairs and others at the incompleteness and inaccuracy of the records because of the difficulties of updating the present manual system.
A computerised national criminal record system on the police national computer will enable police forces to enter information directly on to the national collection.
This should ensure that it is accurate and up-to-date, but the benefit would not simply be in having tidy records.
I have no doubt that, by providing instant access to comprehensive records of offenders, the national criminal records system will become an indispensable aid to the better functioning of the whole of the criminal justice system.
It will be of significant benefit to the police in investigating and detecting crime.
Comprehensive and accurate information on antecedent offences will assist in the prosecution of cases and in sentencing, and it will help the prison service to determine the appropriate prison regime.
This is a major project which will be introduced in phases over a number of years.
It should be clear from what I have said so far that the police national computer is exactly that — for use by the police in the United Kingdom.
The use of the computer is subject to guidelines agreed and approved by the police service.
How it is used, and by whom, is monitored by the police national computer organisation, and auditors in forces and in the police national computer organisation ensure that the security and operational procedures in forces are complied with.
Apart from the police forces — and here I move on to one of the hon. Gentleman's questions — only the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency and Her Majesty's Customs and Excise have direct access to the PNC, but they can see only some of the information and only to read it.
They are not able to enter or to change data.
The information held on the PNC can be disclosed via the police to a wide range of bodies.
They are listed in the data protection registration for PNC and continental police forces cannot themselves retrieve information from the PNC.
The chief police officers are responsible for ensuring that PNC terminals —
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
What will happen under the Trevi proposals?
Is it intended that there should never be an interchange of information directly by computer but only by request between all European Community police forces?
Mr. Lloyd
The nature of closer interchange is already being discussed.
The hon. Gentleman is right on that.
There has been no agreement on the subject and, at present, no police force on the continent can take information from the PNC and no such police force has access to it.
If a continental police force requests particular help from the police forces here, the police in their own judgment may release what information they think it desirable to release in the common fight against crime.
The chief police officers are responsible for ensuring that the terminals are sited in secure locations away from public view and operated only by properly trained and authorised personnel.
Security is maintained by terminal operators using unique identification and password codes to gain access to the system.
The communications network is designed to prevent unauthorised access to the system from external sources.
A full list of the security measures that forces should take in relation to the computer system is set out in the code of practice of the Association of Chief Police Officers.
Information on PNC is not generally restricted to officers of a certain rank.
The level of access for operational purposes is determined by role rather than by rank.
I turn now to the information that is held on the national computer about which the hon. Gentleman asked a number of questions.
On a number of occasions, I have been glad to set out for the hon. Member in response to his questions in the House detailed information about the contents of the computer records and how many are held on the system at any one time.
Indeed, the hon. Gentleman quoted one reply this evening.
This information is recorded in the Official Report and it would not be especially useful to dwell on it here.
I should like to emphasise that the police national computer is subject to the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1984.
The various applications on the system are registered in accordance with the law, and state the purpose for which the data is held and to whom it may be disclosed.
The safeguards provided by the Act should not be dismissed lightly.
In addition, the police service itself has issued a code of practice setting out how the principles underlying the Data Protection Act should be applied to the PNC and to other police computer systems.
The code has been agreed with the Data Protection Registrar and a copy is in the Library.
There are clear guidelines in the code on the manner in which information should be added to computer systems, how long it should be kept on the system and the security measures that should be taken to prevent unauthorised access.
It sets out in some detail the means of complying with each of the eight principles that underpin the Data Protection Act.
The ACPO code of practice for computer systems contains a foreword by the Data Protection Registrar welcoming the code.
The code is kept under review, which is one of the points to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
If the code is kept under review, is there any intention to issue an updated version with any alterations to the 1987 edition which is the one that was supplied to me when I asked for a copy?
Mr. Lloyd
I believe that it will be updated as the new computer takes on additional information, but when and at exactly what point is a matter on which I shall have to get back to the hon. Gentleman because I do not know ACPO's plans.
The system belongs to the police, not to the Home Office.
Mr. Allen McKay
Again, the hon. Gentleman is wrong.
His attitude to local government is set, narrow and shallow.
If he thinks that the conduct of one local authority affects other local government thinking, he is wrong.
Local government is an entity on its own.
Its affairs never spill over its own border.
That has been one of the problems of local government, not what the hon. Gentleman has referred to.
Mr. Mitchell
With respect, I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman.
The chapter of the way in which some Labour councils have behaved is well documented.
That is what has done so much damage to local government.
My final point relates to the important work of the Audit Commission.
All hon. Members are consumed by analysing how much money has been spent and whether more money will be made available for particular services, but we do not spend anything like enough time considering whether that money is well spent.
I pay tribute to the work of the Audit Commission.
It has saved billions of pounds by writing reports that are always respected and independent, and which suggest ways in which local government — and, now, the health service — can get better value for money.
The Audit Commission has examined achieving value for money in areas such as the management of the council housing stock, and has produced reports on absenteeism through sickness, on the police, on refuse collection and on schools.
It has performed an outstanding service to local government and to local and national taxpayers by seeking to get more from each pound that is spent in public service.
Although the citizens charter and the charter mark are an excellent extension of the other reforms that we have introduced to make local government more efficient and responsive to the people it represents, the work and commitment of the Audit Commission are our best guarantee that that money will be well spent.
I very much regret that it appears that the Labour party's plans for the Audit Commission may water down its effectiveness by handing control to the Labour party's chums in the unions and local government.
If the Audit Commission is to continue to do the work that it does so successfully for local government, and to achieve better value for money, it must be independent and impartial, and its reports and work must be respected.
I very much hope that the work of the commission can be significantly extended after the general election.
It could do much more work on housing associations and housing management.
We must ensure that we can further benefit from the work that it performs so well.
Mr. Tony Banks (Newham, North-West)
The feelings of the young hon. Member for Gedling (Mr. Mitchell) about the way in which local government has broken up were expressed subjectively and I suspect that he will not agree with me when I say that they seemed to date from about 1979 — and we know what happened in 1979 when the hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) was first elected.
She was elected, in part, on a manifesto which said that it was her intention to take Whitehall off the backs of the town halls.
That was her claim, but what followed was a complete lie in terms of the manifesto pledge.
The relationship between central and local government has deteriorated partly because a series of Conservative Administrations have continually attacked and deprived the local authorities of resources, and subsequently because of the poll tax.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo rose
Mr. Banks
I shall warm to my theme and then give way to the hon. Gentleman.
When the hon. Member for Gedling mentioned the Secretary of State being a great supporter of the pillars of local government, I could not avoid a little chuckle.
That reference immediately brought to mind Samson, who pulled the pillars down.
The Secretary of State has indeed pulled those pillars down.
I then went on to think about who had clipped Secretary of State Samson's golden locks and, once again, I realised that it was the right hon. Member for Finchley.
However, he is still with us, and his contribution from the Dispatch Box was in his usual style, as if this House was not made up of Members of Parliament, but delegates, all with their blue rinses and red necks, applauding to the rafters when he makes one of his roustabout speeches to the Conservative party conference.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
The hon. Gentleman is right that there was a change in 1979, but for different reasons from those he advanced.
However, I do not believe that I will be able to disabuse him of his beliefs.
Prior to 1979, most local authorities were Conservative-controlled and they considered themselves to be local authorities, not Governments.
When the Labour Government asked those of us in local government to exercise restraint on spending, we did it because they were the Government, and we were the local authority.
After 1979 there was a marked increase in Labour-controlled local authorities and that understanding went out of the window.
Consensus went out of the window, and those authorities decided locally that they were the Government and to hell with what was said in this place.
That is why the Conservative party had to legislate to get done those things which were done by agreement prior to 1979.
Mr. Banks
I should like to consider that argument in some detail, but time does not permit it.
However, I cannot let the hon. Gentleman get away with it altogether.
Everyone in local government would accept that central Government set the broad parameters for overall spending, which is perfectly legitimate.
The hon. Gentleman spoke about a Labour Government asking for cuts to be made.
It is important to remember that, then, central Government gave a rate support grant equivalent to about 60 per cent.
of all local government spending.
We are now talking about a rate support grant of about 42 per cent.
— considerably lower.
When the Labour Government called for cuts, local government spent a great deal more.
The hon. Gentleman has not made his case.
The interference in local government by central Government is not just financial, but political.
However, we should interfere in local government with some trepidation because local democracy and local accountability underpin parliamentary democracy and accountability.
Many hon. Members on both sides of the House have cut their political teeth in local government and one would expect such Conservative Members to show more loyalty towards it.
I accept that one can make some criticisms about Labour local authorities, but what I dislike about the Secretary of State's usual contribution is that it is so cliche d, simplistic and grotesque.
He seems to say that Tory councils equal good, Labour councils equal bad.
That does not bear any analysis.
If one seeks to understand the way in which politics is gradually dragged into the gutter, it is because hon. Members come out with such a simplistic approach.
The hon. Member for Southampton, Test (Mr. Hill) has only just ambled into the Chamber.
If he would like to sit there for a while and learn something, I will then cheerfully give way to him.
Interruption
Mr. James Hill (Southampton, Test) rose
Mr. Banks
I do not normally give way to someone who has just ambled into the Chamber, but I shall make an exception on this occasion, because I rather like the hon. Gentleman's florid looks.
Mr. Hill
The hon. Gentleman cannot separate his several lives.
He is unable to separate his contribution to what should be a well-informed debate from a satellite television knockabout.
If the hon. Gentleman is as clever about local government as he is trying to impress us, perhaps we could hear something about local government.
We know that he was a member of the Greater London council, and there are plenty of things that he could talk about.
However, he is just offering us a knockabout contribution, and I do not believe that that will get the debate any further.
Mr. Banks
I am glad that I did not miss that intervention, because it has contributed so much to the debate.
The hon. Gentleman, who has only just wandered in, should realise that I am responding to points raised earlier by his hon. Friends.
Although he may not agree with what I have said, and what I am about to say, he should at least extend to all of us the courtesy of sitting quietly in his seat, especially if he joins us at such a late time.
There are times when I do not believe that the Secretary of State understands what is happening in local government.
I know that the right hon. Gentleman gets around the country, but does he realise that it is almost impossible to maintain services in many of our local authorities?
I have never known a time when central Government have interfered so much in the day-to-day running of the town halls.
We should allow them to get on with their business and we should not interfere so regularly in what they do.
My hon. Friends the Members for Newham, South (Mr. Spearing) and for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) have already mentioned the particular problems that we face in our borough.
We are the second most deprived local authority area in the country according to the Department of the Environment's own indices.
We have a raft of problems with which to deal and the Secretary of State should understand some of them by now.
The particular problem to which my hon. Friends have referred has arisen because we will have to pay back about £6 million, which was awarded by the rates valuation courts because of previous overpayment of rates.
As my hon. Friends have said, the original calculations were made by the Inland Revenue and had nothing to do with the borough of Newham.
We had a stable rate base for a long time and we saw no reason to doubt that there was anything untoward in the ratings that had been made within our borough.
We now find ourselves confronting a massive pay-back.
I do not intend to say any more about this issue, which has already been referred to by my hon. Friends.
However, we were received promptly and courteously by the Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities yesterday when we explained the situation to him.
I would not want to pre-empt any joyous, or even hopeful, news that he might tell us tonight.
I would even say something nice about his new-fangled haircut if he were to say something hopeful to the London borough of Newham.
It is important to consider the wider implications of the revenue support grant settlement as it applies to all London.
It appears that London is well represented tonight, but we are all from one particular borough.
As chair of the London group of Labour Members of Parliament, I should like to consider the difficulties being experienced by other London boroughs.
It is the opinion of the Association of London Authorities that the level of revenue support grant does not reflect the wide divis.
Mr. Dalyell
I thank my hon. Friend for that comment.
Having made that preamble, my hon. Friends will be relieved to know that my contributions to Report stage will be solely in queston form.
It is best to be candid also about who one has consulted.
My first question is a result of a telephone conversation with Graham Bowie, chief executive of Lothian region.
What safeguards will exist for the independence of a funding council?
We shall need athletic Parliamentary Private Secretaries to obtain the answers to all my questions.
My second question follows consultation with a number of people.
What professional support, and from whom, will the permanent secretariat and permanent advisers have?
Thirdly, how does all that lie with new clause 10 and the submissions to the Scottish Office?
Is the funding council to be the creature — it is an unpleasant word, but it is not meant unpleasantly — of the Scottish Office?
My fourth question concerns an extremely important matter — the practical nature of the tendering requirements, for instance, for computer facilities, estate surveying, legal and architectural services, medical advice and supplies.
At present, the further education authorities take as much advantage as possible of the economies of scale through the regional councils.
As the Minister raises his eyebrow, I recommend my excellent speech on competitive tendering of 20 January in the House.
One example is the Minister's letter of 30 January to me about de minimis exemptions.
The Secretary of State smiles, but those are practical matters involving extremely important people within the local authorities.
Mr. Brian Wilson (Cunninghame, North)
To be fair to the Minister, he was smiling in response to my question about whose constituency included Renfrew.
Mr. Dalyell
I thank my hon. Friend; I always like to be fair to Ministers.
The letter stated:’ The present de minimis figure of £100,000 reflects our judgment as to the point at which it would not be right to oblige an authority to comply with the accounting and reporting requirements of competitive tendering.’
That aspect has to be considered carefully.
My fifth question arises from a conversation that I had yesterday with Tony Godden, the head of the West Lothian college, who has severe reservations about the time scale leading to incorporation and how colleges like his — Bathgate and Livingston — can undertake the services previously carried out by the regional council.
At this early stage, will the Minister say how, in practical terms, the changeover is to take place?
I hope that the issue will be explained in the other place.
My sixth question arises out of a conversation with Dr. John Watts, the rector of St. Kentigerns, Blackburn.
He said that on that day he had 70 pupils at the West Lothian college and Oatridge agricultural college, and the links between the colleges were excellent.
But he thought that the links were bound to become more tenuous when the institutions were paid for from different purses and had different bureaucratic structures.
The House will be relieved to hear that I am coming to the end of my list of telephone calls.
Hon. Members
Next it will be letters.
Mr. Dalyell
It is telephone calls on Report and letters in Committee.
My last telephone call was to the head of Oatridge agricultural college, which has been a great help to the agricultural community in Scotland.
Chris Nixon said that co-operation could exist, but it would be difficult when co-operation through the normal virement funds ceased.
Members who have been on the Public Accounts Committee, as I have, will know all about virement, which is not a recondite issue but a practical one.
Representatives at Oatridge believe that under the proposed set-up the college would have to buy services.
At present, the region acts as a clearing house and Lothian region gives the college a great deal of autonomy.
But once the new proposals are implemented, school work will be funded and we will face either the impossible position of teachers being paid for doing nothing or the arrangements will cease to exist.
Chris Nixon said that he could not envisage the school buying college time unless the college could buy school time.
Theoretically, doubtless the colleges can buy school time, but in practice, as all my colleagues know, it is impractical to do so.
I am sorry, I forgot that I made one more telephone call — to Mr. Sellars, the Lothian region's further education expert.
He expressed anxiety about the public accountability of the funding council, and in particular who was to look after the strategic planning.
My hon. Friend the Member for Monklands, West (Mr. Clarke) is chairman of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.
There is a view that COSLA should carry out the service.
If it is to be implemented by the Scottish Office, we should be told about it.
Mr. Tom Clarke (Monklands, West)
Before my hon. Friend concludes what some people might describe as the Linlithgow questions, may I point out that there are indeed many in COSLA who would still argue, even at this late stage in our discussions on the Bill — very rushed discussions indeed — that if the Government are determined to take the colleges out of local government, there is still an important role for COSLA.
My hon. Friend was right to identify it.
Mr. Dalyell
I should like to know how the Government see that role for COSLA.
I should also like to know what I am to say to Oatridge, St. Kentigerns and other people who are involved at a practical level.
Mr. John McAllion (Dundee, East)
The Minister asked my hon. Friend to withdraw amendment (a) to new clause 6 which commits the Government to setting up a funding council for Scottish further education.
If the new clause goes through without amendment (a), it will empower the Secretary of State to set up such a council.
He may do so, but he may decide not to do so.
If amendment (a) is not carried, the Minister cannot say that he has brought forward the new clause as a concession to the Opposition.
He is dressing it up as a concession, but, without amendment (a), if there is a Conservative Government post election — I do not think that will happen, but we should explore the fantasies in case there is — the Secretary of State could decide not to set up a further education council in Scotland.
He could say that he had the power but no obligation to do so.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
I appreciate that the hon. Gentleman did not have the pleasure of joining us in Committee.
The request which was made to me in Committee was to bring forward amendments to enable the Secretary of State to set up a funding council, on the clear understanding that no commitment was being given that we would wish to do such a thing.
When I said in Committee that we had no intention of establishing a funding council in April 1993, I was asked to provide power to enable a future Secretary of State to do so.
That is what I have done.
I have fulfilled the undertaking to the letter.
Mr. McAllion
The Minister confirms what we are saying, that there is no commitment on behalf of the Secretary of State to set up a funding council.
Mr. Robert Hughes
The Minister is being slightly disingenuous.
What we pressed him to do in Committee was to include in the Bill power to set up a funding council.
He said that he was against that.
We then asked him, if he could not go so far as to meet us in full, to introduce an empowering provision.
He has met that part of the commitment, but our main concern was to have the legislation drafted in such a way as to ensure that a funding council would be set up.
Therefore, the Minister has not been as generous as he pretends.
Mr. McAllion
My hon. Friend is right.
The Minister is never as generous as he pretends.
He seeks consistently to mislead the people of Scotland about the reality of what he and his Government have been about in Scotland in the past 12 to13 years.
Since the Minister is anxious to avoid giving a commitment to set up a further education council, perhaps he could use the opportunity of replying to the debate to rule out a possibility which was raised in the press last year.
In May The Times Higher Education Supplement, in an article entitled’ Merging the High and Low Roads’, suggested that further education funding in Scotland could in future be incorporated in the proposed Scottish higher education funding council.
If that is not the case, perhaps the Minister will say that it is not the intention of the Government to go down that high road or low road, whatever they wish to call it, and merge further education and higher education in one funding council after the general election.
By giving the Secretary of State the power this side of the general election, perhaps he intends to implement such a council after the election.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
We have had an interesting discussion.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) raised a number of questions.
I hope that I can provide him with the answers in a way that his hon. Friends on the Front Bench were unable to provide answers to questions raised when he was the hon. Member for West Lothian.
The hon. Gentleman's telephone calls raise a number of important questions, the first of which concerns the independence of the funding council.
The hon. Gentleman must recognise that we have not given a commitment to establish a funding council: we simply gave a commitment to provide powers for the Secretary of State to do so.
Any such council would need to be established and have its functions defined by an order approved by this House.
And if there were a proposal to establish a funding council, that would best be done in the context of the further education colleges having acquired self-governing status, having found their feet and having had an opportunity to discuss the respective roles of the funding council and of the Secretary of State.
The new clauses are designed to set out the structure for a funding council skeleton on which such structures would be built.
That is a matter for future debate, certainly not for today when there is quite enough to be done in preparing colleges for self-governing status and ensuring that they have the support and expertise required to enable them to make a success of that.
That support is available in the Scottish Office and has been tried and tested in the work that has been done supporting the central institutions.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow is only too well aware of how successful the central institutions have been in working with the expertise in the Scottish Office.
Mr. Worthington
The Minister is being unusually diffident.
In Committee he conceded that there was a case for a funding council’ as a buffer’.
Right from the start, his counterparts in England and Wales have seen the necessity for a funding council.
We accept that the Minister has honoured his commitment; he has brought forward powers to establish a funding council.
We are just asking for knowledge of the Minister's attitude to a funding council.
Does he think it would be a good thing; is he committed to setting one up?
Mr. Forsyth
We discussed all this in Committee when I set out our position clearly.
In the fifth sitting of the Committee on 19 December I had the following to say:’ It would not be helpful to establish such a council on 1 April 1993 when the colleges become self-governing and will require a period of stability.
I told the committee that when the colleges were firmly established under a central funding mechanism, I saw no reason why a funding council should not be considered.
The hon. Member for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) said in Committee that if the Minister is persuaded that it may be possible to establish a funding council at a future date, why does not the Bill allow the Secretary of State to establish one, given that it would require primary legislation.
Since then, the hon. Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington) has made a persuasive case for including such provisions in the Bill.
I have taken advice about what would be involved in amending the Bill to allow for such a further education council to be established at a later date by a future Secretary of State if he so wished.
It will require extensive amendment to the Bill, but given the Committee's progress in considering part I, and given the positive way in which Opposition Members have put their case, I am happy to undertake to table amendments on Report to keep the option open to establish a funding council for further education.’
That is what I have done.
The hon. Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington) welcomed it.
To suggest now that we should commit ourselves to establishing a funding council to carry out certain functions is to change the position that the hon. Gentleman adopted in Committee and my understanding of the Opposition's view —
Mr. Tom Clarke
I share the premise of my hon. Friend the Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion) that the timing is academic.
I do not expect the Minister to be helpful —
Mr. Robert Hughes
Or even to be here.
Mr. Clarke
I am trying to be as kind as possible to the Minister.
Even if the order to which the Minister referred a few minutes ago is introduced, what can the Minister tell us about the Government's thinking on what the timetable will be?
Mr. Forsyth
I did so in Committee.
I make the observation that given the Opposition's effort to determine the Government's view two or three years from now, I can only conclude that Opposition Members expect us to be in government after the next general election.
If the hon. Member for Monklands, West (Mr. Clarke) had any confidence that he would be in government, he would know that the Bill would provide him with the power to decide when to establish the council.
The Opposition's approach is revealing, although entirely understandable with the way the polls are going.
I said in Committee that I had an open mind on the matter.
If we thought that a funding council would be entirely inappropriate, we would never have agreed to include such provisions in the Bill.
It is a matter best addressed at a future date in the light of the experience of the self-governing colleges.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) asked me about the independence of the funding council.
The council's functions would be established by order.
Obviously, the council would exist to carry out functions on behalf of the Secretary of State, but the duty would remain with the Secretary of State.
The hon. Gentleman asked whether the funding council would be the creature of the Scottish Office and he asked where public accountability would be.
Accountability will remain in this place because the Secretary of State will be accountable to the House for the exercise of his duties in the provision of further education.
The funding council will have particular functions which will be carried out on his behalf.
The new clauses are carefully drafted to ensure that the clear lines of accountability are maintained.
The hon. Member for Linlithgow also asked me about competitive tendering and the tendering process.
I am delighted that he sees the benefits of competitive tendering and that he is anxious to ensure that further education colleges should get the best value for money.
If colleges want to make arrangements with local authorities about purchasing or about other centrally organised purchasing arrangements, they are free to do so.
It is a matter for their boards of management and we should expect them, like all bodies that are publicly funded, to get value for money.
Mr. Dalyell
I bring to the Minister's attention the correspondence between West Lothian district council and the hon. Member for Edinburgh, West (Lord James Douglas-Hamilton), the Under-Secretary of State, on precisely the difficulties that a council, whether district or regional, has on the whole issue of competitive tendering.
This is not the occasion on which to go into detail, but I think that the Minister should be aware of the problem.
Mr. Forsyth
I should be happy to look into that correspondence and to consider the hon. Gentleman's point.
The general point is that the colleges would be free to make whatever arrangements seemed best for the provision of services.
Centrally organised arrangements are sometimes not appropriate and that point brings me to the hon. Member for Kincardine and Deeside (Mr. Stephen).
The hon. Gentleman argued that the Bill was a centralising measure.
For a Liberal Democrat to argue that giving institutions the power to run their own affairs is a centralising measure is extraordinary.
It was even more extraordinary that the hon. Gentleman seemed to think that the measure had something to do with the poll tax.
I explained in Committee that the poll tax
Hon. Members
Poll tax!
Mr. Forsyth
I have called the community charge the’ poll tax’on a number of occasions.
We used the term’ poll tax’in the famous vulture posters which we have put behind us.
The community charge or poll tax has nothing to do with the arrangements for financing local government.
It is clear that the money that will now be provided centrally by my right hon. Friend will not be given to the local authorities.
This is a transfer from one account to another.
The idea that it would somehow reduce the community charge is erroneous.
We have explained the point at great length to the hon. Member for Kincardine and Deeside, but he keeps making his claim.
I do not know whether he does not understand the measure or whether he thinks that he can discredit the idea by associating it with the poll tax.
I have no idea how his mind operates in those matters.
The hon. Gentleman also suggested that the measure was an attack on Scottish education.
The one point that he left out of his speech was the recognition that the measures have been welcomed by the principals of the colleges concerned.
Why does the hon. Gentleman think that he knows better than the people who are responsible for running the colleges who have welcomed the opportunity to be able to take decisions at local level?
The hon. Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion) criticised me for not giving a clear commitment to setting up a funding council.
I have covered that ground in some depth.
I am sorry that the hon. Gentleman was not able to join us in Committee because I have enjoyed his contributions in previous Committees of which he has been a member.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman would have helped us —
Mr. McAllion
Unlike the Minister, I am not sorry that I was not on the Committee; I am pleased that I missed it.
The Minister must have been asleep or doing something else when I raised my final point about the article in the education press in Scotland about the middle of last year.
It suggested that the Government intended to merge further education funding with the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council.
Does the Minister discount that possibility?
Mr. Forsyth
I am happy to discount that possibility, together with many other stories which appear in the education press and which are represented as the Government's view.
It is regrettable that that happens.
The view mentioned by the hon. Gentleman has never been put to me and I did not see the article to which he referred.
He can rest easy on that matter.
I hope that the hon. Member for Clydebank and Milngavie will feel able to withdraw his amendment and accept that the Government have fulfilled the undertaking that was freely given as a result of our deliberations on this matter.
Mr. Worthington
I cannot withdraw the amendment, which would set a date for the introduction of a further education funding council.
The last exchange between my hon. Friend the Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion) and the Minister was interesting.
An acceptable reason for not introducing an FE funding council — although I do not say that the reason would be either accurate or right — would be if the Government intended to merge it with the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council.
I believe that the Secretary of State was credited with saying that the Government would consider merging the two at some stage.
The Minister shakes his head, which shows that that is not in the Government's mind.
However, had that been a reason, I could have accepted it.
The possibility of such a merger has now been discounted by the Minister, who has given a solid commitment that no Government of his persuasion would attempt such a merger.
What is the Minister's difficulty?
Is he or is he not in favour of a further education funding council?
It is not a difficult issue.
Both the Welsh and the English Ministers have managed to make up their minds on it.
We can only reach the conclusion — which will be noted by the further education sector in Scotland — that the reason behind the Government's proposal for a further education funding council is that it might help the Bill's passage.
It is quite clear that the Government are not committed to introducing such a council.
There has been no intellectual acceptance of the case for an FE funding council.
At the very most, it is an open issue, but, knowing the Minister as I do, I concur with what the hon. Member for Kincardine and Deeside (Mr. Stephen) said about the Bill being fundamentally a centralising measure.
It seeks to keep control with the Secretary of State.
Administration will be done by self-appointed business men on boards of management, but the parameters of further education — the fee level, the overall funding and the policy — will be set by central Government.
The Minister did not accept our argument that there is great virtue in having a forum, a central organisation, where the further education world could concentrate its arguments, debate policy and move forward.
If the Government are returned to power, because of the inadequacies of this place there will be no scope for public debate on further education.
My hon. Friend the Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) raised some extremely interesting issues which we do not have time to debate today but which I hope will be debated in the other place, such as the relationship between the putative funding council and the Scottish Office.
At first glance, it would appear to be very much the creature of the Scottish Office, when in fact it should be a buffer acting at arm's length from the Scottish Office.
Another inadequacy about the way that we have to deal with the matter today is that there is not time to debate the issue, which we debated in Committee, about the role of a funding council in strategy and planning.
It has a strategic planning function.
That debate will have to take place in another place.
The issue of academic freedom has been raised both in this place and in the other place — the notorious clauses 36 and 64, which have similar elements in the further education sector, cannot be debated today.
Anyone listening to or reading about the debate will know that the nub of the Government's thinking is that they want the Bill to be passed.
Their proposal for a further education funding council does not really have any commitment.
Nothing that the Minister has said today convinces me that his heart and his mind have been won over to the case for a funding council.
All the Government are doing is providing the power to establish one.
People will note that fact with interest.
I hope that hon. Members will support our amendment.
Mr. Dalyell rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
Order.
The hon. Gentleman has spoken.
He needs the leave of the House to speak a second time.
Mr. Dalyell
With the leave of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish once again to refer to the St. Kentigern-Oatridge problem, which is repeated in all our constituencies in one form or another, and which I recommend to some diligent Peer in the other place.
If institutions are funded from the same general purse, on the whole they mesh together and work easily together.
When there is a different purse and a different bureaucratic structure, it is much less easy to have the sort of fruitful relationship that exists between, for example, St. Kentigern's school at Blackburn and the Oatridge agricultural college.
A general problem that might be explored in the other place is how, if there is to be such a separation, we can ensure that fruitful, easy relationships continue to exist.
I leave that matter to the other place.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
The Question is, That the clause be read a Second time.
Hon. Members
No.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
I want to be clear that the House realises what we are doing.
I have put the Question on new clause 6.
I understand that later the hon. Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington) wants to press his amendment (a) to a vote.
Question agreed to.
Clause read a Second time.
Amendment (a) proposed to the proposed clause, at beginning insert [’ with effect from 1st April 1994’
Mr. Worthington
The Minister assures us that the door is not closed but that we are edging forward.
The point of contention now appears to be how institutions may be affected.
Given the Minister's assurance that, if we can find a better form of wording, it can be inserted in the Bill in another place, I shall not press the sub-amendments.
Amendment agreed to.
Amendments made: No. 10, in page 33, line 29, at end insert —() The Secretary of State may give general directions to the Council about the exercise of their functions.
() If it appears to the Secretary of State —(a) that the financial affairs of any institution within the higher education sector have been or are being mismanaged; or (b) that, in consequence of matters outwith the control of such an institution, it is likely that the financial position of the institution will be significantly adversely affected, he may, after consulting the Council and the institution, give such directions to the Council about the provision of financial support in respect of the activities carried on by the institution as he considers are necessary or expedient by reason of the mismanagement or, as the case may be, adverse effect on the institution's financial position. '.
No. 84 — new schedule —’ The Scottish Further Education Funding Council Status 1.
The Funding Council shall not —(a) be regarded as the servants or agents of the Crown;(b) have any status, immunity or privilege of the Crown, and their property shall not be regarded as property of, or held on behalf of, the Crown.
Tenure of office and superannuation of members 2. —(1) The Funding Council shall consist of not less than twelve nor more than fifteen members appointed by the Secretary of State, of whom one shall be so appointed as chairman.
(2) In appointing members of the Funding Council the Secretary of State —(a) shall have regard to the desirability of including persons who appear to him to have experience of, and to have shown capacity in, the provision of further education (within the meaning of section 1(5) (b) of the 1980 Act) or to have held, and to have shown capacity in, any position carrying responsibility for the provision of such further education and, in appointing such persons, he shall have regard to the desirability of their being currently engaged in the provision of such further education or in carrying responsibility for such provision; and (b) shall have regard to the desirability of including persons who appear to him to have experience of, and to have shown capacity in, industrial, commercial or financial matters or the practice of any profession.
House of Commons disqualification 3.
In Part III of Schedule I to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (disqualifying offices) there is inserted at the appropriate place —’ Any member of the Scottish Further Education Funding Council in receipt of remuneration.’
Property and contracts 4.
Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6 below, the Funding Council shall have the power —(a) to acquire, hold and dispose of land and other property;(b) to enter into contracts, including contracts for the employment of staff for the purposes of the discharge of their functions;(c) to invest any sums not immediately required by the Funding Council for the purpose of their carrying on any of the activities which they have power to carry on; and (d) to accept gifts of money, land or other property and apply it to, or hold or administer it in trust for, the purpose of the discharge of any of their functions.
5.
The Funding Council shall not borrow money from any source, give any guarantee or indemnity or create any trust or security over or in respect of any of their property which was acquired, improved or maintained wholly or partly, directly or indirectly out of funds provided by the Secretary of State under section Payment of grants, etc. to Funding Council of this Act or from the proceeds of or any consideration for the disposal of any property so acquired, improved or maintained.
6. —(1) The Funding Council shall not dispose of any property acquired, improved or maintained wholly or partly, directly or indirectly, out of funds provided by the Secretary of State under the said section Payment of grants, etc. to Funding Council or from the proceeds of or any consideration for the disposal of any property so acquired, improved or maintained without the prior consent, given in writing, of the Secretary of State.
(2) The consent of the Secretary of State may be given in respect of a particular disposal of property or of disposals of any class or description and may be given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State may determine.
(3) The consent of the Secretary of State is not required for the disposal of land which is or forms part of property mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) above where the disposal is in consequence of the compulsory acquisition of such land by any authority in pursuance of any power of compulsory acquisition under any enactment; but the Funding Council shall inform the Secretary of State of any such compulsory acquisition.
(4) Where any such property is disposed of, the Funding Council shall pay to the Secretary of State such portion of the proceeds or value of the consideration for the disposal, after deduction of such expenses as appear to the Secretary of State to have been reasonably incurred in the disposal, as the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Funding Council, determine.
Execution of documents 7. —(1) For any purpose other than those mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) below, a document is validly executed by the Funding Council if it is signed on their behalf by a member of the Funding Council or by their secretary (or any person performing the duties of secretary to the Funding Council) or by any person authorised to sign the document on their behalf.
(2) For the purposes of any enactment or rule of law relating to the authentication of documents, a document is validly executed by the Funding Council if it is subscribed on their behalf by being executed in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) above.
(3) A document which bears to have been executed by the Funding Council in accordance with sub-paragraph (2) above shall, in relation to such execution, be a probative document if the subscription of the document bears to have been attested by at least one witness.
Reports and accounts 8.
The Funding Council shall make such reports or returns and give such information to the Secretary of State as he may require for the purposes of the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties under this Part of this Act.
9. —(1) It shall be the duty of the Funding Council —(a) to keep proper accounts and proper records in relation to the accounts;(b) to prepare in respect of each financial year of the Funding Council a statement of accounts; and (c) to send copies of the statement to the Secretary of State and to the Comptroller and Auditor General before the end of the month of August next following the financial year to which the statement relates.
(2) The statement of accounts shall comply with any directions given by the Secretary of State with the approval of the Treasury as to—(a) the information to be contained in it;(b) the manner in which the information contained in it is to be presented; or (c) the methods and principles according to which the statement is to be prepared, and shall contain such additional information as the Secretary of State may with the approval of the Treasury require to be provided for the information of Parliament.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General shall examine, certify and report on each statement received by him in pursuance of this paragraph and shall lay copies of each statement and of his report before each House of Parliament.
(4) In this paragraph’ financial year’means the period beginning with the date on which the Funding Council is established and ending with the second 31st March following that date, and each successive period of twelve months.
Additional provisions 10.
An order made under section Scottish Further Education Funding Council of this Act may contain such additional provisions —(a) relating to the membership, staff and proceedings of the Funding Council (including any committee of them);(b) relating to salaries, pensions, allowances and any other payments to be paid to members of the Funding Council (including any such committee) and to staff; and (c) as to the winding-up and dissolution of the Funding Council, as the Secretary of State may consider necessary or expedient.
11.
Employment with the Council shall be included among the kinds of employment to which a scheme under section 1 of the Superannuation Act 1972 can apply, and accordingly in Schedule 1 to that Act (in which those kinds of employment are listed), at the end of the list of’ Other Bodies’there is inserted —’Scottish Further Education Funding Council.’
Schedule 1
Constitution and proceedings of boards of management —
Mr. Worthington
I beg to move amendment No. 71, in page 37, line 12, leave out ten nor more than sixteen' and insert fourteen nor more than twenty'.
Madam Deputy Speaker: With this it will be convenient to consider the following amendments:
No. 72, in page 37, line 22, at end insert —(e) no less than two persons nominated by the education authority in whose area the college is situated. '.
No. 73, in page 38, line 11, leave out sixteen' and insert twenty'.
Government amendments Nos. 53 to 55.
No. 75, in page 40, leave out lines 40 and 41.
No. 76, in page 40, line 42, at end insert —(2) For a period of two years commencing from the first transfer date, a member (whether elected or appointed) or an employee of a local authority, shall not be eligible for appointment as chairman, but, after that time has elapsed, no such restriction shall apply. '.
Mr. Worthington
The amendment seeks to improve the college boards of management by increasing their size to make them more representative.
We obstinately continue to believe that people from the education authority should be on the boards because that will allow collaboration.
That seems to be common sense.
We do not wish to exclude local authority employees from chairing such a board.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
I made clear to the Committee considering the Bill, when we considered a similar amendment, that I do not consider that enlarging the size of boards would ensure that they are more effective.
Nor do I consider that a better balance of interests would necessarily be achieved.
I very much hope that board members will be able to take a broad view and not regard themselves as speaking for any narrow interest groups.
The Secretary of State will make the appointments to reconstitute college councils later this year.
Those appointments will be based on the need to ensure a strong employer presence and on the basis of the personal qualities, experience and commitment that the individuals bring to the task.
Those people will become the members of the first boards of management on 1 April 1993.
I cannot, therefore, accept amendment No. 72.
However, I recognised the case made in Committee by the Opposition on an amendment seeking to restrict board members to serving no more than eight years.
As we said in Committee, eight years seems too short a time for the college to capitalise on experience gained by individual members.
However, having considered the matter carefully, I have tabled amendments Nos. 54 and 53, which will restrict board members to serving no more than three four-year terms of office, or 12 years in total.
That will provide the college boards with new perspectives and new experience.
Amendment No. 55 is consequential and makes clear that in calculating the 12-year limit on membership of a board of management no account is taken of any previous service on a college council.
I have reflected on the position of elected councillors being allowed to become chairmen of college boards.
I still remain of the view that that would be undesirable.
Education authorities will have a duty to provide community education and a power to provide further education of the type falling within clause 6 of the Bill.
Boards will be funded by the Secretary of State to provide both.
The chairman of an authority's education committee could find himself chairing a board of management where serious conflict of interest could arise in the future.
It may be that, with the passage of years, the position would change, but that can be dealt with by the Secretary of State's order-making power in clause 3 to amend the provisions contained in schedule 1.
Those arrangements do not preclude education authority representatives either being appointed initially by the Secretary of State or subsequently by boards, but I stress that appointments will be made on the basis of personal qualities.
I invite Opposition Members to acknowledge the concessions that I have made and to withdraw amendments Nos. 75 and 76.
Mr. Worthington
I beg to ask leave to withdraw the amendment.
Amendment, by leave, withdrawn.
Amendments made: No. 49, in schedule 1, page 37, line 21, leave out from being' to end of line 22 and insert nominated by the students' association of the college from among students of the college. '.
No. 50, in page 38, line 22, leave out from person' to whether' in line 23 and insert appointed by being nominated by the students' association of the college'.
No. 51, in page 38, line 33, leave out from beginning to ‘shall’ and insert ‘appointed by being nominated by the students' association of the college’.
No. 52, in page 38, line 39, leave out from ‘by’ to ‘shall’in line 40, and insert ‘being nominated by the students' association of the college’.
No. 53, in page 38, line 44, after ‘board’, insert —(a) '.
No. 54, in page 38, line 48, at end insert —; or b) where the total number of years of any previous terms of office (whether or not consecutive) served as a member of that board exceeds eight. '.
No. 55, in page 38, line 48, at end insert —(2) For the purpose of sub-paragraph (1)(b) above, in calculating the number of years served no account shall be taken of any term of office served as a member of a college council.'
Schedule 4
Transitional provisions for college councils —
Amendments made: No. 62, in page, 47 line, 43, at end insert —() The terms and conditions on which the Secretary of State may make any grants under this paragraph may include in particular conditions —(a) enabling him to require the repayment, in whole or in part, of sums paid by him if any other condition subject to which the sums were paid is not complied with; and (b) requiring the payment of interest in respect of any period during which a sum due to him in accordance with any other condition remains unpaid, but shall not relate to the application by the college council to which the grant is made of any sums derived otherwise than from the Secretary of State. '.
No. 56, in page 48, line 45, at end insert —— Establishment of students' associations —.
—(1) Where, at the beginning of the transitional period, there is no students' association established for the students of the college, the college council shall, as soon as is practicable after that date (after consultation with such persons as appear to them to be representative of students of the college), make a scheme for the establishment of a students' association for students of the college.
(2) The primary function of a students' association of a college established under this paragraph shall be to represent the interests of students of such college.
(3) A scheme made under sub-paragraph (1) above shall include provision as to—
(a) the date on which the scheme is to come into effect, being a date not later than the day immediately before the first transfer date; and
(b) the initial composition and constitution of the students' association.’
The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council —
Amendments made: No. 11, in page 52, line 41, leave out sub-section (7) and insert:
(7) If an employee of the Council becomes a member of the Council and was by reference to his employment by the Council a participant in a pension scheme such as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (5) above —
a) thee Council may determine that his service as a member shall be treated for the purposes of the scheme as service as an employee of the Council whether or not any benefits are to be payable to or in respect of him by virtue of paragraph 5 above; but
b) if the Council determine as aforesaid, any discretion as to the benefits payable to or in respect of him which the scheme confers on the Council shall be exercised only with the consent of the Secretary of State given with the approval of the Treasury.
No. 12, in page 54, line 2, leave out from accounts' to and' in line 3.
No. 13, in line 6, at end insert —
() The statement of accounts referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b) above shall comply with any directions given by the Secretary of State with the approval of the Treasury as to—
a) the information to be contained in it,
b) the manner in which the information contained in it is to be presented, or
c) the methods and principles according to which the statement is to be prepared,
and shall contain such additional information as the Secretary of State may with the approval of the Treasury require to be provided for the information of Parliament.
Schedule 8
Miscellaneous and consequential amendments —
Mr. Worthington
I beg to move amendment No. 77, in page 59, line 22, after Act', insert, in section 51, of this Act'.
Do the Government accept the amendment?
Mr. Michael Forsyth
Much as I would like to assist the hon. Gentleman, I cannot as I do not accept that transport for students at boards of management colleges should remain with education authorities.
Therefore, I suggest that the hon. Gentleman withdraws the amendment.
However, guidance will be given to boards on the exercise of their powers and I shall monitor the position to ensure that the present level of provision is at least maintained.
Mr. Tom Clarke
I remind the House of the suggestion of my hon. Friend the Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington) that, at present, under section 51 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, local authorities have a responsibility to ensure that transport is provided where necessary.
It is obvious that, not only is it necessary for students with disabilities to have reasonable transport, but that their transport often has to be specially adapted.
As there is a clear obligation on the local authorities which is not, under the Bill, being given to the boards responsible for further education, that could cause difficulties for such people.
I am sorry that the Minister has not found it possible to agree with the reasonable amendment.
I do not want to add to the controversy that we had earlier by saying that, yet again — and I congratulate them on this — our colleagues have obtained more in the English legislation than we have — The Minister indicates dissent, but I won the last argument and I am not sure whether he wants another one at this late hour.
But as he was profoundly unconvincing, and as another place is at present still considering the English position, I would not wish to force the point on the House.
Interruption
I hope that another place will have a perhaps more inspired attitude to these matters.
Mr. Forsyth
As to winning the argument, I do not think that the hon. Gentleman has grasped the difference in structure between the Scottish Bill and the English Bill.
The duty in the Scottish Bill to provide further education remains with the Secretary of State; in the case of the English Bill it is transferred to the council.
That is why there is a difference in provisions.
The hon. Gentleman is confusing duties which remain with the Secretary of State and with the council.
Under clause 8(2) (c) boards have power to provide to students of the college such assistance of a financial or other nature as they may consider appropriate.
That will enable them to respond flexibly to the transport needs of their students, including students with learning difficulties.
As I said to the hon. Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington), I propose that guidance will be given to the boards on the exercise of that power.
I will monitor the position to ensure that the present level of provision is at least maintained.
The hon. Member for Monklands, West (Mr. Clarke) has nothing to fear from the provisions.
I understand his anxiety about the matter, but the Bill will ensure that the provision of transport is at least as good as is provided at present and may very well be improved.
Amendment negatived.
Amendments made: No. 82, in page 59, line 34, at end insert —() In section 65B (provision for recorded children who have ceased to be of school age) after subsection (6) there shall be inserted the following subsection —(6A) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (c) of subsection (6) above, the reference in that paragraph to any other body shall include a reference to the board of management of a college of further education (within the meaning of Part I of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992) making provision from which, in the opinion of the authority, the child might benefit.
No. 57, in page 60, line 10, at end insert —
Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 c. 36.
In section 11(1) of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 (training and occupation of the mentally handicapped)—(a) after the words’ operation of’there shall be inserted’(a)’; and (b) after the word’mind)’there shall be inserted the words or (b) section 1 of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 (which imposes a duty on the secretary of State to secure the provision of adequate and efficient further education in Scotland).
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read the Third time.
The Bill introduces fundamental reforms to further and higher education in Scotland and has been widely welcomed there.
The Committee stage was marked by co-operative and constructive debate.
I pay tribute to my hon. Friend the Minister of State for his sensitive and skilful handling of the Bill in Committee and to Opposition Members for their positive approach to many aspects of the Bill.
I feel sure that it is a better Bill than when it started.
Of course, parallel debates in another place have informed our deliberations.
The Bill is an important measure of devolution.
In further education, it devolves power from local authorities to local self-governing boards.
The Government have met much of the anxiety of Opposition Members through the provision for a possible further education funding council to be established at a later date.
In higher education, it introduces devolution from a United Kingdom funding council to a new Scottish body, something that has been universally welcomed by universities and others.
It is also an important measure to remove the artificial binary line in higher education.
It introduces new arrangements for degree-awarding powers and for achieving university status.
Scottish higher education is expanding rapidly and achieving new heights.
As I said on Second Reading, there is an explosion of opportunity for our young people.
The Bill matches the needs of the times, and I commend it to the House.
Mr. Worthington
Briefly, I should like to respond to the Secretary of State and to express my thanks to my hon. Friends who have contributed positively to improving the Bill.
I am glad that the Secretary of State paid tribute to the co-operative spirit in which we approached the Bill.
The Bill is in two halves.
The further education part is virtually friendless in Scotland.
There has been no sentiment for it.
The only body of people who have been behind the Bill have been the principals of the colleges, and what did they say?
They said that something had to be done to put right the mess which the Government had made of the Self-Governing Schools etc.
(Scotland) Act 1989.
They said that difficulty had been created because of the uncertainty of poll tax funding and of the regime laid down by the Government.
The Opposition welcome the transfer to Scotland of responsibility for higher education and the ending of the binary divide.
Many apprehensions about academic freedom have been expressed, but we are moving towards a solution of that problem.
We are still worried about quality, however — the change in the nature of the relationship between research and teaching.
We are not convinced that the Government pay enough attention to quality.
I thank the Minister for delivering every one of the pledges that he gave us in Committee.
The Bill is considerably the better for that.
I thank all who have assisted the Bill's passage through the House.
Mr. Dalyell
I echo the words of my hon. Friend —
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
Get on with it.
Mr. Dalyell
I will not.
On second thoughts, I am always obedient to the Whips.
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Clydebank and Milngavie (Mr. Worthington), I thank the Minister for his courtesy to the Committee.
His civil service team put in considerable efforts.
The Minister is fortunate indeed to have such high-quality civil servants at the Scottish Office.
I fear that the Secretary of State was not right to claim that the Bill is universally welcomed.
Count me out of that.
More importantly, count out many of the science, engineering and medical professors in Scottish universities.
There is considerable scepticism about the measure, as the right hon. Gentleman knows.
Of course, there may be widespread approval in certain circles, but it is far from widespread in other circles of important people who will have to make the Bill work.
I do not concede for a moment that this is a devolution measure.
The hon. Member for Dumfries (Sir H. Monro) will recollect very well that, in 1980, he piloted the Wildlife and Countryside Bill through the House.
Some of us said that we would keep an eye on what happened to that Act in the years that followed.
In the past 11 years, some of us have done precisely that, justifiably sending endless letters to the Department of the Environment.
I shall certainly keep a beady eye on this development, which I do not welcome.
If some of those who proposed it are proved right in several years' time, I hope that I will admit as much, but I have grave doubts nevertheless, and they are shared by a large number of heavyweight people in the Scottish universities.
I hope that my colleagues will be able to effect what they say they will in respect of part I of the Bill.
I believe in local authorities; their relationship with further education was extremely valuable.
I hope that I will prove to be wrong about the Bill.
In the meantime, I am always obedient to the Whips, so I shall leave it at that.
Mr. Stephen
It was interesting to be given an insight earlier this evening into the Minister's attitude to his own brief.
At times he was clearly not too pleased with the words he was reading out.
If the House will bear with me, I too can give hon. Members an insight into the words on my brief by reading them out:’ I should begin by saying that the Report stage was dominated by Government amendments, which I believe is rare.
This was because of the number of concessions made by the Minister, who on the whole gave a sympathetic response to many of the concerns expressed by members.
Everyone is grateful for that.’
I can bear to say that, and I am happy to do so sincerely.
The discussion in Committee and on Report has been positive and good natured.
We welcome the fact that provision for special needs is included in the Bill for the first time.
Part I, with the inclusion of some form of commitment to a funding council, is an improvement, but we cannot support the removal of further education from local authorities.
I remain firmly convinced, as does almost everyone in Scotland, that the Bill is a centralising measure which was brought about as much by the Government's hostility to local authorities and by the difficulties of the poll tax as by anything else.
Where else did the great idea come from?
Was it a Government commitment which was part of their manifesto?
It was not.
It was totally unexpected, and there was little if any warning for the local authorities involved.
It is no great exaggeration to say that an accountable and integrated further education system is yet another victim of the disastrous poll tax.
Part II is far more welcome.
We support a separate funding council, although we should prefer to see that under a Scottish Parliament.
We also welcome the abolition of the binary divide.
On a personal basis, I very much welcome the commitments given to RGIT in Committee.
There are aspects of the funding council which we shall seek to change in the other place.
The council should have strategic planning powers so that the distribution of funds can be more firmly tied to the needs and shape of higher education.
There remain concerns that academic freedom is not as entrenched as it should be.
Although I appreciate the difficulties in wording, that remains an area of real concern to many principals in Scottish universities.
The failure to include some provision for the welfare of students is also deeply regrettable.
Although the Bill in its present form is a significant improvement on its first form, it remains seriously flawed.
I hope that we can see further improvements to the Bill in its later stages.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
It seems but yesterday that the Bill was given its Second Reading on 26 November, yet there has been a great deal of debate of its contents.
At that stage, the Secretary of State said that the Bill was a tremendous step forward for Scottish education, and suggested that it was almost home rule being delivered in one fell swoop.
That was a slight overestimate of the position, because all that the Bill involves is the transfer of very limited powers to organisations in Scotland.
The debate in Committee has taken place against a background of what the Chinese, who are celebrating their new year this week, would call’ interesting times’.
The matters first raised in Committee will be discussed further in the general election, as we move towards far larger constitutional changes.
The Bill has been a step in the right direction.
I have consistently supported the idea of a higher and further education council for our institutions in Scotland.
I also place it on record that I very much welcomed the Minister's attitude in Committee.
At times, he seemed to have to cope single-handedly with everything that came from the Opposition.
The Committee was conspicuous for the fact that Conservative Members made few contributions; the majority came from the Opposition.
Although I have fundamental disagreements with the Minister on many issues, I acknowledge that he made many concessions to the logical arguments of hon. Members from the three Opposition parties involved.
That is to be much encouraged and welcomed by us all.
I also pay tribute to those who wrote to us, including the principals of the colleges, the regional authorities which were deeply involved and various organisations — not least the voluntary organisations, which were concerned about particular issues such as students with special needs.
It is valuable that their contributions have been so accurately recorded, both in Committee and on Report.
During our discussions, we have raised many issues that need deeper and further explanation if we are to achieve the right results for Scottish education.
I think especially of our debate tonight on new clause 15, when there was an inadequate response from the Government, who appeared to have inadequate knowledge of the points being raised.
That, in itself, is an argument for the establishment of a Select Committee on Scottish affairs, which could consider in more detail an education system that we all value highly.
I hope that when the Bill goes to another place the words recorded in the Official Report, spoken both in Committee and on the Floor of the House, will be examined carefully and that what we have started will be built upon to make the Bill even better than it is.
Question put and agreed to.
Bill accordingly read the Third time, and passed.
Social Security (Mortgage Interest Payments) Bill Order for Second Reading read.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time I believe that there will be a consensus across the House on the Bill.
As its provisions will be beneficial to many people, I hope that we shall deal with it expeditiously.
The House will recall that in the latter part of last year both my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer and my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State outlined measures to be taken by both the Government and mortgage lenders with the excellent aim of reducing the level of repossessions that were occurring at that time.
Whatever party we belong to, all were agreed that that was a desirable aim.
Mortgage rescue schemes are an important part of that initiative.
I am sure that we are all glad that many of the lenders — building societies, banks and others — have come forward with schemes to ensure, or at least to advance the proposition, that the number of repossessions should be reduced to the absolute minimum.
The Bill will be a further significant contribution towards the vital aim of bringing reassurance to people who might otherwise be at risk of losing their homes.
I am especially glad that lenders have given assurances that they will not repossess homes where direct payments are being made to cover the mortgage interest.
The Bill provides for the direct payment to qualifying lenders of the mortgage interest component of income support.
It builds on existing, more limited arrangements that we have already introduced, which rely on suitable cases being referred to an adjudication officer who considers whether it is in the interests of the claimant for direct payments to be made.
Those arrangements have already proved to be a useful interim measure — but they are only that, pending the introduction of the Bill, which provides for a much more comprehensive scheme.
It will provide the basis for detailed regulations, which will come before the House in due course, to come into effect from April.
The Bill will cover those income support claimants who have an amount for mortgage interest included in their income support assessment.
I think that by anybody's judgment, they should be making appropriate payments to qualifying lenders.
The Bill will cover all such claimants, but the regulations specify the point at which the direct payments will start.
Many unemployed claimants stay on benefit for less than 16 weeks, during which only 50 per cent.
of the mortgage interest is payable.
After 16 weeks, the income support calculation for claimants under 60 years of age includes 100 per cent.
of the eligible mortgage interest.
Accordingly, we intend to provide in regulations for direct payments to start once that 100 per cent.
of the eligible interest becomes payable in income support.
Perhaps I ought to make it clear that, when we talk of qualified lenders, we have in mind building societies, banks, insurance companies and other institutional lenders.
Local authorities and certain other public bodies with home loan facilities will also be included.
It has been possible, relatively simply, to prescribe most qualifying lenders on the face of the Bill, but I hope that the Opposition and others will understand that provision for others, including some institutional and centralised lenders, can be made in the regulations that we shall introduce in due course.
The arrangements will, of course, impose a significant increase in administrative costs on the Benefits Agency.
We therefore felt it appropriate, in our discussions with the lenders, to negotiate a contribution from lenders, so that the increased costs would be met at least in part by them and not entirely by the Government.
I am glad to say that the Council of Mortgage Lenders has agreed to such an arrangement.
As I said at the outset, the scheme that the Bill introduces forms part of a positive and collaborative response from the Government and the lending institutions.
The lenders have given assurances that they will not repossess the homes of people on income support whose mortgage interest is paid direct.
In addition, lenders are drawing up mortgage rescue schemes, and are also examining ways of easing the terms of repayment to help people to stay in their homes.
I believe that, in introducing the Bill, the Government are playing their part, in collaboration with the lending institutions, in providing a powerful and constructive means of increasing the security of many people who might otherwise risk losing their homes.
I hope that the House will agree that the Bill deserves a Second Reading and, indeed, passage into law.
Mr. Keith Bradley (Manchester, Withington)
Although we shall support the Bill because we believe that any measure that alleviates the terrible problem of repossessions is to be welcomed, the way in which the Minister presented it suggests that there is no problem.
We should view the Bill in the light of the package of panic measures that were announced in December, as the rapidly rising tide of repossessions threatened finally to engulf the remnants of this lame-duck Government.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders estimated that there would be up to 100,000 repossessions in 1991 — a staggering 120 per cent.
increase on the previous year.
The cause of the problem is absolutely clear, and is twofold.
First, there is the utter incompetence of the Government's management of the economy; secondly, there are its housing policies, described in The Independent as’ a disaster waiting to happen’.
The management of the economy has caused massive interest rates, crippling mortgage rates and escalating unemployment.
The Minister for Housing, who I am pleased to see is present, recognised in a previous debate that unemployment was a crucial part of the problem of repossessions.
If the hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) would like to intervene, I should be pleased to give way, but if he listens he may learn something.
Interruption
We must also blame the blinkered ideological dogma of a Government who have put owner-occupation at the top of every list, at the expense of decent affordable housing.
Although we support the right-to-buy legislation, we wish that the capital receipts could be used by local authorities to provide affordable housing so that people would not be forced into owner-occupation that they cannot afford.
The consequence of these two strands of Government mismanagement of the economy has led to the appalling problem of homelessness, evictions, marriage breakdown and the human misery associated with the scandalous mismanagement of housing policy by the Government.
The building societies are not without blame, due to their lending policies during the 1980s which led to individual circumstances not being properly taken into account.
The provision of 100 per cent.
mortgages, as well as deferred interest schemes and low-start mortgages, led to the Government having to introduce these panic measures.
The Labour party warned the Government of the time bomb that was being being created by their policies months before they took any action to try to stem the flow of repossessions.
We should pay tribute to my hon. Friend the Member for Hammersmith (Mr. Soley), who produced a proper, comprehensive mortgage rescue package long before the Government considered taking any of their panic measures.
What has happened since December, leading to the Bill that we are debating, shows clearly that the Government were more interested in grabbing the headlines about repossessions than in taking any action to stem the flow of repossessions.
Mr. Barry Field (Isle of Wight)
The hon. and learned Gentleman makes much of forecasts that he claims were arranged in line with the timing of a possible general election.
I remind him of the words of the Liberal Democrat pocket guide to Conservative party policy, published in 1991, which stated, to its credit:’ The Conservatives in 1979 recognised the need for change after three decades of stultifying corporatism.’
If that was not a forecast of better economic prospects, what was?
What would be the effect on the rural economy and on national inflation of the 50p increase in petrol prices that the Social Democrat leader advocated earlier this week?
Mr. Carlile
The hon. Gentleman is a little off the point, and he is very selective in his reading.
His first quotation related directly to trade union law reforms that he knows perfectly well were supported by my party.
His second point was also selective.
If he will read all our policy, he will find clearly stated our determination to ensure that rural areas are protected against the petrol price rises that the Conservatives, Labour, and my own party recognise are otherwise inevitable in due course to protect the environment.
The Tory party has not said that it would ensure that rural areas do not suffer disproportionately as a result.
The hon. Gentleman has made an entirely peripheral intervention.
I will return to the subject of the debate.
Part of the Government's failure can be seen every week in our constituency surgeries, at which small business people complain about the way in which their firms failed.
Often, that happened not because they were poor managers but because they were unable to collect debts owed by other businesses that went broke.
This serious problem led to the record 47,000 business failures that occurred in 1991.
Although prominence has been given to south-east England being especially badly affected by recent economic trends, Dun and Bradstreet surveys show that, in terms of percentage increases in insolvencies, Scotland and Wales were hardest hit, with increases of 77 per cent.
and 74 per cent.
respectively.
It is not a south-east phenomenon, but has hit us all — including the rural areas where business expansion plays such an important role.
The Government's forecasts have already been caricatured by the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East, and they were bizarre.
Every season in 1991 the Government presented another inaccurate forecast.
In the spring, we were promised that the recession would be’ short-lived and shallow’, and that growth would begin again towards the middle of the year.
In the summer, we were told that Britain was coming out of the recession.
In the autumn, we were informed that’ the green shoots of economic spring are appearing once again.’
In the winter, the Government were driven to the desperation of calling upon alchemy —’ what Disraeli once called the alchemy of time.’
The problems of manufacturing industry will be solved not by alchemy but by sound economic policies.
That means managing the economy — not the use of alchemic tubes to produce some mythical solution.
Industry has identified its own problems very clearly.
The best economic predictions have come from the Confederation of British Industry, and particularly from its chief economist, Andrew Sentance.
The CBI's latest quarterly industrial trends survey shows that confidence is virtually non-existent, and that new orders are expected to continue falling.
Export orders declined significantly for a sixth successive quarter.
Output showed a negative balance of 29 per cent., and, after a slight improvement in October, 34 per cent .
of business men were less optimistic about their companies' prospects.
I ask on behalf of my party, and of small business people in particular: why do the Government not take the steps that could be taken in an enterprise economy, without nationalisation and corporatism, to revive our service and manufacturing industries?
I urge the Secretary of State to say why, when business person after business person tells him,’ Of course, we must have a single European currency,’he continues to insist on the opt-out that is so unrealistic and damaging to British industry?
Is there one senior figure in British industry and commerce who really believes that we are not bound to have a single currency in the end?
Why not accept that, and play a leading role in creating it in as beneficial an environment as possible?
Home Rule (Scotland) Bill
Order for Second Reading read
Mr. Menzies Campbell (Fife, North-East)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.
The Bill comes before the House by an accident of timing that, nevertheless, makes it of particular political relevance not only to the people of Scotland but to the people of the United Kingdom.
My Bill would establish a new constitutional settlement for Scotland, create a Parliament with a fixed four-year term, provide for elections by a system of proportional representation, establish a Bill of Rights, create the office of ombudsman, give to the Parliament revenue-raising responsibility, entrench these arrangements in such a way that they could not be changed without the consent of both the Westminster and Scottish Parliaments and provide that all Scottish domestic affairs should be the responsibility of a Parliament sitting in Edinburgh, reserving foreign affairs, defence and large-scale economics to Westminster.
The Bill also contains special provisions for the islands, to which I suspect my hon. Friend the Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) will wish to pay special reference, if he catches your eye, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
The purpose of the Bill goes beyond that to which I have already referred.
It is conceived as the first step towards a written constitution for the United Kingdom.
It is drafted in such a way that the essential reform of the United Kingdom constitution will be a logical second step.
Mr. Bill Walker (Tayside, North)
Will the hon. and learned Gentleman give way?
Mr. Campbell
I should like to make progress.
I have no doubt that the hon. Gentleman will endeavour to catch your eye, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in the light of the number of Conservative Back Benchers who have chosen to be present, it would seem that he has a reasonable opportunity of doing so.
The Bill draws on the scheme proposed by the constitutional convention.
Indeed, it goes beyond that, so far as is necessary to promote a written constitution based on federal principles.
The Bill provides a scheme to recreate in Scotland a Parliament with all the dignity and style to which the Scottish people are entitled.
The scheme recognises the distinctive nature of the Scottish legal system and Scottish institutions.
It is a scheme, too, that rejects the exclusiveness of nationalism.
To acknowledge a legitimate sense of national identity is far removed from the intellectual self-satisfaction of nationalism.
Nationalism, as history demonstrates, is a crude, blunt force, too easily convertible into bitterness and selfishness, too easily manipulated into intolerance and too easily transformed into introspection.
On this occasion it is only right to give some historical analysis of the government of Scotland since the Union.
Throughout the years of Union Scotland, unlike Wales, has acquired separate legislation throughout domestic matters.
That is a major anomaly which the British Parliament has accepted because it has no alternative.
The anomaly has not always worked entirely to the advantage of Scotland because, as a result of the requirements of a separate legal system, the British Parliament cannot meet fully the need for modernising, reforming and improving that legal system.
Scotland is the only territory on the face of the earth which has a legal system without a legislature to improve, modernise and amend it.
’ There are other distinctive Scottish characteristics as well.
Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Scotland was governed in a different way from the rest of Britain, with different administrative powers, different local government and a different structure of education.
In 1885 a Scottish Secretary was appointed, and in the 1920s he was elevated to Secretary of State.
In the 1930s the Scottish Office was sent lock, stock and barrel to Edinburgh.
All this administrative devolution was done by Conservative Governments, and it was not done out of a feeling of national sentiment, but because of the administrative requirements needed to achieve good government for the Scottish people.
It may be asked why, if we have had this enormous devolution and if Parliament, with a unitary system, is able to respond to the distinct needs of Scotland, this should not continue.
It may be asked why, with a separate legal system and a separate Scottish Office, it is necessary to go any further and establish a directly-elected Assembly.’
The answer is that during the past 200 years or more a dynamic change has taken place.
’ This is not because the people have changed their minds but because of the increasing complexity of government, requiring more and more administrative devolution, and more powers to be given to the Scottish Office.
We have now a Secretary of State for Scotland who is for all practical purposes a Scottish Prime Minister.
He covers a Department the equivalent of which in England and Wales is served by eight or nine Ministries.
He has one Department, and Scottish Members are expected to scrutinise his actions.
The Scottish Office has more civil servants than the European Commission There has been a qualitative change in the call for devolution.
In the early twentieth century the demand for a separate Scottish Legislature was the result of national sentiment.
That national sentiment still exists, but added to it is the need for good government, good administration and a better deal for Scottish people within the United Kingdom.’
Those words may seem familiar to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
That is hardly surprising, because since I embarked upon this historical analysis I have been quoting virtually verbatim from a speech made on 16 December 1976 in this House by the now right hon. and learned Member for Edinburgh, Pentlands (Mr. Rifkind), which can be found at columns 1832 and 1833 of the Official Report for that date.
What the right hon. and learned Gentleman said then has, over time, come to be seen yet more acutely as a cogent and sensible analysis of the needs of Scotland as we approach the end of the century.
Mr. John Bowis (Battersea)
The Bill would remove from the United Kingdom Cabinet any power over any matter relating to Scottish governance.
Given that it would remove the functions of the Secretary of State for Scotland to a Scottish Parliament, the hon. and learned Gentleman would presumably accept that there is no role for a Scottish Secretary of State, or Scottish Prime Minister to use his terminology, within the United Kingdom Cabinet.
Therefore, he would remove the voice of Scotland from the Cabinet of the United Kingdom and from the decision-making process of the United Kingdom as a whole, including decisions on taxation and foreign affairs.
Is that in Scotland's best interests?
Mr. Campbell
It is in Scotland's best interest to have exclusive responsibility for the conduct of its own domestic affairs.
It would also be in Scotland's interest to have influence over defence, foreign affairs and large-scale economics.
The financial scheme attached to the Bill demonstrates that it would be in Scotland's interest to have an influence over overall levels of taxation in the United Kingdom.
All that can be achieved without necessarily retaining the existing office of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Unlike the Labour party, for which this is a matter of great difficulty, my party and its predecessor have never shrunk from the fact that if one has effective devolution, and an effective Parliament with the powers that the Bill would establish, the case for the retention of a Scottish Secretary of State in Cabinet would be weakened.
Likewise, unlike the Labour party, my party and its predecessor have had no difficulty with the proposition that if we create a Scottish Parliament with the kind of effective deveolution which the Bill proposes, the case for the retention of the same numbers of Members of Parliament who presently come from Scotland to Westminster would be weakened.
Indeed, in its evidence to the Kilbrandon commisson, my party accepted that if its then proposals had been accepted by the commission, the case for a reduction in Scottish Members to, say, 58 or 59 would have been hard to resist.
Mr. Bill Walker rose
Mr. Campbell
I wish to make a little progress before giving way.
When the present Secretary of State addressed the House on that occasion, he might also have taken the opportunity to draw to the attention of the House and to remind the public outside, particularly in Scotland, that the nature of sovereignty in the Scottish constitutional tradition is different from that of Westminster.
I refer in that context to the observations of Lord President Cooper in MacCormick v. The Lord Advocate in 1953, when Lord Cooper, generally regarded as one of the foremost Scottish jurists of this century, said:’ The principle of the unlimited sovereignty of Parliament is a distinctively English principle which has no counterpart in Scottish constitutional law Considering that the Union legislation extinguished the Parliaments of Scotland and England and replaced them by a new Parliament, I have difficulty in seeing why it should have been supposed that the new Parliament of Great Britain must inherit all the peculiar characteristics of the English Parliament but none of the Scottish Parliament, as if all that happened in 1707 was that Scottish representatives were admitted to the Parliament of England.
This is not what was done.’
That judgment, passed in 1953, has never been challenged, as it might have been by an appeal to the House of Lords sitting in its appellate civil jurisdiction capacity.
Why is the case for a Parliament such as we propose now so strong?
First, whichever opinion poll one reads, the great weight of Scottish political opinion is dissatisfied with the present constitutional arrangements.
The great weight of Scottish opinion believes that the distinctive nature of Scottish life, with its own legal system, its own philosophy on education and its own traditions, is insufficiently recognised by the United Kingdom Parliament.
The great weight of Scottish opinion believes, with justification, that Scottish legislation and domestic affairs are invariably an afterthought in measures designed for England and Wales.
The great weight of Scottish opinion finds it difficult to understand why, contrary to its Standing Orders, the House of Commons has been unable to establish a Select Committee to scrutinise Scottish affairs.
The great weight of opinion in Scotland is outraged at the fact that the present Government can barely find enough Members from Scottish constituencies to fill the ministerial appointments in the Scottish Office.
Mr. Bill Walker
That is not so.
Mr. Campbell
There is a Whip who does not represent a Scottish constituency.
Indeed, nor did his predecessor represent a Scottish constituency.
Home rule for Scotland would show the rest of the United Kingdom that government devolved from the centre is an opportunity to be seized with enthusiasm.
In our commitment as a party to home rule, we proceed on the footing not only that the distinctive characteristics of Scotland and its people need expression and institutions of government, but that the demands of modern government require those institutions to be immediate, sensitive and properly democratic.
Home rule and proportional representation are the means by which we shall break the stranglehold of Westminster.
They are also the means by which we shall provide a system of government which commands the confidence of all the people, in which the democratic deficit is made good and in which pluralism is entrenched.
I say without qualification that home rule without proportional representation would not be home rule at all, and I would not support any measure to bring devolved government to Scotland which did not have PR as its centrepiece, for, however desirable it would be to create a Parliament in Edinburgh, to create one as unfair and undemocratic as that which we have here would be a betrayal of the people of Scotland.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths (Edinburgh, South)
Does the hon. and learned Gentleman acknowledge and welcome the moves by the Labour party in Scotland, endorsed nationally, for the new Scottish Parliament to be elected by a system of proportional representation?
Mr. Campbell
I accept and welcome the progressive nature of the Labour party's views on proportionality.
But I question whether, under Professor Plant's most recent proposal, proportionality will be achieved.
I am anxious that a list system in which the lists are provided by parties might be less than democratic.
However, I welcome without any difficulty the progression in Labour party thinking from a first-past-the-post system to a system of proportionality.
In my Bill, for which I seek a Second Reading today, the provision is that Parliament should be elected by the single transferable vote in the first instance, but thereafter, in subsequent elections, Parliament should be free to determine its own electoral system as long as that is consistent with the principles of proportionality.
There is always some value in looking back in history, and I offer a quotation that best seems to describe what we are about today.
It states:’ as to the future, we have to secure for Scotland a much more direct and convenient method of bringing her influence to bear upon her own purely domestic affairs.
There is nothing which conflicts with the integrity of the United Kingdom in securing to Scotsmen in that or some other way an effective means of shaping the special legislation which affects them and only them.
Certainly I am of the opinion that if such a scheme can be brought into existence it will mean a great enrichment not only of the national life of Scotland, but of the policies and public life of the United Kingdom.’
Those words were spoken in Dundee on 3 October 1911 by Winston Churchill.
What is the Government's position?
The Secretary of State is implacably opposed to any measure of the sort that my Bill embraces.
As I understand it, he offers a choice between the status quo and independence.
I understand him to say that if there is a democratic vote for the status quo, it will be honoured, as will a democratic vote for independence.
But if there is a democratic vote for reform, the Secretary of State says that that is to be ignored.
The Secretary of State argues that to allow what my Bill proposes would be to place Scotland at the top of a slippery slope, but his attitude has the effect of placing Scotland at the edge of a cliff.
If the pages of the national newspapers of Scotland are to be believed, increasing numbers of his own party do not accept his analysis
Mr. Bill Walker
How many?
Mr. Campbell
Sir Russell Fairgrieve, who is a former chairman of the Conservative party in Scotland.
I cannot imagine that, as Sir Russell was granted that post, he is regarded as anything other than a man with eminently good sense.
Others include Councillor Brian Meek, Mr. Struan Stevenson, Councillor Christine Richards and Mr. Arthur Bell, who I know is a particular favourite of the Under-Secretary of State.
Those are all prominent Scottish Conservatives who have made it clear that they believe that the Conservative party should have joined, and even now should still join, the Scottish Constitutional Convention.
It is clear that, in the Conservative and Unionist party in Scotland, there is a substantial measure of support for devolution.
If hon. Members are dissatisfied with my list, I can also cite the example of a distinguished former Member of the House, Mr. Alick Buchanan-Smith, whose principled support of devolution all his political life was, among many other factors, a proper mark of his integrity and desire to see the best government for Scotland.
At the centre of this argument is the question whether a Parliament should have the right to be responsible for revenue.
The Government's position is that a tax-raising power in the technical sense inevitably means that taxes will be raised.
That is a proposition without logic, because the power contained in the Bill is a power to vary income tax: it may be raised or it may be lowered depending on the political judgment of those who form the majority in a Scottish Parliament.
The Government's arguments do not, however, deal with the question that runs as follows: if the Parliament in Scotland decided to raise taxation, would it not be entitled so to do if a majority in favour of that existed?
Similarly, if it chose to reduce taxation, that too would be democratically justified.
Is not the responsibility of determining the level of revenue, at least within a variation, precisely what is needed to make a Parliament responsible?
The noble Lord Home certainly thought so in 1979.
Was he right then when he told the people of Scotland,’ Don't vote for the proposals of the Labour party because they do not contain any responsibility for raising revenue.
Reject them, and we in the Conservative party will bring you a better scheme’?
We have waited for some time for any scheme, let alone one that would justify being called better than the proposals of 1979.
It is to these important matters that the people to whom I have already referred — distinguished members of the Conservative and Unionist party in Scotland — are already turning their minds, away from the implacable nature of the Secretary of State's response.
There are other straws in the wind.
At a not-much-reported occasion in north Berwick last Friday night, the right hon. and learned Member for Pentlands made a speech of an accomplished delphic nature in which he said that, if change were to be allowed, independence would be the least advantageous change.
I have no doubt that were he here today he would tell us that he was merely offering the hypothesis as a basis for argument; but bearing in mind that the right hon. and learned Gentleman is the author of the words that I uttered a moment or two ago in support of the analysis of the historical nature of the government of Scotland, the Government should certainly take some account of this further straw in the wind.
Mr. Bowis
If Scotland were to have a Parliament with tax-raising powers, it could of course raise taxes that it wanted to raise, but the people of Scotland should be aware that there would then be no capping and no one to protect them from excessive expenditure decided by Strathclyde or Lothian.
The point about the cost of the measure and the additional tax that will be needed relates to present circumstances.
Scotland receives 25 per cent.
more per head from United Kingdom taxation than the rest of the United Kingdom, so unless England, of its benevolence, gave more tax revenues to Scotland there would have to be a 5p increase in tax just to stand still.
These are not my figures; they were recently published in the Scottish newspapers, including the non-Conservative Daily Record.
Mr. Campbell
That of course assumes that everything spent on transport in England is a national cost and that the policing of London is a national cost, but we say that once we settle down and allocate the nature of expenditure as between the two countries, disallowing the cost of running the southern region of the railways as a United Kingdom expense, it is perfectly clear, as the Scottish newspapers have often demonstrated under the heading’ Scotching the Myth’— Scottish Television has demonstrated the same in a programme of the same name — that there is no question of Scotland being subsidised in the way that the hon. Gentleman suggests.
If that is the hon. Gentleman's anxiety, he has not read the Bill.
The Bill provides that a Scottish Parliament would have the right to vary upwards or downwards from the United Kingdom's established level of personal income tax.
It could act in that regard only and in none other— no alteration of VAT, no alteration in corporation tax, only alterations in personal income tax.
While people in Scotland are flattered that in Battersea they think of nothing else but the protection of the people of Scotland from excessive expenditure, I fancy that the people of Scotland are mature enough to elect or to refuse to re-elect Governments who do not conduct taxation affairs in the way in which they wish.
If the hon. Gentleman is concerned about the position of his party in Scotland, he should have regard to the fact that, at the 1987 general election, the city of Glasgow returned 11 Labour Members of Parliament.
However, 25 per cent.
of those who voted in Glasgow voted Conservative.
Therefore, the first-past-the-post system ensures that a Conservative voter living in Glagow has no representative in Westminster.
If we had proportional representation, the Conservative party would find itself with rather more influence in a Parliament in Scotland than it has here.
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
Is the hon. and learned Gentleman aware that not one Member of Parliament from the Scottish National party is present, although I am sure that, in common with everyone else in Scotland, we shall be challenged by it to hear statements about its separatist policies?
The hon. and learned Gentleman will agree that SNP Members of Parliament should be here today to debate this honourable Bill.
Furthermore, they have taken no part in the great debate in the Scottish Constitutional Convention, although there is still a seat available for that party.
Mr. Campbell
I can confirm as a matter of fact that the Scottish National party did not join the convention, although some distinguished individuals, no doubt at some political disadvantage to themselves, were prepared to do so.
I can confirm that there is no SNP Member of Parliament present to hear this debate today.
Whatever the progress of my Bill, one thing is clear beyond doubt.
After the forthcoming general election, the constitutional position in Scotland will be reviewed, whatever the composition of the Government.
It is clear that the present arrangements will not survive.
My Bill is an attempt to satisfy the needs of the people of Scotland, and it is designed to open the door to the necessary constitutional reform for the rest of the United Kingdom.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Allan Stewart)
I congratulate the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East (Mr. Campbell) on his good fortune in the private Members' ballot.
Given the number that he drew in the ballot, it was not certain that he would have the chance of a debate on his Bill, but he has had that opportunity and has spoken with his customary mellifluence.
Some of his expressions of outrage were a little overdone.
I do not believe that the people of Scotland are up in arms over the fact that my hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, North-East (Mr. Kirkhope) is, among his many other duties, the Scottish Whip.
I have not noticed many placards complaining about that bedecking the streets of Edinburgh or Glasgow.
Mr. Bill Walker
Will my hon. Friend reflect on the mirror image of those charges, when one looks at the Liberal Democrat and Labour party Front-Bench spokesmen to see how many come from Scottish constituencies and frequently and regularly speak on purely English matters?
Mr. Stewart
My hon. Friend is right.
The hon. Member for Edinburgh, South (Mr. Griffiths) has just spoken in a debate on a United Kingdom Bill and is entirely entitled to do so.
I am glad to note that the hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) is with us.
I noted, after the recent widely publicised opinion poll in Scotland showing that 50 per cent.
of the Scottish electorate favoured independence, that he was quoted on television and in the press as saying that a Scottish Parliament would be a first step.
The first question before the House today, therefore, is whether his hon. and learned Friend's Bill is a first step.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
Does the hon. Gentleman accept that if the majority of the people of Scotland vote for independence, they should be entitled to have it?
That appears to be the position of his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland.
What my hon. Friend the Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) said was entirely consistent with that.
Mr. Stewart
The hon. Member for Gordon said that a Scottish Parliament would be a first step towards independence.
If I misunderstood him, the hon. Gentleman will no doubt correct me.
The hon. and learned Member referred to opinion polls.
Is it not surprising that after several years of unremitting devolutionist propaganda from the Scottish Constitutional Convention, support for devolution is almost at an all-time low, according to the opinion polls?
Mr. Bowis
The point that my hon. Friend has just made might explain why, if there is uncertainty in Scotland, there is also uncertainty among Scottish Liberal party members.
That may explain why, although 10 Scottish Liberal Members of Parliament appear as sponsors on the face of the Bill, only three have managed to turn up today.
Mr. Stewart
My hon. Friend is arithmetically correct.
That proportion is, however, rather greater than the proportion of Scottish National party Members or, for that matter, Labour Members who are here.
I see that Scottish Labour Back Benchers are heavily represented by the hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde (Mr. Graham) who is listening with his customary attention to my remarks.
May I return to the point made by the hon. and learned Member about the views of certain members of my party.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Edinburgh, Pentlands (Mr. Rifkind) has made it unequivocally clear over a long period of years that he is wholly opposed to unilateral devolution, which is what the Bill proposes.
I hope that the hon. and learned Member forgave me when I chortled happily when he read out the names of about four members of the Scottish Conservative party who are in favour of this assembly.
According to the press, the vote at the Scottish Conservative party conference in 1988 at Perth was about 600 to 12, the 12 being in favour of devolution, one of whom, I happen to know, voted that way simply because he was sorry for the minority.
That leaves 11.
Those 11 votes include the names of the persons to whom the hon. and learned Friend referred.
I do not deny for a moment that about 0.01 per cent.
of Scottish Conservative party members have always taken that view.
Mr. Bill Walker
Will my hon. Friend also note that, unlike the Liberal party, whose individual members have held this view for a long time, what is most interesting is the view held by senior members of the Liberal Democrat party in Scotland who are now calling for separatism?
Mr. Menzies Campbell
Not true.
Mr. Stewart
The hon. and learned Member says that that is not true.
Like him, I do not necessarily automatically accept everything that is stated in Scottish newspapers.
Those Liberal Democrats, whom I saw quoted as being in favour of the Scottish National party's position, will no doubt clarify their position in due course.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
May I bring the Minister back to the tiny proportion of Scottish Conservatives who, he claims, support any form of devolution?
Does he rule out any constitutional change?
If not, what is the Conservative party contemplating?
Mr. Allan Stewart
I can make the position absolutely clear.
As my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has said, the Union is not set in concrete; it has changed over time, but, broadly speaking, we favour the current constitutional arrangements.
There has been some administrative devolution, to which the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East referred.
The Conservative and Unionist party will fight the next general election as the party of the Union.
Mr. Graham
I am glad to see that the Minister is fine and fit, because it was reported that he was ill.
Does not the hon. Gentleman recognise that opinion poll after opinion poll in Scotland has shown support for the quest of the Scottish Constitutional Convention for a Scottish Parliament?
The recent survey showing that 50 per cent.
of Scottish people want independence resulted from the Government's decimation of the Scottish industrial base, such as Ravenscraig, Armitage Shanks, which is in the Minister's constituency, and the litany of factory closures and job losses and from increasing poverty in Scotland.
People are angry and are pitching hard because of the polarisation of the debate between the status quo or independence.
The people of Scotland have proved for years that they support an assembly.
Why will not the Minister take part in that debate?
Mr. Stewart
May I make two points in reply to the hon. Gentleman?
First, the much-publicised recent opinion poll showed that 70 per cent.
of Scottish people oppose the proposals of the Scottish Constitutional Convention.
They favoured either independence or the status quo.
Secondly, of course it is true, and it always has been, that if people are asked,’ Do you think that a Scottish assembly or a Scottish Parliament is a good idea?’, most tend to give a positive response.
That was true before the last referendum in 1979.
When people are faced not with broad philosophy but a specific choice, opinion changes markedly.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce (Gordon)
The Secretary of State said that if the majority of Members elected from Scotland were Scottish National party Members, the Government would regard that as a vote for independence and accept it.
If after the next election there is a clear majority of Members committed to reforming the United Kingdom and creating a Parliament for Scotland within the United Kingdom, will the Conservative party accept the verdict of the people of Scotland?
Mr. Stewart
The reform of the United Kingdom Parliament, as the hon. Member refers to it, will take place if there is a majority within the United Kingdom Parliament for that reform.
The hon. Member must recognise that England is a partner in the Act of Union.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce
We can have independence but not reform.
Mr. Stewart
What I am saying is perfectly clear and straightforward.
If a party obtains a majority in the House on a programme of reform, it will endeavour to pass legislation through the House.
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
The Minister should clarify the important point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce).
It is obvious, by the very nature of things, that the Scottish National party could win all 72 seats in Scotland and not have a majority in the House.
At what point does he think that there is a majority for independence, and at what point is there a majority for reform in the United Kingdom?
Mr. Stewart
I think that there is a majority for what the hon. Gentleman refers to as reform within the United Kingdom when that case commands a majority in the House.
It is as simple as that.
— The hon. Gentleman is making the political point that if the SNP had 72 Scottish Members of Parliament as he posits, sovereignty would remain with the House, but the House would conclude that the Act of Union was no longer sustainable.
However, the ultimate decision would have to rest with the House — that is clear.
Interruption
I shall deal now with some of the detailed aspects of the Bill.
As I said in answer to the hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde, it is always the case that the more one considers the details of specific proposals, the more problems arise.
That has always been the case and remains so, and it is true of the Bill.
My hon. Friend the Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) asked the fairly obvious question about the role of the Secretary of State — would there be one?
Would he be responsible only for Scotland?
Would he be of Cabinet rank?
The hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde is clear about the answer, but the rest of the Opposition do not agree with him.
He is clear, I think, that there would not be a Secretary of State for Scotland, but that is not the Labour party's view.
Already, on that simple and straightforward question raised by my hon. Friend, the so-called united front on devolution has fallen apart fairly quickly.
— The hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde said something from a sedentary position which I did not catch.
Interruption
Mr. Graham
The Minister asserted that the devolution scenario has fallen flat, but that is absolutely untrue.
The massive majority of people in Scotland have a clear desire for a devolved Parliament in Scotland.
The Minister should test that.
Mr. Stewart
I had hoped that the hon. Gentleman was going to say whether he was in favour of the Liberal Democrats' position that there should not be a Secretary of State and on Labour's position that there should be.
Mr. Graham
That is not important.
Mr. Dalyell
On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
I think that it is within the knowledge of some hon. Members that a tragic explosion has taken place in the dock at Grangemouth.
Up to eight people are missing and others have severe burns.
I think that the Scottish Office industry Minister is aware of the incident.
I wonder whether it would be appropriate for the Government to make a statement at some stage this evening, at the Government's choosing.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
The Treasury Bench has heard what the hon. Gentleman said.
I cannot take the matter any further at this stage, other than to say that no request has been received, as yet, for a statement to be made.
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
Earlier, the hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) appealed to the press to use some discretion in its coverage of tonight's debate on the ground that scenes from the Piper Alpha incident inevitably would be harrowing for the relatives of those involved.
That is true, and many of my constituents are in that position.
However, it is most important that there is coverage of tonight's debate because the most pressing danger is that of complacency creeping into both the activities of the offshore industry and our proceedings tonight.
It is not without significance that throughout the debate there have never been more than half a dozen hon. Members on either side of the House.
As was said earlier, since the Piper Alpha incident there has been a succession of serious incidents in the North sea, although obviously not on the same scale as Piper Alpha.
Nevertheless, they have been potentially major incidents.
The statistics for’ dangerous occurrences’show that they have been increasing during the past few years — so there is no ground for complacency.
An industry that deals with petroleum products tends, by its nature, to be inherently dangerous.
As the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) said, news is coming through about a serious incident in Grangemouth tonight.
I join with the hon. Gentleman in saying that we would appreciate a statement to Scottish Members at some point.
The North sea industry is also inherently dangerous and there can be no complacency in the safety regime that we are imposing upon it.
There is a danger that, three and a half years after the Piper Alpha tragedy, some of the scenes — although etched on the memory — are fading from front-line political significance.
If we judge the commitment to offshore safety by the amount of money that is spent on it, it would be a strong indictment of the level of concern of this House and of the Government.
During the 1980s, only a tiny fraction of 1 per cent.
of Government revenue from the North sea was spent on implementing and enforcing the safety regime in the North sea.
Even on the increased expenditure levels expected by 1994-95, it is probable that only 1 per cent.
of Government revenue will be expended on enforcing the new, beefed-up safety regime in the North sea.
If we project that against total revenues expected in that year, it amounts to about one single day of revenue being allocated to the budget to implement the safety regime in the North sea.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
I apologise to the hon. Member for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond) for interrupting his speech.
I refer to the serious incident in my constituency.
I am grateful to my hon. Friend the Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) for raising with you, Madam Deputy Speaker, the question whether a Government statement can be made later tonight.
I have been in contact with the authorities, and particularly with the police in my constituency, who have been as helpful as they can in all the circumstances.
Obviously, the emergency services are run off their feet.
I hope that it will be possible — though I shall understand if it is not — for a Minister to come to the House to say something about that major incident, which involved the jetty at Grangemouth, which is part of the dock and BP complex.
Madam Deputy Speaker: As the hon. Gentleman knows, the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) raised a point of order on that matter a few moments ago — but as the hon. Member for Falkirk, East represents the constituency concerned, it is understandable that he wants to raise it again, and in a most helpful manner.
I repeat that, at this stage, Mr. Speaker's Office has not been informed that a Minister wants to make a statement.
One may come later — we must wait and see.
Mr. Salmond
A number of right hon. and hon. Members' constituencies include major petroleum production facilities, so I am sure that we all share the concern and anxiety felt by the hon. Member for Falkirk, East (Mr. Ewing).
A statement would be appreciated by right hon. and hon. Members in all parts of the House.
I was making the point that if we judge concern for safety by the money spent on it, then by any measurement or definition, it is a sad indictment of the official concern expressed in the 1980s.
A mere fraction of North sea revenues is to be spent on enforcing the safety regime.
When the Select Committee on Energy took evidence, many oil companies said that a huge amount is currently being expended on safety.
The Committee was given a figure for new safety expenditure arising from the Cullen report of £850 million, perhaps rising even to £5,000 million over the next 10 to 15 years.
Later evidence established that 70 to 80 per cent.
of that expenditure will come from the Exchequer through offsets against petroleum revenue taxation.
We are talking not about an industry in decline — no matter what some right hon. and hon. Members may think — but about one in which oil and gas production will rise from more than 2 million barrels a day now to a new peak of almost 3 million barrels a day by the end of the century.
There will be many more production platforms established as smaller accumulations are identified and exploited in the North sea.
Because of that, the cost of supervising and enforcing even the new goal-related safety regime will be higher.
I am not convinced that, even on the projected budget for the mid-1990s, the budgetary emphasis on safety can yet be considered adequate.
The Bill's provisions are not controversial.
It has widespread support in the House as far as it goes, but missing is legislation to protect against victimisation.
With respect to the Secretary of State, I believe that most right hon. and hon. Members found very unconvincing his explanation as to why such a provision could not form part of the Bill.
That goes hand-in-hand with the case made for trade union involvement in oil and gas industry activities.
Lord Cullen believed that his remit did not allow him to move too far into the question of labour relations, and said so in paragraph 21.83 of his report.
However, even given that restriction, the report gave more than a nod and a wink in the direction of the collective security that trade unions could provide if they nominated members of safety committees.
As a member of the Select Committee, I was extremely concerned when Mr. Rimington, Director General of the Health and Safety Executive, revealed in his evidence that he had not been aware of the restrictions that Lord Cullen felt had been placed upon him in respect of investigating labour relations.
Lord Cullen's point that trade union involvement gives an enhanced feeling of collective security to offshore employees is one that should be widely recognised.
I am not necessarily holding any brief for some of the activities of certain unions with members working in the North sea.
My own view is that, with one honourable exception in the Manufacturing Science Finance union, most of the unions involved in the North sea have not always represented their members effectively, and part of the present response made by the offshore industry liaison committee on moving to trade union status is a reaction to that situation.
None the less, all Select Committee members felt some frustration in trying to identify which procedures would allow offshore workers to apply for trade union recognition, and enforce the general wish for union recognition upon employers.
We have received no convincing answers either from UKOOA or the Government as to the procedure that needs to be observed to ensure that offshore workers not only enjoy the right to be trade union members but can have their trade unions recognised by their employers.
In conjunction with the hon. Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion), as a member of the Select Committee, I visited a BP platform.
The company extended good facilities to speak to its employees and to members of the platform's safety committee in private.
A number of issues arose that emphasised the difficulties that safety committees encounter because of the absence of trade union representation.
It should be said that the platform in question was a good, functioning platform, and the safety committee was in general happy with its work and remit, and with the employer's response.
However, the committee pointed out that in the absence of trade union involvement, it often found itself faced with broader issues of terms and conditions.
The committee was becoming caught up in issues that did not fall within its remit.
That is another argument for the clarification of how offshore workers should go about securing trade union rights and recognition.
Dr. Godman
The confusion to which the hon. Gentleman refers does not exist at any of the BP refineries that I have visited.
Mr. Salmond
Yes, I am sure that is so.
The Select Committee made the point that, if onshore workers have certain rights, offshore workers should, all the more so, enjoy the same rights.
No convincing reason has been given for treating onshore and offshore workers differently — often by the same company.
Mr. Robert Hughes
Is the hon. Member aware that the companies argue that responsibility lies not with them but with their contractors?
We pointed out to the companies that they let the contracts, and could therefore require trade union representation as a condition of awarding them.
Mr. Salmond
I agree.
It is similarly unconvincing for UKOOA to say that it is not within its remit to consider trade union or labour relations when the Select Committee was presented with a previous UKOOA agreement and understanding dating from the 1970s, which dealt with exactly these points.
Unfortunately, it was never implemented.
As to discrimination, we are not necessarily talking about someone being fired, sacked, or NRB'd.
There are many more subtler forms of exerting pressure and discrimination.
An employee might believe that his promotion prospects hung on the extent of his activity in pushing for trade union recognition or safety provision.
An offshore worker has presented me with a detailed file containing his experiences as a safety representative.
I shall not mention his name, for obvious reasons, but his case is now being considered by the HSE.
As is well documented in the case evidence, that worker was not suddenly sacked but was transferred to another platform without reasonable cause.
When unhappy circumstances befell him, he was treated differently from other employees in the same circumstances.
He believes that the subtle discrimination practised on him resulted from his active role in a North sea safety committee.
Whatever Conservative Members may believe, I can assure them that there is a climate of fear among offshore workers who believe — rightly or wrongly, but I think rightly — that many employees are subject to discrimination because companies or contractors consider that they have placed too much emphasis on safety matters.
Another notable example relates specifically to some of the points made in the case study to which I have just referred.
When Shell and UKOOA — representing all the major companies — appeared before the Select Committee, they were astonished that anyone should suggest that they, as operators of various North sea fields, could not be approached by any employee, regardless of whether that person was employed directly by a company or employed by a contractor.
As the hon. Member for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) has pointed out, about a quarter of offshore workers are employed by the major companies, while the remaining three quarters work for contractors.
It is clear, however, that in this case the contracting company felt extremely nervous when it found that representatives of a safety committee had gone straight from the employer to the ultimate operator in the field.
Its anxiety and the pressure that was placed on the safety committee representatives speak volumes: they reveal that not everyone is treated equally in the North sea, and that, on some North sea installations, there is still a marked divergence between the recourse available to those working for the operator and that accorded to those working for contracting companies.
My final point relates to the penalties that will be employed when North sea workers are eventually given some sort of legislative protection against victimisation.
When I asked earlier what those penalties might be, I was fobbed off with the answer that the matter would be referred to the industrial tribunal, and that the worker involved might receive some form of compensation.
Perhaps, if Ministers are preparing legislation, they will take note of my view.
I believe that, if it is established through a proper investigation that a company has been victimising workers for reporting safety concerns, that company — whether it is a contractor or an operator — must be in exactly the same position as an employee who has jeopardised the safety of a platform.
Given that such an employee would face dismissal if that were proven, a company should face no less than severe curtailment of its operations across the North sea.
Unless we, as legislators, are prepared to treat such circumstances with that degree of seriousness, rather than allowing fines even in the low thousands to be imposed, we are unlikely to secure the safety culture to which North sea workers are, sadly, not accustomed but are certainly entitled.
Mr. Tam Dalyell (Linlithgow)
I wish to make three points.
First, I believe that I speak for a number of my hon. Friends when I say that we want the Bill to reach the statute book, come what may, in view of the approaching general election, and I hope that it will be given a fair wind.
If it is thought that the politicians have dithered in any way, we shall be slaughtered on the anvil of public opinion and informed opinion in the oil industry.
People will ask,’ Are they more concerned with their politics than with recommendations that must be implemented as a matter of urgency?’
Mr. Robert Hughes
I hope that my hon. Friend will dispel any notion that the Secretary of State may have sought to introduce to the effect that the passage of the Bill would be seriously delayed if we examined the important question of victimisation.
The Bill could, with our support, be amended speedily, and we certainly will not hold it up in any circumstances.
Mr. Dalyell
That brings me to the second issue that I wish to discuss — the question of anonymity, which the Secretary of State mentioned several times in his opening speech.
According to my experience — and, I believe, that of my hon. Friends the Members for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) and for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman), and the hon. Member for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond)— there is no such thing as anonymity.
We find, in our day-to-day constituency work, that if we complain we are asked — quite understandably — to produce more facts: we are asked for the basis of the complaint.
If we give the basis of the complaint, however, it is very easy for employers to look down the list and find out which employee comes from Linlithgow, Greenock and Port Glasgow, Aberdeen, North or Banff and Buchan.
It is not difficult to put two and two together.
I do not say that people’ have it taken out of them’for making a complaint at the time when that complaint is made, but there may be a problem the next time something happens.
The hon. Member for Banff and Buchan mentioned promotion, for instance.
All these things enter into such considerations, and the proverbial black mark may be recorded.
It is very difficult to pursue an issue when it is impossible to produce a detailed case.
Ministers should take on board this message from those of us who speak for people with whom we come into contact in our day-to-day work: something must be done about victimisation, and it must be done quickly.
It cannot be postponed.
I cannot stand here and say,’ You will not get your Bill through unless you do something about victimisation.’
That would be a very empty threat.
I believe, however, that when it is felt almost unanimously in the House of Commons that something should be done — on a’ no-line Whip’— Governments have at least a moral obligation to answer questions properly.
My final question is rather more specific.
It relates to recommendation 57 of the Cullen report.
Let me yet again express the view that Lord Cullen and his staff have produced a document of world-class significance — in, given the circumstances, a remarkably short time.
In view of the time that other reports have taken to produce — I attended day 167 of the Layfield committee inquiry on Sizewell recently — it is enormously to Lord Cullen's credit that he has produced such a detailed and worthwhile document so quickly.
Paragraph 57 says:’ For the purpose of maintaining breathable air within the accommodation, it should be required by regulation that the ventilation air intakes should be provided with smoke and gas detectors and that on smoke or gas alarm the ventilation and dampers should be shut down’.
That refers to paragraphs 19.171 and 19.172.
Paragraph 19.171 states:’ The need for an integrated approach is illustrated by the ventilation system.
It is clearly essential that smoke should not be sucked into the accommodation through the ventilation intakes.
On the other hand, positive pressure maintained by the ventilation system allows the use of air locks to prevent smoke entering through main entrance and evacuation doors.
The power supply for the ventilation system introduces another factor, since it is essential that emergency power to other functions in the accommodation should not be jeopardised.
In short, the ventilation system needs to be thought through to minimise the chance either of its being ineffective or defeated or of its actually making things worse.’
Paragraph 19.172 states:’ There is, however, one specific measure which I am satisfied I should support.
The air intakes of the ventilation system should be provided with hydrocarbon gas and smoke detectors and on alarm the ventilation and dampers should shut down.
I note that the draft fourth edition of the guidance notes to the Construction and Survey Regulations contains provisions on this matter.’
My hon. Friend the Member for Aberdeen, South (Mr. Doran) and other colleagues know what it is to which I refer.
It arises from constituency surgeries.
Very considerable concern has been expressed about the ventilation systems, not least in relation to the lavatories on some of the platforms.
I do not intend to go into too much detail.
The Department knows the precise field to which I refer.
I shall tell the Minister afterwards.
I hope that he will be able to say that great attention is now being given to Lord Cullen's concerns about the ventilation systems.
Mr. Tony Lloyd (Stretford)
This debate, which essentially arises out of the Piper Alpha disaster, has been given even greater poignancy due to the reports that we have received of a major explosion at Grangemouth.
Points of order have been raised, asking for a statement tonight.
The Opposition appreciate, however, that it may be premature for the issue to be raised in Parliament tonight while there is uncertainty.
However, may I ask the Minister to take on board the fact that it would be appropriate for a statement to be made to the House tomorrow.
The debate is important and has led to keen observations being made on both sides of the House.
I repeat what my hon. Friend the Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) said: the Opposition have absolutely no intention of trying to block the Bill.
It is an important Bill even if, as it stands, we believe that it needs to be improved.
It is also important because it arises out of the death of 167 people in 1988 after the Piper Alpha explosion.
It is important, too, because it arises out of Lord Cullen's report which focused on other accidents in the oil industry, and elsewhere, as well as on the Piper Alpha accident.
The Cullen report is widely recognised as one of the most excellent reports that has ever been produced on matters that affect industrial safety.
The report is important because it makes it clear that where safety is not given priority by both management and the regulatory authorities — in this case the Department of Energy and the Government — things begin to go badly awry.
The Minister said earlier today that he hoped it would be accepted that the Government had come to the House in good faith.
However, we judge the Government's good faith in terms of their track record.
In many ways it has considerable weaknesses.
I point to the fact that both the Department of Energy, in its failure to prioritise safety within the oil industry, and more generally the Government, supported by Conservative Members, in their consistent failure throughout the 1980s to provide a framework for safety, contributed to a number of major disasters.
Piper Alpha is significant tonight, but the Herald of Free Enterprise and the King's Cross disasters can be attributed, to a considerable extent, to the Government's failure to give priority to safety.
Faced with the pressure resulting from those disasters, we know that the Government have begun to try to undo some of the damage.
However, the rising level of deaths and serious injuries in industry generally is a matter of great shame to us all, but it is a matter of great shame in particular for those who can be held to be responsible.
There is an enormous cost in terms of both human tragedy and the economic implications, through days lost through sickness and ill health.
The provision of an overall health and safety regime is considerably less today than it once was.
That ought to concern us all.
I hope that the Minister is able to deny newspaper reports about the Government's attitude to safety.
According to those reports, almost incredibly the Government are even now considering the privatisation of the electrical equipment certification service.
That service did a considerable amount of work after the explosions on Piper Alpha.
Since then, the service has been greatly involved in the certification of electrical motors on offshore oil and gas platforms in order to ensure that that area of danger is minimised.
In the light of Government protestations that safety is of the highest order, the idea that that service should be privatised is brought into focus.
Is the Minister in a position to confirm that the Government intend to privatise that important part of the health and safety regime?
If it is true, I repeat that it does not square up with the Government's protestations about their concern for safety.
Safety in the oil industry in general is still far from perfect.
I understand that during the past 12 months there have been three gas leaks, two in the southern sector and one in the northern sector.
The leaks had great similarities with Piper Alpha.
Thankfully, they did not lead to the same tragic results.
We know that the Government still justify regulation dispensations for the oil industry.
I refer to a parliamentary answer that was given to me by the Under-Secretary of State for Employment, the hon. Member for Mid-Worcestershire (Mr. Forth).
I asked under what circumstances dispensations from the health and safety regulations were given by the Department to offshore oil companies.
The Minister replied:’ Each application is carefully considered and only granted subject to equivalent or higher alternative safety arrangements being in place.’
North sea operators are given dispensations, not only when there are equivalent or higher alternative arrangements in place but in some cases when it is well known to the authorities that the platforms are operating at a level that would not be allowed if they were completely new platforms.
I refer the Minister to the specific case of the Amoco Montrose platform — now, thankfully, closed — which was given dispensation for nine years although it was known that the accommodation facilities did not meet the fire regulation standards that apply to platforms.
However, it had been built when the new fire regulations had been well trailed.
We cannot accept seriously the argument that an overwhelming case can be made that the Government regard safety as a matter of the greatest priority.
The most important single factor in terms of the Cullen report and the Bill is, inevitably, the movement of responsibility for health and safety in the oil industry to the Health and Safety Executive.
We welcome that.
It is right and proper that there should be one regulatory agency.
Furthermore, it finally resolves the conflict between the Department of Energy, as the producer Department, and the Department of Energy as the Department that is responsible for monitoring safety.
I draw the attention of the House and of Ministers to the fact that in that context it seems to make no sense whatsoever that one regulatory authority responsible for safety — the maritime inspectorate — should still remain within the Department of Transport.
I hope that the Ministers will seriously consider that the time has come to tidy up that particular aspect of health and safety.
One of the Cullen report's most important contributions to safety has been the development of the concept of a safety case.
That is widely accepted by all those involved in health and safety both in Britain and throughout the world.
The hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) made an important point when he referred to the need for health and safety to be designed in from the beginning.
It is quite obvious that in many cases health and safety cannot be bolted on, as an afterthought, to the basic design.
That is why the concept of the safety case — a case going back to the very essentials of design — is so important.
I want to put a specific question to the Minister.
It is clear that, in the development of the safety case regime, time is of the essence.
I hope that that is accepted on both sides of the House.
We recognise the complexity of the situation and the fact that there is a shortage of skills, so we make no criticism of the time that this process has taken.
It is to be hoped that everything possible is being done to bring forward the safety regime as quickly as possible.
It is likely that outside consultants will be employed by the Health and Safety Executive.
If so, a conflict may well arise between the work of the consultants in their capacity as testers of design for the private operators and what they do for the HSE to determine whether the safety case is well established.
It is not a conflict which will lead inevitably to problems, but it should be recognised at an early stage and rectified by the Government.
The safety case regime in the North sea is based to a considerable extent on the CIMAH regulations — the major accident hazard regulations as applied to industry on land.
At present, only 18 people in the Health and Safety Executive are working on those regulations, and even though the provisions have been in operation for about two and a half years, fewer than one third of the safety cases have been accepted as being proper working documents.
We welcome the emphasis on safety in the North sea, but we expect a parallel prioritisation of the extremely dangerous potential accident sites onshore, and we expect to see an improvement in that situation.
In the Cullen report and in the House today we have witnessed an important debate about the role of safety representatives.
It will come as no surprise to the Minister to hear that we have always taken the view that safety representatives are at their best when backed by a trade union, of whose resources and training they are able to take advantage.
If I pursue this issue, the Minister will refer me, as the Secretary of State referred the Select Committee, to the current review of the safety representatives and of the safety committee regulations.
While I accept that, I have to say that we expect those undertaking the review to have complete power to look into all areas and, specifically, to consider whether safety representatives who are not backed by a trade union are in a position to give the same kind of expert advice as would be expected from safety representatives appointed by a trade union.
If the review is to command the support of all sides of industry it must be seen as being thorough and in-depth.
Otherwise it will be flawed.
It would be helpful if the Minister could indicate when the whole review process is likely to be completed.
It seems that matters have fallen behind schedule and need to be put back on the rails.
Many issues have been raised in this debate.
Obviously victimisation is a very relevant matter, about which my hon. Friend the Member for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) made a number of important points.
I do not want to go over that ground again; suffice it to say that we accept the Secretary of State's assurance that the Government are making a genuine effort to find a mechanism to implement Lord Cullen's recommendation 30.
The Select Committee drew attention to the under-reporting of accidents in the oil industry.
Clearly, part of that under-reporting comes down to the fear of victimisation.
Surely there can no longer be any argument about the fact that the RIDDOR regulations, which make compulsory the reporting of all serious onshore accidents, should be applied directly offshore or be paralleled by the introduction of equivalent offshore regulations.
The House would welcome a statement that the Government intended to pursue that line.
Another important area in terms of safety in the offshore industry is the COSHH regulations, which all parties in this House claim is one of the great steps forward in health and safety provision in this country.
Of course, the COSHH regulations do not apply offshore, and the Minister ought to consider whether it is time to provide such protection for those who work in the offshore industry.
We shall save for the Committee stage the debate about the level of penalties that are appropriate under the Bill.
It is important that we accept that the central thrust of the measure is about the offshore industry.
The Bill arises very much out of the Piper Alpha incident.
Many lives were lost in that incident, and we have an obligation to the 30,000-odd people working in the industry, as well as those who lost loved ones in the tragedy.
We must provide a framework for an enduring safety regime for the offshore industry.
We intend to ensure that the Bill passes speedily.
In no circumstances shall we frustrate its progress.
On that basis I hope that we can look to the Government to ensure that recommendation 30 of the Cullen report is implemented simultaneously.
That is a matter of great importance.
If we can have such an assurance we shall be able, for once, to say that the Bill has bipartisan support.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
This has been a serious and well-informed debate, arising, as many hon. Members have said, from one of the most serious and tragic accidents that we have experienced in our generation.
Hon.
Members on both sides, particularly those whose constituents were most directly affected, have made valuble contributions to the debate.
Indeed, we have seen the House at its best.
With regard to the incident at Grangemouth, to which two or three hon. Members have referred, I should say that we are receiving information almost by the minute.
Indeed, the situation changes every time we receive further word.
The location and seriousness of the incident are still in some doubt.
I am sure that one of my ministerial colleagues will want to inform the House tomorrow.
Health and Safety Executive inspectors are already on their way to the scene.
I hope that Opposition Members accept that were we to attempt a rushed account this evening it would of necessity be incomplete.
I am sure that hon. Members would prefer to hear a more considered account tomorrow.
It is such an account that my colleagues would prefer to give.
I hope that that is acceptable to all hon. Members.
In the time available to me I shall answer as many as possible of the points that have been raised.
If I should miss any, I shall write to the hon. Members concerned as soon as possible — if possible, before the commencement of the Committee stage so that any information that I can give may be used in Committee.
At a very early stage the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) raised the question of resources.
I can tell the hon. Gentleman that the offshore safety division is a separate, discrete, independent division of the Health and Safety Executive.
All the posts in it are additional.
There have been some temporary secondments to ensure that the division is staffed as effectively as possible and that the experience available is as approprite as may be.
However, the officers are all additional.
To date, 84 are in post, and 51 offers of posts have been made.
So we are well on the way to achieving the recruitment targets that have been set with a view to making the decision as effective as possible.
Clause 5 was commented on by the hon. Member for Sedgefield and by my hon. Friend the Member for Waveney (Mr. Porter).
I wish to make it clear that it is a safety net clause which follows on similar provisions made for the telecommunications, electricity and water industries.
Experience has taught us that it has not been necessary to invoke the similar or parallel provisions made for those industries.
It is not envisaged that we would have to use them for the offshore industry, but the provisions provide a safety net.
We see no conflict between security and safety.
The hon. Member for Sedgefield questioned the commercially sensitive nature of the provision.
There will be no compromise between safety and commercial motivation, but occasionally the divulging of information might be commercially damaging to the business involved.
I do not think that anyone would believe that that was either necessary or sensible.
Therefore, there is no conflict between commercial viability or motivation and safety, but we believe that the security of the installations and of those who work in them should be a legitimate purpose of the Bill and the provisions in clause 5.
I hope that all hon. Members will accept that that is the motivation behind the clause; it is a last resort provision which we hope will not be required.
I shall try to allay hon. Members' understandable anxieties about the subject of victimisation.
I shall not mention each one individually, but almost all contributors to the debate have touched on the issue and made no secret of their concern.
Indeed, they made the extent of their anxiety explicitly clear.
I regret that there was some suspicion in the minds of Opposition Members.
It is important to make it clear that, within the existing regime, if a safety representative has been victimised to the point of being unable to carry out his functions as a safety representative, the installation operator and owner would be in breach of the Offshore Installations (Safety Representatives and Safety Committees)
Regulations 1989.
In that case, enforcement action could be taken under that provision.
If safety standards are threatened by the alleged or actual act of victimisation, offshore safety division inspectors have the powers, under the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act, to issue improvement and prohibition notices.
They have further powers, under the Mineral Workings Acts, to require improvements to be made or an activity to be stopped.
In that sense, powers exist to cover that issue.
Mr. Dalyell
How often have those powers been used?
Mr. Forth
From memory, I believe that six incidents have been reported in the past year.
A number of investigations have been made by the Health and Safety Executive.
As has been mentioned, one problem is that, when such cases have gone to tribunal, there has not been an overwhelming success —
Mr. Dalyell
Of course.
Mr. Forth
The hon. Gentleman says,’ Of course’.
The hon. Members for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) and for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond) spent some time describing in detail cases with which they were familiar.
As tribunals are totally independent of Government and are judicial organisations, they must have the power — and the House must respect that power — to investigate such matters and come to a conclusion.
It is a bit unfair of Opposition Members to ask Ministers to make judgments on or second guess what tribunals do.
That cannot be our role.
Mr. Salmond
The Minister is always making the case there there is no need for legislative change.
I hope that he will veer away from that argument and say why legislative change is needed.
If he were a safety representative on a platform and, without explanation, he were transferred to another platform run by the same operator or service company, how would an industrial tribunal or any other organisation be able to prove that the reason for his transfer was that he was making a nuisance of himself over safety matters?
How does the Minister intend to deal with that?
Mr. Forth
That constraint would apply to almost any regime.
The hon. Gentleman is unfair to claim that we have said that we shall not take action.
My right hon. and learned Friend has said more than once, and I have repeated it, that it is the Government's avowed intention to deal with that subject.
However, we want to take the right action, and to do so properly and comprehensively.
Our view, and the advice given us, is that the Bill does not represent a suitable way to deal with that problem.
We share the desire of the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) to get the Bill on the statute book before any interruptions caused by imminent events.
In order to do so, given the stage that the Bill has reached, it would be risky to start seeking to extend its scope or coverage, play with the long or short titles or introduce new sectors in the Bill, for whatever reason.
Not only would there be great procedural difficulties in doing so, but there would be political difficulties.
We want to guide the Bill through all its stages and for it to be properly scrutinised in Committee.
With the help of Opposition Members, who have generously said that they will help, we hope to see the Bill on the statute book as soon as possible.
I do not want to do anything to jeopardise that process.
Therefore, my right hon. and learned Friend has given an undertaking that we shall proceed with legislation as soon as it is reasonable to do so, but the Bill is not the appropriate way.
Mr. Robert Hughes
I took the opportunity in the interval between speaking and listening to the Minister's wind-up to consult’ Erskine May’on the subject of changing Bills' titles.
’ Erskine May’states clearly that amendments may be made in Committee even if they are not within the Bill's scope according to the long title.
Thereafter, once the Bill is amended, the long title may be changed, but only to take account of the amendments that have been made.
Therefore, I believe that we can square the circle and there is no reason to say that, by widening the scope of the Bill's long title, it would open the issue so much that the Bill's progress to Report would be unnecessarily delayed.
Mr. Forth
I have not been in the House as long as the hon. Gentleman and I defer to his experience.
In addition, I have not had the opportunity to read’ Erskine May’during the debate, as I was listening attentively to contributors.
However, what the hon. Gentleman says is a new one on me, if I may put it as basically as that.
I have always been led to believe that we must pay due regard to a Bill's title.
If what the hon. Gentleman has just said is true, surely it would mean that any Bill could be amended in almost any way in Committee, and one could subsequently play around with its title in order to accommodate the amendments.
That does not accord with my experience, however brief, in the House or in Committee.
Mr. Robert Hughes rose
Mr. Forth
I do not want to get bogged down in that subject as I want to press on and try to answer questions asked.
Mr. Hughes
I hope that I did not give the impression that a Bill could be amended in any way at all as that is not so.
It can be amended even in a way not covered under the Bill's title if the amendment is connected with the Bill's purpose.
However, I think it is Standing Order No. 62(b) which states that a Committee can amend a Bill and change the long title for that purpose.
If the Minister checks’ Erskine May’, which I can gladly provide for him, I believe that we can reach common ground on this if there is the will to do so.
Mr. Forth
I shall certainly look at that, but this is exactly the sort of issue in which I do not want us to get involved.
What we must do — until today there has been a broad measure of agreement on this — is to try to focus attention on the Bill's aims and motivations.
We must ensure that it makes proper progress through the House, receives proper scrutiny and is on the statute book before any rude interruptions.
I fear that if we are tempted to act as Opposition Members are trying to tempt me to do now, we might jeopardise the Bill's progress.
I accept the offer of the hon. Member for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) as given in good faith, but there are 646 hon. Members — I exclude you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and your colleagues for this purpose — and we cannot necessarily rely on them all to show such restraint and singlemindedness as the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
May I press the Minister on the assurances given by the Secretary of State?
I hope that the Minister is not back-tracking on them because we would take a dim view of that.
I suggest that the Minister talks to his departmental officials at the earliest opportunity to find out whether my hon. Friend the Member for Aberdeen, North (Mr. Hughes) is right.
I give the Minister the assurance that, as we have already said, we have no intention of frustrating the Bill.
If any strange event were to take place, the Bill would be given the quickest journey through the House and, I hope, through the other place.
There is no question of any hon. Member trying to frustrate the Bill.
I urge the Minister to consider seriously whether the suggestion of my hon. Friend the Member for Aberdeen, North is possible.
Mr. Forth
I accept the hon. Gentleman's offer on the basis on which it was made.
The hon. Gentleman knows that it would be more than my job was worth to attempt to go back on undertakings given by my right hon. and learned Friend.
He can be certain that that will not happen.
I hope that Opposition Members will accept in good faith the undertakings given by my right hon. and learned Friend and myself and that they will accept that we seek to find the best possible way forward to meet the important points about victimisation.
We do not dissent from the arguments of substance which have been made, but we ask Opposition Members to allow us to deal with the matter in the most effective way available to us.
The hon. Member for Sedgefield raised an important point about why there had been no prosecutions following Piper Alpha.
As he is an expert on such matters, the hon. Gentleman knows better than I that public prosecutions in Scotland are a matter for the Lord Advocate.
He decided in the Piper Alpha case that there was insufficient evidence to establish beyond reasonable doubt whether there was any criminal responsibility for the disaster.
Applying the ordinary standard of proof in civil cases to the evidence presented at the public inquiry, there had to be proof on the balance of probabilities.
Regrettably and tragically, there was no direct evidence in the Piper Alpha case because little equipment was recovered and many of the key people involved tragically lost their lives in the accident.
No new evidence came to light after the disaster, so the burden of proof was dependent on inference.
The view was taken that a successful criminal prosecution required evidence to establish beyond reasonable doubt the cause of the disaster and that evidence simply was not available.
Mr. Frank Doran (Aberdeen, South)
As a Scottish lawyer, may I make the simple point that the Lord Advocate looked carefully at the question of a prosecution for culpable homicide?
I agree with his decision that there was not enough evidence for all the reasons that the Minister has given.
Our quibble is with the Lord Advocate's decision not to prosecute under the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974 for which there is ample evidence as shown by Lord Cullen's report.
Mr. Forth
It would be inappropriate for us to dwell on the matter unnecessarily or to attempt to second-guess the decisions of the Lord Advocate in Scotland on the matter.
However, I will ask my colleagues to consider again the hon. Gentleman's point to see what substance we can make of it.
I have attempted to reply to the point raised by the hon. Member for Sedgefield by putting on record the reasons why some people may find it difficult to understand why no prosecution was pursued.
My hon. Friend the Member for Lancaster (Dame E. Kellett-Bowman) made a detailed point about certificates and the hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman) also touched on that point.
The difficulty is that the two contributions made opposite points.
My hon. Friend seemed to say that it was too easy to obtain the certificates, and that they were handed out with packets of cereal or like confetti.
The hon. Gentleman then implied that it was difficult for people to obtain certificates because of the cost of obtaining the qualifications.
I suppose that the true position lies somewhere between the two.
The offshore petroleum industry training organisation has now established a data base to provide details of the courses attended.
The idea is that it can check more accurately whether people have done the courses, and I hope that that answers the point made by my hon. Friend.
She gave me her apologies earlier for being unable to be here for this stage of the debate.
I will look again at the point made by the hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow.
It is worrying if people are being deterred from obtaining such a certificate of qualification by prohibitive costs.
The local enterprise companies in Scotland would want to consider the matter, although I doubt whether at this stage we should want to regard it as the responsibility of the LECs to give individual support or subsidy to people seeking such a qualification.
I do not rule that out completely, but I believe that we should consider the matter carefully before going down such a route.
Dr. Godman
I am grateful for the Minister's sympathetic response to my point.
In a constituency such as mine there are many highly skilled men, such as shipbuilders and welders, out of work.
In many cases, because they are unemployed, they are deterred from seeking the vital certificate because of the cost involved in having to travel to Grampian to undertake the training at the Robert Gordon institute of technology.
That is the problem.
Mr. Forth
If the hon. Gentleman waits for a few days, he may be made aware of developments emanating from a source not far from me now which may interest him and which may deal with that point.
The issue has an application wider even than the application that the hon. Gentleman describes.
We are very much seized of that point and we want to take action as soon as possible on it.
I am being terribly careful in what I say and I am sure that the hon. Gentleman understands why.
Mr. Robert Hughes
I hope that the Minister is not speaking about the date that must not be mentioned.
Does the Minister agree that when individuals have raised money to pay for the offshore survival course, it is disgraceful that they should be denied unemployment benefit on the basis that they are unavailable for work while they are on the training course?
Is that still the case?
Will the Department change that rule?
Mr. Forth
That is not my direct responsibility, but I will ask my colleague the Under-Secretary of State to reply to the hon. Gentleman.
I do not want to give an inaccurate answer from the Dispatch Box.
I will ensure that the hon. Gentleman receives a reply as soon as possible.
Mr. Salmond
Given that the Minister is in such expansive mood I will press him on the matter of training.
The Minister may not be aware that Scottish Enterprise is considering a proposal at present.
Although we have some excellent training establishments onshore, there may be a gap in the market, not only for the North sea, but internationally, for training that mimics offshore conditions on semi-submersibles.
Would the Department of Employment be willing to co-operate on that?
Mr. Forth
Certainly it would.
However, I believe that if Scottish Enterprise has the matter in hand, it could not be better dealt with.
I shall introduce a tiny degree of controversy by saying that some of us south of the border are always envious of the resources and resourcefulness of those north of the border in dealing with such matters.
I will go even further while I am in an expansive mood and say that we often look at what happens north of the border to give us inspiration and we then follow.
In this case, we may want to follow.
Mr. Howard
I am grateful that, on this occasion at least, the hon. Gentleman has found it possible to welcome at least some of the proposals in the White Paper.
I shall deal in turn with the various points that he raised.
The hon. Gentleman asked first why the assessment credit, the skill check credit, is not to be made available to unemployed people.
The fact is that unemployed people already have access to a range of programmes through the employment service, including job review workshops, which provide precisely that service for those who are unemployed.
If the training and enterprise councils think it appropriate to make some of those funds available for unemployed people, they are perfectly free to do so.
As to where the money is to come from, it is true that the proposals will be funded from within my existing resources.
It is typical of the Labour party that it loses sight of the possibility of being able to get better value for money and of being able to improve the extent to which and the way in which we can help people without always asking the taxpayer to fund more.
We shall make the necessary funds available to fund those initiatives.
In due course, I shall discuss with my right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary to the Treasury exactly from where the money is to be found within existing resources.
On training credits, as we have repeatedly made clear, it is perfectly true that the best approach for young people is a voluntary approach.
We think that the best approach is to place buying power in the hands of young people.
We reject the compulsory route that is favoured by the Labour party, which will never understand that the way forward is to motivate and to encourage and to give people the incentives that they need to make the most of the opportunities that are available to them, not simply to rely on the dead hand of compulsion.
On the proposal that the training contract should make it possible for employers to recover the cost of their investment in training, the difficulties to which the hon. Gentleman referred can be reflected in the contract.
Far from it being a departure from a voluntary approach, it is a voluntary approach: it depends upon a contractual relationship being agreed between the employer and the employee.
The difficulty that has arisen — and one of the obstacles to progress in that area — is that there has been doubt about the law.
Many people have thought that such contracts were not enforceable.
That is why it is important to clarify the law.
The true attitude of the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) and the Labour party emerged in his final two points.
He talked about the European Commission's social action programme.
He is blind to the independent studies that have been carried out on that programme, such as that by Professor Snower of Birkbeck college, which demonstrates clearly and beyond doubt how damaging those proposals would be to the creation of jobs in this country.
In his concluding remarks, the hon. Gentleman had the temerity to talk about the job losses that have been announced today by Gateway.
Of course, I regret those job losses, but the hon. Gentleman has surely seen the article in The Independent on Sunday a week last Sunday which spelt out clearly the devastating consequences on jobs in the retail trade of his proposal for a national statutory minimum wage.
How dare the hon. Gentleman and the Labour party claim to be concerned about jobs when they have put forward a package of proposals that would decimate employment in this country and confine millions of people to the dole queues.
The hon. Gentleman should be ashamed of the lip service that he has paid to employment by continuing to outline such policies.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I must remind the House that we have a busy day ahead of us, including a ten-minute Bill motion.
I will allow questions on the statement to go on until 4.15 pm.
I hope that hon. Members will ask questions about the White Paper and not make wider points.
Sir Dudley Smith (Warwick and Leamington)
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that during the past 25 years successive Governments have never quite got it right on training, which is so essential to our future prosperity?
An exception to that is the past few years when we have made significant progress.
This White Paper is another jump forward.
Does my right hon. and learned Friend further agree that the Opposition spokesman showed his lamentable inexperience of industry when he talked about poaching?
In fact, companies which train properly and successfully over several years bitterly resent other companies which do not indulge in training taking their workers.
That is a problem with which my right hon. and learned Friend is trying to cope.
The example shows exactly that the Opposition are not in touch with what is going on.
Mr. Howard
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his support.
He speaks with the considerable experience of someone who served as a Minister in the Department of Employment.
Perhaps I can confirm what he said by reference to one statistic.
Between 1984 and 1990 there was an 85 per cent.
increase in the number of people in work receiving training.
Of course, more progress needs to be made, but that statistic is some indication of the progress that we are making and have made.
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
The Secretary of State said that he would have to ask the Chief Secretary to the Treasury where the money would come from.
He has not told the House how much he expects his proposals to cost, both in the pilot phase, when adult credits will be paid to a quarter of a million people, and later when he hopes to extend the scheme across the country.
If the purpose of that is to transform attitudes to training, what effect will the lead handcuff clause that he proposes for the training contract have on attitudes to training?
Is he not still missing the real point if he really wants to do something radical to promote opportunities for people at work, and create rights for citizens at work to ownership and participation in decision-making at the place of work?
Mr. Howard
I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman's last point.
We have taken a considerable number of far-reaching measures in association with the Confederation of British Industry to encourage precisely that course.
As to the cost of the measures, the two-year cost of the skill check initiative will be some £25 million and the cost of the pilot scheme of vouchers to help unemployed people to make use of open learning facilities will be £3 million.
As the hon. Gentleman will appreciate, those measures represent only part of our considerable range of initiatives.
I do not suggest that these measures alone will revolutionise training in Britain, but, taken in conjunction with other measures that we have taken, the considerable progress made by the training and enterprise councils, together with Investors in People and our national record of achievement, we are certainly well on the way to completing a transformation of attitudes to training in Britain.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton (Macclesfield)
I warmly welcome my right hon. and learned Friend's statement.
Does he accept that many employers, if not the overwhelming majority, support the Government's robust stance against the social clause?
A leading textile and clothing employer told me last night that if we implemented the social clause it could cost thousands of jobs within his company.
My right hon. and learned Friend said that many of the new responsibilities that he announced would lie with the TECs.
I have an excellent TEC, the South and East Cheshire TEC, which he knows well.
Will he assure the House that the necessary funds to enable the TECs to undertake the additional responsibilities that he announced will be provided for those excellent bodies?
Mr. Howard
I agree with my hon. Friend, and I am grateful for his support.
It is extraordinary how oblivious the Labour party remains to the extraordinarily damaging consequences of its proposals.
Those consequences have been highlighted by my hon. Friend with specific examples from industries within his constituency.
I can certainly give my hon. Friend the assurance for which he asked on resources for TECs for the initiative.
There will be a competition to decide which 15
TECs will have responsibility for the initiative, and I expect many bids.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
The statement was extremely thin, but it touched on one matter of importance — the fact that some employers spend money on training but others do not: they poach.
Instead of leaving that, as hitherto, to market forces, it appears that the Secretary of State wants to intervene; he wants to be dirigiste.
Unfortunately, his approach is based on the same argument as that used by the people who built the Berlin wall —’ If you leave the people who trained you, you have to pay a penalty’.
That is the approach that the right hon. and learned Gentleman has taken, but there is another — that every employer should spend money on training.
If they do, we can give freedom to our people.
That is the argument for a levy on all employers.
It is an argument not for training boards with a lot of bureaucracy, but for the present successful French policy where every employer has to spend money on training.
In that way, we would increase national expenditure on training and the Secretary of State would not have to go in for these dictatorial measures.
Mr. Howard
I am afraid that the remarks of the hon. Members for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) and for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) about market forces only go to show how little they understand them.
Market forces are based on contract, and the proposal that I advanced would clarify the law to make it possible for people to enter into contracts, which would have the consequences that I described.
As to a levy, I am surprised that the hon. Member for Newham, North-East, with his experience as Chairman of the Select Committee on Employment, is not aware of the experience of employers throughout the country who sought to operate the levy that we used to have, which was recognised on all sides as a failure.
It led to employers spending time in filling up forms and trying to ensure that every conceivable expense was lumped together under the heading of training instead of concentrating on the training itself.
There could be no clearer example of the Opposition's blind and blinkered approach to these matters than that proposal.
Mr. Patrick Nicholls (Teignbridge)
As an employer, may I say that the greatest single obstacle to providing training is the possibility that someone else will take away one's trainee and thereby render one's investment worthless?
May I suggest to my right hon. and learned Friend that the explanation for the ill-tempered ignorance with which his proposals have been greeted today is that Opposition Members are, for the most part, neither employers on the one hand, nor employable on the other?
Mr. Howard
There is considerable ground for speculation about why the Opposition have adopted such a churlish attitude to proposals which are clearly well designed and will make a significant contribution to further improvement in attitudes to training.
I can only hope — I am always an optimist in these matters — that on further, more mature reflection they will yet change their mind.
Mr. Jack Ashley (Stoke-on-Trent, South)
Is the Secretary of State aware that he has done painfully little to create ladders of opportunity for disabled people because only one in three have jobs?
That is a shocking figure.
Is he also aware that some of his colleagues have damaged their interests because they talked out a Bill designed to outlaw discrimination against disabled people?
Why does not the Minister enforce the employment quota for disabled people?
Why does he not impose a levy — not the levy that we were just speaking about, but one similar to the French or German levy — to bring jobs to disabled people?
What further action can we have?
Mr. Howard
The right hon. Gentleman is well aware that enforcing the quota is simply not practicable since there are not sufficient numbers of registered disabled people to fill the quota.
We have reviewed the quota, as we have reviewed the range of ways in which we help disabled people into work, and we have decided to keep the quota under review, but the right hon. Gentleman knows of the difficulties in enforcing it.
Mrs. Edwina Currie (Derbyshire, South)
To promote employment in this country, does the Secretary of State's White Paper include policies of 25 per cent.
VAT, a 35 per cent.
basic rate of income tax, 52 per cent.
corporation tax, a 98 per cent.
tax on savings or 20 per cent.
inflation — or am I right in thinking that no sane Government would introduce such policies honestly in this country?
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that that is exactly what was introduced and confirmed in the Budget in April 1975, one year into the last Labour Government?
Mr. Howard
I am extremely interested in my hon. Friend's recollections.
It is particularly worthy of note that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), the shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer who would have responsibility for these matters if a Labour Government were elected, was a prominent member of the Government at that time.
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
What will happen to nurses who have trained at the taxpayers' expense in the national health service but who, increasingly, find themselves unable to get a job after three years' training?
What will happen to their pay packets when they end up working in the private sector, often for less money — because we know that the national health service is simply a Bill away from being privatised?
Will the Minister tell the nurses honestly whether they will have to pay for their training?
Mr. Howard
There is no question of making nurses pay for their training in those circumstances.
How the hon. Lady supposes that the lot of nurses would be improved by the policies of the Labour party is utterly beyond me.
Whether nurses would come under the arrangements identified in the White Paper depends entirely on the contractual arrangements that they make with their employers.
Mr. Barry Field (Isle of Wight)
I know that my right hon. and learned Friend keeps in close touch with the chairmen of the training and enterprise councils and that he is aware of the concern, particularly in the south of England, about the largesse that occasionally appears to be shown to the north.
Will he confirm categorically that TECs will have equal access to the funds that he has made available under the White Paper, excellent as it is?
Will he ensure that constituencies such as mine and others on the south coast, where employment is a problem and retraining is high on the agenda, have equal access to Government funds without fear or favour and that they have parity with the north of England?
Mr. Howard
The Isle of Wight TEC will certainly have equal access to the competition.
We want to encourage excellence in the implementaton of this initiative.
There will be a competition, which is the best way forward to ensure that the plans are implemented in the most effective way.
Mr. Dick Douglas (Dunfermline, West)
What distinction does the Minister make between education and training?
Many of the people who come under the first proposal would be paying back loans for educational purposes.
Can the Secretary of State tell us how many people might be involved in this so-called transfer fee racket, which seems to be difficult to administer?
Will he tell us about the relationship between his Department and Scottish Enterprise because, in the defence industry, we need a skills audit, which he could finance?
Scottish Enterprise does not have the resources to proceed further with its study of the consequences of the fall in defence expenditure in Scotland.
Mr. Howard
I cannot give an estimate of the numbers involved.
It will depend on how many choose to enter the type of contract that I have described.
On the distinction between education and training, we have done a great deal to bring together the best of education and of training.
The hon. Gentleman may be interested in one significant and revealing statistic.
In 1979-80, 46 per cent.
of all 16-year-olds were in education or training.
In 1989-90 that figure had gone up to 73 per cent.
That shows the progress that we have made in the past 12 years in taking education and training forward.
Mr. David Nicholson (Taunton)
I welcome my right hon. and learned Friend's proposals, particularly his skilful proposal which deals with poaching.
They contrast not only with the bureaucratic levy grant system, which used to exist, but with the Labour party's taxation proposals.
Is he aware that my constituents in the retail industry will take careful note of his response to the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) on the devastating effects that the minimum wage would have on that industry?
Will he consult with our right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Social Security about how the availability for work rule might impede people, particularly the adult unemployed, in obtaining useful training which might enable them to return to work?
Mr. Howard
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his support and for his important observations about the retail industry in his constituency.
I know that he will lose no opportunity to make it clear to employers and workers in that industry how devastating the prospects for their jobs would be if the Labour party's proposals were put into effect.
I do not think that the availability for work rule will impinge on any of the proposals that are identified in the White Paper, but I shall reflect on the point that my hon. Friend made.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Would hon. Members who are below the Gangway come into the Chamber or leave, please?
Mr. MacGregor
The purpose of the timetable motion
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
Will the Lord President confirm that my hon. Friend the Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunningham) has never supported the introduction of a guillotine on the proceedings of a Bill without any agreement with the Opposition?
He has not done so either in his evidence to the Committee or on the Floor of the House.
Mr. MacGregor
What I have said before in the House is that the hon. Member for Copeland supports the principle of the timetabling of Bills.
I spoke about the much wider use of timetable motions.
I referred not to this one but to the principle.
I hope that the Committee chaired by my right hon. Friend the Member for Westmorland and Lonsdale will put proposals to the House that we can then debate.
The purpose of the timetable motion is to structure the debate during the Committee stage to ensure that sufficient time is devoted to all the elements requiring detailed consideration.
It is in line with the precedent of the timetable motion on the Local Government Finance Bill, which is generally held to have worked well and provided for effective consideration of the Bill.
I am very pleased that, in so far as it is possible, we have been able, through the usual channels, to accommodate the wishes of the Opposition on the allocation of time to different parts of the Bill.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State, Department of Education and Science, acceded to Opposition requests that 80 per cent.
of the time available in Committee should be spent on clauses 1 to 14, which deal with further education funding councils.
I understand perfectly well why that should be so, as the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) made clear in the Second Reading debate his support for the higher education reforms, which account for quite a large part of the bulk of the latter part of the Bill.
I hope that this allocation reflects the wishes of the House as a whole.
As was made clear in the debate today, there is agreement — on both sides, I think — on the latter parts of the Bill dealing with higher education, although here, too, we are providing reasonable time for consideration in Committee.
The Bill has been given extensive consideration in another place — a total of about 65 hours, including four days in Committee and three days on Report.
The time that this timetable motion provides for the Committee stage will be ample for consideration of the issues that the House as a whole has shown it wishes to raise.
The timetable provides for a minimum — I stress that it is a minimum — of 50 hours in Committee, and the Committee may go beyond that if it wishes to do so.
Another issue is the need for speedy processing of the Bill.
That reflects two things — first, the shortened nature of this parliamentary Session, giving rise to the need to proceed with our Bills in an orderly way through Committee if we are to dispose of as many of them as possible; and, secondly, the importance that we attach to this Bill, which is symbolic of the high priority that we give to the reform of further education, as well as higher education.
Mr. Derek Enright (Hemsworth)
As the passing of the Bill is being given such high priority, will the Leader of the House guarantee that all the evidence will be put before the Committee — that some of it will not be suppressed, as the Secretary of State suppressed evidence put forward by colleges of further education?
Mr. MacGregor
Having heard the exchanges earlier today, I do not think that there has been any suppression.
Certainly, I know that in very many colleges of further education there is substantial support for what the Bill seeks to do.
Mr. Dennis Turner (Wolverhampton, South-East)
I appeal to the Leader of the House to ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science to do what he has been asked repeatedly, during and before the debate, to do — publish the survey information that has been sent to him by colleges of further education.
It is as simple as that.
If the Secretary of State for Education and Science does not want to be charged with the suppression of evidence, the Leader of the House should appeal to him to come clean, go public and reveal the evidence.
Mr. MacGregor
I certainly know of further education colleges that are very enthusiastic about the Bill and whose one concern is that it may not complete its passage during the current Session.
That is why we are discussing the motion.
We are providing ample Committee time for consideration of evidence of the type about which the hon. Gentleman is talking.
It is vital that we should not lose the momentum on these important reforms.
There is a great demand from universities, polytechnics, further education colleges and sixth form colleges to implement the reforms as quickly as possible so that we may avoid the damaging effect on morale that delays and uncertainties could cause.
The sooner the funding councils are started up and are able to discuss detailed formulae and arrangements for the distribution of funds to institutions of higher education and institutions of further education, the better.
The Bill also means big changes for further education and sixth form colleges.
They, too, need to know without delay where they stand so that they can prepare to work in and with the new structures and make their own bids for funds.
It is essential that these councils are set up as soon as possible so that they may start work on all the detailed arrangements and consultations that will be necessary if a smooth transition to the new funding system is to be ensured.
As I am constantly told by many who get in touch with me, uncertainty and delay would be damaging to the whole of the further and higher education sector.
That is why it is essential that we make progress with the Bill as quickly as possible, consistent with proper discussion and consultation — not so much consultation as consideration — in the House.
At this point it is consideration in the House.
I readily acknowledge the need for time to debate the Bill in Committee.
I believe that the timetable that we are proposing offers a sensible and balanced way of achieving all the different objectives, including the legitimate desire of the House to consider the Bill fully, and I commend it to the House.
Interruption
Mr. Bruce Grocott (The Wrekin)
There is a small part of me that feels that, on behalf of my right hon. and hon. Friends, I should welcome what the Leader of the House has said.
As we all know, it is a matter of only a few weeks before the joyous day when the boot will be on the other foot and the right hon. Gentleman will be sitting on the Opposition Front Bench making speeches on timetable motions.
Part of me thinks that he is setting a useful precedent.
The right hon. Gentleman has explained how important it is that the rights of the Opposition should be restricted.
Apparently, it is a mistake to spend too many hours discussing a Bill.
When the time comes, as it certainly will, for a Labour Government to introduce quite a lot of progressive legislation that the country desperately needs, I have no doubt that the right hon. Gentleman and his right hon. and hon. Friends will wish to oppose it.
He will not really be able to do that, however, because he will be obliged to stand at the Opposition Dispatch Box and commend any guillotine motion that we bring before the House on the basis that the Labour Government are faithfully following the precedent of 13 years of Tory government.
The Leader of the House may not operate in quite that way.
I think that he will learn the tactics of Opposition rapidly.
I hope that he learns them well, because he will need to deploy them for a long time.
Let me make it crystal clear — I have done it before and I do not mind doing it again — that I do not have any fundamental or irrevocable objections to timetable motions.
I do not know whether I speak for all my right hon. and hon. Friends.
The Leader of the House was right to say that there were many who said, in giving evidence to the Committee which he set up, that they think it right that Bills should be the subject of timetables.
However, the right hon. Gentleman completely misrepresented the position of my hon. Friend the Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunningham), who has been quoted, by implying that we, the Opposition, would be happy if timetable motions were introduced without any attempt to secure an agreement on what the timetable should be, and without any reciprocal arrangement that improved the rights of the Opposition.
There are many ways in which that could be done.
When there is a Labour Government and the Leader of the House finds himself sitting on the Opposition Benches, that Administration will be gracious to the then Opposition.
We shall discuss ways in which the rights of the Opposition can be observed.
It is — Some of my hon. Friends are not as generous as I would be prepared to be.
Interruption
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett (Denton and Reddish)
My hon. Friend talks about rights.
I ask him to remember that there are the rights of the Opposition and the rights of those outside the House, who ought to have the opportunity to influence our decisions.
This guillotine motion will make it extremely difficult for those outside to make representations to those who consider the Bill in Committee following its Second Reading.
When my hon. Friend is discussing rights, I ask him to accept that it should be emphasised that a guillotine gags Parliament and many others outside.
Mr. Grocott
I very much agree with my hon. Friend.
He and I think that consideration should be given to allowing Committees to bring people before them to give evidence on a Bill during its passage through Parliament.
Many reforms are possible, and a new and reforming Government will consider them all.
Whatever our views on guillotine motions, one or two matters must be put on the record.
All Governments use guillotines, but no Government have used them with the frequency of this Administration.
No Government have used similar means.
The figures that I am about to present to the House will embarrass the Leader of the House, but I shall get them on the record none the less.
The right hon. Gentleman has answered one or two questions on the frequency of the Government's use of the guillotine procedure.
Indeed, he answered such a question on 8 November 1991.
I am sure that this was inadvertent — perhaps the wording of the question was not as precise as it should have been — but the answer did not begin to present an accurate picture of the number of times that guillotine motions have been brought before the House by the Government.
I am sure that hon. Members will not mind if I put one or two statistics on the record.
To be fair — after all, if I do not do it, I am sure that someone else will — I shall go back to the time of the last Labour Government.
In the period of five years and two months between February 1974 and May 1979, a Labour Government introduced 20 guillotine motions.
In a four-year Parliament, the 1979-83 Tory Government introduced 19.
In another four-year Parliament, the 1983-87 Tory Government introduced 17.
In four years and eight months, the current Government have introduced 35.
The Leader of the House may want to check that, and put his own figures right to make sure that the record is straight.
Let me give the details: it will take about 30 seconds.
Let us start with 1987.
Three guillotine motions were tabled for discussion of the Bill that became the Education Reform Act 1988.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
Should we not remind the House that that legislation was supposed to stand the test of time?
Because it was rushed through, another piece of legislation is now needed to put matters right.
Is that not a very good illustration of the problems to which misuse of the guillotine to ram legislation through the House and the country can lead?
In this instance, a second Bill has had to be presented, and most people in the education system have found themselves in a mess in the intervening three years.
Mr. Grocott
My hon. Friend has made a powerful point.
Exactly the same is true of the Government's shambolic efforts in regard to local government finance.
Between 1987 and now, there were guillotine motions on the following: the Local Government Finance Bill two; the Social Security Bill one; the Firearms (Amendment) Bill two; the School Boards (Scotland) Bill; the Housing Bill; the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Bill; the Water Bill two; the Official Secrets Bill two; the Self-Governing Schools etc.
(Scotland) Bill two; the Dock Work Bill; the Football Spectators Bill; the Children Bill; the Companies Bill; the Local Government and Housing Bill; the Employment Bill; the National Health Service and Community Care Bill two; the Social Security Bill two; the Human Fertilisation and Embryo Bill one; the Education (Student Loans) Bill; the Community Charges (General Reduction) Bill; the Dangerous Dogs Bill two; the Local Government Finance Bill; the Education (Schools) Bill; the Further and Higher Education Bill — which we are now discussing — one.
According to my arithmetic that adds up to 35 guillotine motions, which is unprecedented in modern times — indeed, ever, so far as I can judge.
I do not know why the Leader of the House bothers with his Committees, given that he has apparently introduced a major constitutional innovation without any agreement from them.
Not only are guillotine motions being introduced with phenomenal frequency; they are being introduced at a very early stage.
Let us take the last five for which the right hon. Gentleman has been responsible.
The guillotine motion on the Community Charges (General Reduction) Bill was introduced on 26 March last year, before any Commitee debate had taken place.
The motion on the Dangerous Dogs Bill was introduced on 10 June last year — again, before any such debate had taken place.
The motion on the Local Government Finance Bill — which set a record — was also introduced before debate had begun.
The Education (Schools) Bill motion was a minor improvement on the Government's previous record; it was introduced on Report and Third Reading.
The current guillotine motion, however, has been introduced without any attempt to decide whether it was necessary.
The Government have used the guillotine in a way that no other Government have — with alarming frequency and absolute severity.
They have imposed their will on the House.
Despite having a huge majority in the past five years of over 100 Members, they have still felt the need to do what, until he became a member of one, Lord Hailsham used to describe as playing the game of being an’ elective dictatorship’.
That is the way in which the Government have operated.
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
It happens to be worse than that — Oh, it is.
I smell a rat here — I really do.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science sits on the Treasury Bench, treating us over this Bill just as he did when he was Secretary of State for Health.
I remember the time when you and I, Mr. Speaker, had a few words because of what was happening because of the Secretary of State for Health
Interruption
Hon. Members
Oh.
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
Oh yes, I remember it well and I am sure that you do, Mr. Speaker.
I apologised to you anyway — Sherwood can shut up.
The important thing is the rat, which is the question of the report on the survey —
Interruption
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke) indicated dissent.
Mr. Haynes
The Secretary of State need not shake his head.
He is ducking out of his responsibilities as Secretary of State for Education and Science, just as he did on health.
On top of all that, he is rushing everything through to deny us the report on that survey.
It is a shocking state of affairs, and the Secretary of State should be ashamed of himself.
Mr. Grocott
My hon. Friend raises a point that has been raised many times before.
Perhaps he should have directed his appeal directly to honest John sitting opposite me on the Treasury Bench, who may well be able to persuade his fellow member of Cabinet that he should
Mr. Haynes
I am glad that my hon. Friend has given way again, because it is some time since I smelt a rat in the Chamber, but there is one knocking about tonight.
The Secretary of State should come clean.
I do not know what the people back in Rushcliffe think about him when he messes about in this way.
He messed around with health, and look at the mess we are in.
Now he is messing around with education, and look at the mess that that will be in.
It has got to stop.
The people will decide in not many weeks' time.
I know that I will not be here, Mr. Speaker
Hon. Members
Ah.
Mr. Haynes
The right hon. and learned Gentleman, the Leader of the House and all those on the Treasury Bench know that the people outside will not stand for this kind of activity — The Secretary of State is supposed to be listening.
That is how he ducks out of his responsibilities and will not come clean — Now I shall sit down.
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Is this an intervention or a speech?
Laughter
Mr. Grocott
Sadly, my hon. Friend the Member for Ashfield (Mr. Haynes) will not be with us after the election, but my experience of him suggests that if he opens his mouth in Ashfield, we shall hear him down here —
Mr. Haynes
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I shall hear it.
Mr. Grocott
The details of the timetable motion allow for just five days' debate on a Bill which is 103 pages long, contains 94 clauses and nine schedules and which must report back to the House by 26 February.
I have listened to fair chunks of the debate tonight, and there can be no doubt whatsoever that considerable complexities need sorting out, many of which have been raised by Conservative Members.
I am sure that they need the time to debate the Bill just as much as anyone else.
I ask a simple question to which I know that there is a simple answer, but I still think that it is worth a little time to discover it: why are the Government in such a desperate hurry to get the Bill back to the House on 26 February?
I offer one or two possible explanations in an attempt to be generous to the Government.
Is it, for example— this could be one reason — because a clear manifesto commitment must be fulfilled, so Conservative Members feel obliged to rush the Bill through at the end of the Parliament?
I have searched through the last Conservative party manifesto.
There are many references in it.
There is a copy here if Members want to browse through it in the small hours of morning.
Perhaps they will find a section that I have missed.
There are lots of references to bringing the crime rate down, economic miracles and all sorts of things like that.
But I can see no reference whatever to the Further and Higher Education Bill [Lords].
So there is no possible justification for introducing the guillotine motion on the ground of an election commitment.
The second possibility is that the Government have moved the guillotine motion on the ground that an inordinate amount of time has already been spent debating the Bill.
We have already answered that point.
Of course that is not the case: we have not even reached the Committee stage, so the guillotine motion cannot have been introduced on those grounds.
A further possibility is that the guillotine motion has been tabled because massive opposition to the Bill is anticipated.
This is a more difficult one to answer.
Of course there is strong opposition to some parts of the Bill, to which many of my hon. Friends have drawn the attention of the Minister, but it also has to be said that, perhaps unusually for Government legislation, there is a large part of the Bill on which there is a wide measure of agreement.
That is the part which deals with the ending of the binary system in higher education.
Mr. Derek Fatchett (Leeds, Central)
That is Labour party policy.
Mr. Grocott
As my hon. Friend says, that is Labour party policy.
But better than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I am sure that you will allow 30 seconds indulgence here — I remind Conservative Members, although they were not all present at the time, of a Bill introduced way back in 1976, if we can have a trip down memory lane.
I have not checked the Division list closely but some Conservative Members present tonight were here then.
I know that the hon. Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) was not here at the time, and he will not be with us much longer, but many Members who are present tonight were here then.
I draw the attention of the House to 18 May 1976, when the Comprehensive Higher Education Bill was introduced under the ten-minute Bill procedure.
Modesty prevents me from spelling out which Member introduced it.
The motion was:’ That leave be given to bring in a Bill to end distinctions between the various types of educational institutions that cater for people over 18 years of age, and to provide for a genuinely comprehensive system of higher education under democratic control.’
That was not too bad but, like most ideas ahead of their time, I am afraid that it was voted down by 182 votes to 170.
On checking through the Division list, I found that among the Members who sadly threw out that advanced piece of legislation were the right hon. Member for Norfolk, South (Mr. MacGregor) and other interesting names.
I do not have time to check them all.
If the Leader of the House had had the foresight in those early days to see the merit in that legislation, he would not have felt it necessary tonight to move a savage guillotine motion to curtail debate on the measure.
That fine piece of legislation would have long since passed into law and we would have had lots of time to spend on Opposition days, motions of censure and other matters on which we could spend our time much more effectively.
So it will not do to say that the reason why the Government found it necessary to curtail debate on the Bill was that they felt that there would be massive opposition to it.
There is a whole section of the Bill on which there is a great deal of agreement.
We all know why the Government want the Bill back by 26 February.
They want it back by then because, on 10 March, they will have a quick fix Budget and then, some time after, if all goes according to plan from their view, they will fix a quick-fix election on 9 April.
That is what it is all about.
I would not have minded the motion tonight quite so much if it had been given an honest title, such as the General Election (Clearing the Decks) Motion, or whatever title the Leader of the House wanted to give it.
He has this’ honest John’face but sometimes he betrays what he is thinking.
I thought he looked weary as he presented the timetable motion.
It is so similar to the language that he used on previous timetable motions that I do not know why he does not take a tape and mime to it.
There is no doubt about it — he knows perfectly well the reason why he is introducing this guillotine motion.
However, the Government are still feeling some degree of nervousness.
The timetable might not operate this time.
After all, the Prime Minister has run away from three election dates.
He was all set to go last spring, and he ran away.
He was all set to go in the summer, and he ran away.
He was set to go in the autumn, but he did not run away from that one — he got the editors of five friendly newspapers to run away for him.
Opposition Members desperately hope that he will not run away this time.
Let us hope that for once he will stand up and be counted and go down fighting — as go down he assuredly will.
Let us have no more of these silly guillotine motions.
Let us have a general election.
Mr. Humfrey Malins (Croydon, North-West)
I feel uneasy about this guillotine motion.
I have felt increasingly uneasy about such motions in recent months.
It seems that we all spend far too little time examining legislation closely.
We all know the problem: we legislate too much, and that must apply to all of us.
I became a Member of the House in 1983 on a promise from various people that we would legislate less, that we did not want to legislate all the time, and that we would examine matters more carefully.
However, as soon as I got here I realised that we were on a treadmill of legislation.
Legislation from the various great Departments of State was pushed upon the House.
I think that I am not alone in saying that I have not properly done my job of examining in detail some of the legislation which has come before us.
I wish that we would legislate less and would spend more time considering what we do.
This may be my last utterance in the House before the next general election, but I hope to be back — although that is not a matter for me.
I would tell any future House of Commons to study legislation more carefully and to legislate less.
This is an important Bill, relating to adult education.
How many thousands of millions of people in our constituencies are concerned about this issue?
In November last I raised, in an Adjournment debate, the question of adult education in Croydon and Mr. Speaker was in the Chair because of his great interest in the subject.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, South (Sir W. Clark) was also here.
In that debate I was able to say that in Croydon in 1991 there were more than 40,000 enrolments for higher education, representing 20,000 to 30,000 students.
So many people have an interest in this topic and would therefore expect us to spend a good amount of time on it.
Unless I have read the guillotine motion incorrectly, it seems that the time available to discuss clause 15 through to the end of the Bill amounts to about a day.
Yet the Bill contains about 90 clauses, some of which are very important.
It is not for me to suggest ways in which the Bill should be improved now; that is a matter for another day.
However, clause 28 is important.
It relates to the crucial argument about whether continuing education and training services — such as the one in Croydon, which does such a lot of good locally — will be able to bid direct to the funding councils rather than through the new sector colleges.
I raised that matter on the Adjournment of the House.
My hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State understood my concern, but thought that institutions such as those in Croydon should be interested in exploring the possibility of incorporation within the new further education sector by reason of the balance of provisions that they make.
That has been mentioned again today.
Many of those institutions would not seek incorporation for the obvious reasons.
It is important that the close link with the local authority remains.
The adult education service in Croydon is well supported by the local authority.
It is important that that service is not barred from applying direct to the further education funding council.
The possibility of incorporation represents a difficult route because of the close involvement and commitment of the local authority to that service, which is beneficial to it.
That service has associations with many local agencies and voluntary organisations.
It has its roots in the communities of Croydon.
There is a good argument for amending clause 28 on Report to enable institutions such as those in Croydon to bid direct.
The Bill relates to issues which are crucial to many people — perhaps as many as 60,000 adults in Croydon.
There is a great need for the type of adult education which is provided in Croydon, which has a multi-racial society.
Many need extra help in English and other types of subject.
The adult education service does a lot of good in such circumstances.
It is a pity that we cannot spend more time just looking at some of the issues — for example, clause 28, which is quite important — which affect adult education.
I hope that, in future, this House of Commons, of which we are proud to be Members, will spend just a bit more time looking at what hon. Members do day after day.
We should not just go through the Lobbies — half the time I do so without knowing for what I am voting.
We should look more carefully at what we are doing and we should legislate less.
We should spend more time trying to bring whatever expertise we may have to bear on the subject in question.
Mr. Michael Carr (Ribble Valley)
It was interesting to hear what the hon. Member for Croydon, North-West (Mr. Malins) said about the need for deliberation and careful consideration of the issues which come before us.
I agree wholeheartedly with him.
I accept that there may be a case for the use of the guillotine, but surely only after consultation with the official Opposition and the other parties.
There was no attempt to consult with us prior to tonight about whether this guillotine should be introduced.
We deplore that.
The Bill concerns major issues because it will determine the future of further, higher and adult education for many years.
However, the debate on these issues will be held in the run-up to the general election at the fag-end of the Parliament.
We are already aware that, more often than not, many hon. Members now use debates in the Chamber as an opportunity to score party political points.
Why, oh why, could not the debate on the Bill be held after the general election?
The hon. Member for Croydon, North-West mentioned the number of students who attend adult education classes in Croydon.
Throughout the country more than 3 million people attend adult education classes.
They will study the motion and the Bill closely.
They will want to know why the Government have decided to shove the Bill through in the final weeks of this Parliament.
Surely some Conservative Members will concede that it would be far better for the debate on the Bill to take place in an atmosphere free from the heat of an imminent election.
I have no doubt that the Government's huge majority, caused by a distortion of the electoral system, will result in the guillotine motion being approved.
I regret that, and we on this Bench will vote against it.
Sir Peter Emery (Honiton)
I had not intended to speak on the motion, but I feel that I must bring to the attention of the House certain points made by the Select Committee on Procedure in two reports to the House on the passage of legislation.
One is that we should try to ensure that all parts of a measure are debated.
The Committee has pointed out that nothing is more foolish than to have timetable motions introduced after a Committee has sat for some sessions, perhaps debating the first two or three clauses of a Bill, and then, the guilloting having been introduced, the rest of the Bill — perhaps 60, 70 or 80 clauses — is rushed through with hardly any debate.
That must be the worst way of dealing with legislation.
I assure my hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, North-West (Mr. Malins) that an examination of other elected assemblies which can be paralleled to ours in Europe, America or elsewhere shows that we in the British House of Commons spend three, four or even five times longer debating legislation.
Opinions about timetabling motions have altered massively since I took over the chairmanship of the Select Committee on Procedure nearly nine years ago.
In those days, nearly everybody was against the concept of timetabling.
Now, Members in all parts of the House who have served on the Select Committee on Sittings of the House agree that it is essential to find a proper, reasonable and practical way to deal with legislation in Committee and on Report.
Many take the view that there should be timetabling at the start of legislation to enable it to be seen that Members are dealing with all parts of legislation from the word go.
The knockabout, nice party debate that we are having, allowing the Opposition — whichever party is in power — to have a field day attacking the Government, does not achieve much.
It happens with only a handful of Members in their places and achieves little, if any, coverage by the media.
It could be considered a waste of prime parliamentary time.
It would be better to have the whole thing established as part of our Standing Orders, adopting one of the suggestions of the Select Committee on Procedure.
As a member of the Select Committee on Sittings of the House, I give nothing away — because it has been said in public session — when I say that consideration must be given to the views of the Lord President and the shadow Leader of the House about the timetabling of legislation, following some of the thinking on the subject of the Select Committee on Procedure.
The hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) suggested that we need to ensure a proper amount of time for outside organisations to lobby the House.
Everybody wants that, but outside organisations have been lobbying the House — they have certainly been lobbying me, and I am not in a special position — ever since the matter was being debated in the House of Lords.
So although it is an important issue, it falls in this case.
If those on the Opposition Front Bench are right and there is an election on a certain day in April, the Government are right not to allow many hours of debate on the first few clauses so that subsequent clauses are rushed through without sufficient consideration.
They are right to impose a timetable at the start of the Committee stage to ensure that all parts of the Bill are properly dealt with.
I was trying to calculate the exact number of hours which the motion allows the Committee to spend debating the Bill.
The time set for one of the days is midnight, but it is not clear how long the Committee might sit for the first six days.
It will sit at 10.30 am and then again at 4.30 pm, but it is not clear at what time it rises.
It appears that it could rise after midnight.
So hon. Members need not worry about keeping the debate going, because no rising time has been set; therefore, if the Opposition so wish, they have all the time in the world to debate the Bill.
Mr. MacGregor
I agree with many of my hon. Friend's comments.
We are endeavouring to give maximum flexibility to how clauses 1 to 14 are considered.
Therefore, there will be plenty of time, with no fixed limit in the early sittings.
Sir Peter Emery
I am delighted that I have been able to hit on that point, because the flexibility means that the Opposition cannot claim that they will not have enough time to debate those clauses.
They can continue to debate them all night, and even until the following morning, if they so desire.
However, my Committee does not believe that that is the best way to deal with legislation.
We have always suggested that the proper time to rise is after 10 o'clock.
Mr. Straw
The hon. Gentleman is so distinguished that it may be some time since he has sat on a Standing Committee.
He omits a small detail in the form of the Government Whip.
My hon. Friends who will sit on the Committee will be entertained to hear that they can debate the Bill for as long as they wish, but sadly it will be open to the Government Whip to stand up whenever he wishes and move the adjournment.
As he knows that the Government will get the Bill in any event, nothing stops him doing that.
Sir Peter Emery
That is absolutely true.
Moreover, nothing about time or my distinction would stop that happening.
However, once Governments of either party know that they will complete a Bill on a certain day, they hand much of the power over to the Opposition to decide how they want to use that time to debate the proper timing and clauses.
It is an integral point, but one that we well understand.
I am delighted to see that the Government are willing to introduce a timetable motion at the start of Second Reading.
Years ago, they would never have done so.
It will ensure that we do not waste time purely trying to show the Opposition's strength in delaying tactics, which gets nobody anywhere.
Such parliamentary procedure in Committee is coming to an end, as it is being seen as a useless use of time.
I congratulate the Government on introducing a timetable motion at the very start of the Committee stage.
Mr. Michael Foot (Blaenau Gwent)
I am glad to have the chance of following the hon. Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery), the Chairman of the Procedure Select Committee, although I strongly disagree with his suggestions, for reasons that I have given before and hope to repeat this evening.
The House of Commons would make a great mistake if it accepted the proposition that this is the right way for it to operate.
I understood the eagerness of my hon. Friend the Member for The Wrekin (Mr. Grocott) in anticipating the events of the rest of the year.
I shall rejoice greatly when they occur.
I advise him and others to be extremely reticent in proceeding to the supposedly automatic system of introducing guillotine motions, especially after our experience of the past few years under the Government.
My hon. Friend gave the details and I shall return to them in a moment.
Sir Peter Emery
I omitted one fact: there will be sadness on both sides of the House when the right hon. Gentleman no longer is a Member of the House, following his distinguished service.
Mr. Foot
Hon. Members will not be able to have a proper debate on a guillotine motion without me.
I hand on some of my experience of these matters to both sides of the House.
My hon. Friend the Member for The Wrekin talked of the boot being on the other foot.
I thought that rather an inelegant phrase and I shall return to it.
I do not intend to speak for hours, but I should like to make a few further comments.
The House would be wise to listen to the warnings from the hon. Member for Croydon, North-West (Mr. Malins).
He stressed how unwise it was for the House to curtail Committee stages.
In some respects, Committee is the most important stage — the atmosphere can be changed and the follies of Government can be corrected.
Indeed, at the end of this Parliament, hon. Members should have learnt the lesson better than ever before.
My hon. Friend the Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) emphasised how important it was not merely for Members of Parliament but for our constituents to put their case.
They will have little chance of doing so on the Bill in the circumstances in which the Leader of the House has introduced the guillotine.
I know that there has been discussion in the House of Lords, but that makes the offence worse.
That may tempt more Governments to introduce more Bills there.
That is the wrong way to proceed.
I do not think much of the House of Lords anyhow, but it is essential for the proper performance of parliamentary government that the major Bills — this is one — are introduced first in this House.
The House of Commons has the right to say first what it thinks of a Bill.
The proper way to proceed is for Members of the House to consult their constituents and consider the whole Bill in detail first.
The Government should have learnt that better than anyone.
The hon. Member for Honiton talked as if there were a great wave of support for the view that he and others advocate on this matter.
I am not saying that there has not been considerable support for it, and he can report that to the House.
I repeat, however, that a guillotine greatly injures the way in which the House operates.
Of course, Governments like the guillotine, but the House is not in existence only to protect the rights of Governments and the Executive.
It is even more than that — the House is here to protect the rights of different Oppositions.
I have said a good deal more on Government Back Benches than I have on Opposition Back Benches and very often it has been what has been done on Government Back Benches that has saved even Labour Governments from some of their follies.
Even Labour Governments can occasionally commit follies.
They did not in the measures involving the five guillotines which I introduced.
They were all excellent measures, as my hon. Friend the Member for The Wrekin who voted for them so enthusiastically, will confirm.
I do not say that they all had the high quality of the measure that he introduced, but they were very fine measures indeed.
On all, there had been a full chance for the House to discuss matters before the guillotine motions.
It is true that, without guillotines then, the Bills could not have been brought into operation.
They had all figured prominently in the election manifesto of the Labour party at the time.
That, of course, is not at all the circumstances now.
I do not expect shame from Ministers, but I should have thought that all the Ministers present, and all the others who might come in later, would be a little wary about pressing this matter.
They all know that the Bill has been brought to the House in this form only because of the catastrophe of what happened on the Bills that were guillotined a few years ago — the poll tax Bills.
Without them, we would not have had this legislation.
All the Ministers present are poll tax Ministers, as far as I can see.
All of them, including the Leader of the House, voted for the poll tax.
The right hon. Gentleman was a keen supporter of the poll tax.
He had at his side that second eager poll tax supporter, the Secretary of State for Health.
He may have been involved in some other misdemeanours at the same time, but he was also supporting the poll tax in the Cabinet.
Then there is poll tax Patten.
Why do we not have his intellectual contribution to this debate?
I remember many debates on poll tax motions when the chairman of the Conservative party came along.
He was usually the person most eager to get the guillotine through.
On this occasion, as my hon. Friend the Member for The Wrekin and others have pointed out, he has a special interest in being here.
There has been real rudeness on the part of poll tax Patten, if I may use that unparliamentary way of describing him, but everybody knows who I mean.
I have some difficulty in distinguishing between the parliamentary popinjays, or whatever they call themselves — the Pattens, the Patties and the patsies — I cannot tell the difference.
All I know is that they all supported the poll tax and they all voted for the guillotines that carried through the poll tax legislation.
I cannot recall a single one making any objection — except, of course, that great, noble figure, the right hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine), and even he did not object to the poll tax in Scotland.
He thought that it should be tried out on the Scots.
The Government did not have to worry about them; they are all anti-Tory anyhow.
Along with all the rest of them, he voted to apply the poll tax, through that guillotine procedure, against all the Scots, as well as against all the Welsh and all the English.
There are a few prominent poll tax Welsh Members sitting on the Government Benches today.
They, too, voted with equal enthusiasm for the poll tax.
Had it not been for the guillotine debate, for the way in which the Government put the pressure on, for the way in which they shepherded all the sheep, ministerial and other, through the Lobbies, we would not be here today.
We might even have had a decent election and the country might have been saved a good deal earlier, but everyone knows that that is how we got here.
It is shocking that a guillotine motion should be produced in such circumstances.
My hon. Friend the Member for The Wrekin has proved to the hilt that there has been a greater, easier and more eager resort to the guillotine than at any time in English parliamentary history.
There was nothing on that scale in the Labour days.
Interruption
My hon. Friend gave the figures, and if a Conservative Member wishes to dispute them he is free to intervene and do so.
There is no disputing what my hon. Friend has put on the record — the Government, who have a huge majority, have increasingly resorted to the use of the guillotine.
That has merely shown their intellectual arrogance.
The House used to have the assistance of the right hon. Member for Shropshire, North (Mr. Biffen), or Oswestry as it was, until he was sacked.
I have often thought that almost the most foolish act perpetrated by the previous Prime Minister was her sacking of the right hon. Gentleman.
Apart from a few Labour competitors, he was the best Leader of the House that I have seen, certainly in a Conservative Government.
The right hon. Lady got rid of him because he obviously used to say to the Cabinet,’ You won't get away with this, you know.
You can't go through with that.
If you try to do it you will bulldoze the House and eventually the Members will revolt.’
The right hon. Gentleman may not have put it in quite such strong language, but no doubt that was the way in which he put the case to the Cabinet.
One of the important jobs of a Leader of the House is to report to the Cabinet and tell it what it cannot do.
Unfortunately, the last three or four Leaders of the House — I have forgotten the count — have not done that.
They have merely said,’ Oh, no, we shall have a few more guillotines.’
I am afraid that the present Leader of the House has added to that ignoble record.
For all those reasons, I hope that the House will reject the idea of permanent guillotines.
I hope that hon. Members will remember the Government's bad example.
The Government thought they could force through legislation by that means, and legislation on a range of topics became worse and worse.
We do not know whether this Bill will be any better.
A major piece of legislation was introduced in the most shabby way in the other place.
That did not happen in the better days that have gone.
We now have to vote on the timing of its procedures, even though we have not had a single hour of discussion in Committee.
That is the wrong way to run the House, and any Government who set such an example do grave injury to parliamentary government.
That is the last thing that the Opposition wish to see.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
I oppose the guillotine motion.
I pay tribute to the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot).
Over the years I have listened to many forceful speeches by the right hon. Gentleman, who always speaks common sense, and I have often agreed with him.
The House will be the poorer after the election when the right hon. Gentleman will not be with us.
My hon. Friend the Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery) said it was stupid to have such a debate late at night.
I think he said that the media did not pay attention to us.
Perhaps he does not know that I have a suitcase full of letters from constituents who are desperately concerned about the Bill.
The reason why some of us have voted against the Second Reading and will vote against the guillotine is that, unless we put into effect this procedure of opposition, there is no proper way in which objections can be fairly and adequately considered.
It is not a question of media time; it is not a question of wondering whether the media are listening.
I have a duty to nearly a thousand people from the Leicester area who have written to me about adult basic education and community further education.
We have been lucky enough to see the Minister of State; he has been very kind and we have had really good discussions with him.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that some of the points that we put to the Minister have not, in Leicestershire's view, been adequately met.
If this guillotine motion goes through, what do I do about the thousand or so letters that I have downstairs?
I know that an election is coming, but as a conscientious Member I cannot treat them as so much confetti.
All the letters suggest different ways in which the Bill can be improved, but if we accept this awful timetable motion tonight a Bill of nearly 100 clauses will have very limited time for discussion, and the guillotine will fall in Committee.
How can any of the amendments be properly considered?
That is the tragedy of it all.
That is why I think that the Government are desperately wrong.
I say publicly that they are mistaken in trying to push this Bill through in the face of severe and fierce opposition, not just from committed Labour supporters but from rank-and-file Conservatives and from people who have no particular political We were lucky enough to see my hon. Friend the Minister of State a couple of times, and we tried to explain to him how we in Leicestershire would lose out.
We pointed out to him that we have in that county a structure of adult basic education and community further education which the rest of the country can only dream of.
We made it clear to him that we have many examples in Leicestershire of one-for-one adult education in the home.
If people want to better themselves, they are entitled to enjoy this sort of instruction: it should not be denied them in a civilised society.
If the guillotine goes through tonight, what happens to all my amendments?
I have sent dozens of letters to my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Department of Education and Science.
The last one that he answered was, I think, dated October.
None of my November, December or January letters about the Bill has even been acknowledged.
I sent him an amendment to clause 5 of the Bill in December; it sought to improve the Bill by taking account — the wording was carefully considered — of existing providers of quality further and adult education.
That is all we wanted in a small amendment to clause 5.
Our first discussion with the Minister of State took place four weeks ago.
Last week he asked us to bring our experts along from Leicestershire to meet his experts and have a discussion.
During the course of that discussion there was no way in which the Minister could do other than acknowledge that, after the Bill goes through, the existing privileged structure of adult basic education and further education in the county of Leicestershire can be other than damaged.
There is no way in which I can vote for a guillotine which so severely curtails debate in Committee.
Moreover, what chance do I have of serving on the Committee?
I have great respect for my right hon. and hon. Friends, but they will choose those of my hon. Friends who are in favour of the Bill, and I think that the Bill stinks.
The Government are remiss to press on in the face of careful and constructive opposition, which has been voiced by experts from the county of Leicester and other parts of the country.
There is no way that I will support the guillotine motion.
My fear is that I am not likely to serve on the Standing Committee, although I volunteer for such duty if the opportunity be there.
The danger is that, if the guillotine motion goes through, the writers of the suitcase full of letters from my constituency will feel outraged, and they will express that outrage in the way that one would expect.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Renton
To judge from that response, I think that my hon. Friend has a great deal of support in the House.
If we were to add those provisions to the Bill, I fear that we might not fall within the long title of the Bill.
However, I very much support and understand my hon. Friend's enthusiasm for a national lottery.
The time has come to build further on the foundations of the achievements of the trustees and professional staffs, the public's growing interest and the Government's profound commitment to the future of these great institutions.
It is important to ensure that the trustees of the four galleries have the powers to underpin that future.
The Bill does that and more, and I hope that it will be warmly received.
I found on my desk a little sticker which states’ Vote for the Arts’, issued by the National Campaign for the Arts.
I have no doubt that by voting for the Bill and for the Conservatives' record of achievement the arts will prosper far more than they would under the dogmatic, doctrinaire, interfering and bureaucratic solutions proposed by Labour.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr. Mark Fisher (Stoke-on-Trent, Central)
I think that the Minister has set a record in the House by making what was probably one of the longest Second Reading speeches for one of the shortest Bills.
He entertained the House for 47 minutes.
He gave way generously to many hon. Members — and I am sure that they appreciated it — but I suspect that we were hearing the Minister's swan song.
I suspect that that was the last time that he will make a speech as Minister for the Arts, and I do not think that the House would begrudge him a longer time to say his farewells.
He has not held the post very long but he has worked hard and the arts world has appreciated that.
Mr. Tony Banks
Patronise him, patronise him.
Mr. Fisher
I thank my hon. Friend.
However, it was a long swan song for a short Bill.
I do not think that many hon. Members would criticise the length of the speech but they and members of the museum and arts worlds outside would criticise the Bill's contents.
We have heard 47 minutes of the most extraordinary self-congratulation and complacency that can have ever been heard.
I do not believe that the museum world will recognise the picture of the Government's stewardship that the Minister sought to paint.
He knows very well from the deputations of trustees and directors of national galleries and of galleries and museums around the country that they have been hugely critical of the Government's neglect.
I do not understand how the Government can paint the picture that they have.
The real context of the Bill is more likely to be portrayed by the fact that last year the Tate gallery — one of the four galleries covered by the Bill — was able to purchase one picture on behalf of the nation.
That is all that it could afford under this Government.
The Minister referred to the detail in the Bill, and that specifically charges the Tate gallery to’ care for, preserve and add to’its collection.
Yet the Government's stewardship of the Tate has allowed it to add one picture last year.
That is the background of neglect against which we must realise that the Bill is being introduced.
The Opposition undoubtedly welcome most of the Bill.
Its provisions have been around for about three years, since the right hon. Member for Shoreham (Sir R. Luce) introduced measures and ideas along those lines.
Almost all those provisions command bipartisan support.
We welcome the fact that the Government have introduced the Bill, and we shall not oppose it.
However, as the Minister said, the Bill raises important questions about the structure and accountability of the four galleries concerned, about their finances and obligations, about their ability to trade and to acquire and dispose of works of art, and about their liabilities and indemnities in the event of any damage.
The way in which the Government have handled those matters tells us much about their attitude to museums.
The Government probably have the worst record on looking after museums of any Government since the war.
It could be said that they have abandoned whole areas of their responsibility to the national museums.
The fact that the Minister started his speech by talking about an annus mirabilis will have been met with incredulity outside the House.
Members of the public reading his speech will claw through its 47 minutes looking for anything that has happened in the past year for which the Government can claim credit.
The Minister rightly said that good things have happened — such as the extremely good directorship of all four collections, most notably of the national gallery under Mr. Neil MacGregor, and of the Tate gallery under Mr. Nicholas Serota.
But all that good work has happened in spite of the Government — mainly because of the way in which the museums have worked intelligently with sponsors to help them to realise their ideals.
Mr. Eric Martlew (Carlisle)
Does my hon. Friend agree that the most exciting regional museum to be opened last year — it was opened last May by Her Majesty the Queen — was the Tullie House museum in Carlisle?
That excellent museum was conceived by the Labour-controlled council despite Conservative opposition.
Mr. Fisher
Yes.
The Tullie House museum undoubtedly made last year a special year for the north of England.
It is exciting when a brand-new public sector museum opens.
Having visited Tullie House, I can confirm that, as my hon. Friend says, it is remarkable, and I commend it to hon. Members on both sides of the House.
It contains an extraordinary collection, beautifully presented, and any hon. Members who find themselves in Carlisle would do well to spend a few hours there.
They would enjoy themselves very much.
In spite of the Government's hostility to local authorities, and their attitude to local authority finance, local authorities have managed to expand the service in that way — yet the Government have not.
It is true that things have happened above the ground at the Tate, but the Government's responsibilities for its fabric — the wiring, the structure, the roofs and so on— have been appallingly neglected.
The Government are in an extraordinarily poor position to congratulate themselves on an annus mirabilis.
The Minister made a half-hearted attempt to justify that claim, but he could not identify anything that he or the Government had positively done.
I should like to examine one or two points, and invite the Minister to comment upon them before the Bill receives a Second Reading.
The Minister skated over the details of the boards.
Their size satisfies everybody — they are small — and the boards of trustees of all the museums have shown that they have the right ability and expertise, and are working well.
However, the Minister knows that all the galleries — certainly the Tate and the national gallery — have told him strongly that the Government have the term of the trusteeships wrong.
The Bill says that the term of a trusteeship should be five years, yet, as the Minister knows, the director of the Tate gallery, and the trustees of the Tate and of the national galleries have made strong representations that, for good sound reasons, that term should be seven years.
The trustees and the directors say that it takes two to three years to get the feel of the responsibilities — those responsibilities are considerably greater these days — and to work one's way in and become able to contribute fully.
To identify a new chairperson for the board, or to derive full value from bringing on those trustees, five years is too short.
The Minister may say that the trusteeship can be renewed for a further five years, but I see no reason why he has resisted the expert opinion of the trustees and directors of the museums.
The term appears to have been fixed on the Minister's personal whim.
I am not sure whether he received any evidence from anybody else — from the Museums and Galleries Commission, or from any board of trustees or any director — to support his idea for a period of five years.
If the Minister can identify any objective professional evidence that five years is the period needed, that would be very interesting, but I believe that all the expert evidence that he received supported a period of seven years.
It is extraordinary that the Minister should take it into his head that he knows better than people in the museums world, and impose upon them a period that nobody asked for — indeed, everybody asked for the opposite.
Perhaps he will answer those questions when he replies.
Clause 4 is undoubtedly the key to the Bill.
It deals with disposals, and the implications of disposals.
For the first time the Bill gives galleries powers of disposal, subject to certain conditions — or rather it gives such powers to the Tate and the national portrait gallery, but not to the Wallace collection or the national gallery.
The Opposition have no quarrel with the principle of disposal, leaving aside the financial implications.
Undoubtedly, if Parliament empowers trustees and directors to use their artistic judgment and professional experience to acquire works of art on behalf of their galleries, it is logical to trust them to use that same judgment to dispose of works of art.
In a neutral world, unaffected by other considerations, that would be correct.
We should trust the judgment of people such as Mr. MacGregor and Mr. Serota.
However, there are genuine fears.
The Minister knows that opinion is well split in the museums world.
The national gallery told the Minister's predecessor, the right hon. Member for Shoreham — no doubt the arguments were repeated to the Minister personally by many of the trustees and directors of the museums — that they did not want powers of disposal — not because they did not trust their own intellectual judgment, but, following the line set down in the Museums and Galleries Commission's 1988 report on the national gallery, because those powers should not be forced on the galleries.
The trustees asked that Parliament should not confer such powers on them.
That was the view of the MGC in 1988, and I understand that it remains the view of many of the directors, not because of the matter of intellectual judgment or scholarship, but because of fears that the Government will seek to put pressure on their finances.
The Minister has gone some way towards allaying those fears by adding the proviso that any money from disposals should be used for the acquisition of further works.
However, that leaves the galleries open to pressure, when they come to the Minister and make points such as that which I made at the beginning of my speech — saying, for instance, that last year the Tate gallery could buy only one work of art.
In future the Minister will be able to refer to the Bill and say,’ Parliament has given you the power to dispose of works of art, if you wish to acquire more — and, in using those receipts from disposals, you are specifically confined to making further acquisitions.
If those at the Tate do not believe that the acquisition of one picture a year is sufficient to keep its contemporary art collection up to date, the Government could tell them to use the powers in the Bill to dispose of works of art.
Directors of galleries are worried about that.
The Minister may say that that argument is unreasonable.
He may turn the argument on those galleries by saying that, in effect, they are admitting that they do not have any works of art that are available or appropriate for disposal.
The Minister might then argue, with some validity, that huge revenue is not to be gained from such disposals.
That would be a good debating ploy.
However, the fact is that if the directors of galleries wish to raise money the Minister can refer them to the Bill and powers contained in clause 4.
That is worrying in view of the way in which the Government have handled the purchasing grant — the acquisition grant — of the galleries in the past few years.
As part of the Minister's annus mirabilis— no doubt he would say that there have been 12 anni mirabilis; I think that that is right —
Mr. Gerald Bowden (Dulwich) indicated assent.
Mr. Fisher
I am glad that I got that right.
In the past seven years, the acquisition grants of the galleries have been frozen.
The national portrait gallery now gets £310,000.
In cash terms that is exactly the same as the amount it received seven years ago.
The Tate gallery gets £1.8 million, which is exactly the same as it got in 1984-85.
The national gallery gets £2.75 million, the same as it received seven years ago and rather less than it received 10 years ago.
During that time the allocation to that gallery has been reduced, and subsequently frozen.
The Wallace is the exception because it has not been asked to increase its collection.
The other three galleries, however, have experienced a Government who have said, effectively,’ We don't want you to buy works of art.
We believe that your acquisition money should be frozen at the 1984 level.’
However, the Bill requires those galleries to buy works of art, but it will take a long time to make such acquisitions.
Sir Timothy Raison (Aylesbury)
Surely the test of all this is not necessarily how big the Government grant for acquisitions is but what the galleries are able to acquire.
I would support strongly a bigger Government grant for acquisitions because there are many good uses to which it could be put.
Although the national gallery has had a limited grant, it has, by various means available to it, acquired not only a marvellous new building, but many great works of art.
Mr. Fisher
I was just about to make that point and I am glad that the right hon. Gentleman raised it.
Given the way in which the grant works, the national gallery is only able to buy works on instalments.
The right hon. Gentleman follows such matters closely and he will be aware that the typical price of the major works that the national gallery must buy is several millions.
At the moment that gallery is engaged — I use the word advisedly — in purchasing an important Cuyp landscape.
It is worth £8 million and the gallery has had to purchase it through three annual instalments negotiated with the previous owners.
That is the only way it can acquire that one work.
In addition to the third instalment on the Cuyp, the national gallery has made the first instalment on a Cranage painting.
That is the way in which the gallery has to operate.
If the right hon. Member for Aylesbury (Sir T. Raison) inquires of the trustees and directors of either the national or the Tate he will be told in no uncertain terms that it is extremely unsatisfactory that they cannot acquire the sort of painting that they need to keep their collections fresh and up to date.
They will also raise a much more important issue with him.
It is not only a matter of those galleries buying great emblematic works of art.
The thing that makes British museums and galleries so exciting and unique is that, unlike American ones, they have a duty to collect not just the high spots of any period, but the average, sometimes even the bad, works of art which represent the context from which the great works of art arose.
When one visits a gallery it is important to look at the great works in the context of their period.
If the right hon. Gentleman talks to those directors, they will back what I say.
Sir Timothy Raison indicated dissent.
Mr. Fisher
The right hon. Gentleman may disagree, but that is true.
The Government's attitude has made it difficult for galleries to acquire the keynote works that they need.
It has been almost impossible for them to acquire the artistic infrastructure that should surround those works so that they can be seen in the right scholarship context.
Sir Timothy Raison
I accept that many museums are concerned with acquiring such context works, but the national gallery is in the business, quite rightly, of acquiring the very finest works.
The hon. Gentleman has said that it is in the process of acquiring two incredibly beautiful works and the point is that it is acquiring them even though they cost much more than the nominal amount of Government grant available.
With the aid of the national art collections fund and other means, the galleries can raise other resources to acquire the finest works.
We would like them to acquire more, of course, but they do not have a bad record.
Mr. Fisher
The right hon. Gentleman and I will have to disagree about the difficulties that those galleries face.
I would be surprised if he did not agree with me that it is wrong that the Tate can buy only one picture a year.
That is apart from the fact that it cannot fill any holes in its Picasso, Matisse or Henry Moore collections.
The Tate cannot even afford works by fine living British artists like Howard Hodgkin.
Such works are out of the range of the Tate's powers of acquisition.
If the Tate is unable to buy the works of young British artists, as it should, its collections will be enormously deficient.
That is especially significant as it is the key contemporary house of 20th century works of art in Britain.
Mr. Renton
I noted what my right hon. Friend the Member for Aylesbury (Sir T. Raison) said and it is interesting that, in reply, the hon. Member for Stoke-on-Trent, Central (Mr. Fisher) has tried to sit on both sides of the fence on the difficult question of acquisitions and disposals.
He must declare his hand.
The Tate is primarily concerned with collecting contemporary art but it is never able to show more than from 23 to 25 per cent.
of its collection at any time.
Is the hon. Gentleman saying that he would not give it the limited powers of disposal available in clause 4(4) (b)?
The hon. Gentleman must declare his hand and say whether he is in favour of those disposal powers.
Mr. Fisher
We will discuss that clause in detail in Committee.
I have already said that the Opposition support the Bill.
We have a bipartisan approach to it.
However, we have grave reservations about clause 4 if it is left in the hands of a Government who have a long track record of being mean with acquisition money.
The intellectual case for disposal is fine and if a Government take an intelligent view about the need to buy new pictures it poses no danger.
However, this Government have frozen, deliberately, purchase grants even in the past three years when the Minister has had funds at his disposal.
He has increased funds to the Arts Council, so why has he not unfrozen the acquisition grants?
I have said several times that we will not oppose the Bill.
If it does not pass through the House before the general election, the next Labour Government will pick it up and enact it.
However, the difference is that the powers of disposal in clause 4 will then stem from a Labour Government who have a strong commitment to expand collections rather than to freeze acquisition funds.
The Minister cannot duck the fact that, even in the years when he had some money from the Chief Secretary to dispose on our arts and cultural life, he deliberately chose not to unfreeze the purchase grants of the galleries.
I am not surprised that the Minister looks away with some embarrassment.
Perhaps the Minister finds that worthy of a chuckle.
If he finds it amusing that he did not unfreeze acquisition grants even in the years when he had the money to do so, he is in a bad way.
The Government's record on acquiring works of art in those important national museums is nothing short of a disgrace, and the Bill does nothing to deal with the problem.
Interruption